ColourReviewof
Self-Assessment
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Veterinary
Dentistry
FrankJMVerstraete
Clinicalcases
Problembased
Fullcolour
MANSON
PUBLISHING
Self-Assessment Colour Review of
Veterinary Dentistry
Frank J.M. Verstraete
DrMedVet, BVSc (Hons), MMedVet, Dipl AVDC, Dipl ECVS
University of California, Davis,
California, USA
Manson Publishing/The Veterinary Press
Acknowledgements
I am indebted first and foremost to all the contributing authors who supported me in
this project. They all participated with great enthusiasm and generously shared their
expertise and slide collections.
Thanks are due to John Doval for the medical artwork, and to Cheryl H. Terpak
for technical assistance in cataloging the illustrations submitted.
 Publishing for taking the initiative to have this book produced and for supporting me
throughout its preparation.
Last but not least I would like to thank my family, Martine, Stephanie, and Colette,
for their patience, support, and help in bringing this project to fruition.
Copyright @ 1999 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 1-874545-93-6
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system or transmitted in any form or by any means without the written permission of
(as amended), or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by
the Copyright Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place, London WC1E 7DP.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be liable
to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL
Project management, typesetting and design: Paul Bennett
Editing: William H. Down
Cover design: Patrick Daly
Colour reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed by: Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
Preface
I hope that the contents of this book will be a true reflection of its title. This text was
written to give you, the reader, whether you are a keen final-year student, a resident, a
practitioner, or a board-certified specialist, an opportunity to assess your knowledge of
veterinary dentistry, based on a series of well-illustrated questions. Hopefully, it will
stimulate your interest and promote further study. The book should be used in
combination with standard dentistry textbooks; it is not intended to substitute any of
them, and by no means should this book be seen as a stand-alone volume. If, at the end
of an evening, having gone through a few questions, you find your desk covered with
half a dozen opened veterinary and human dental textbooks, and several article reprints
scattered in between, I will have achieved my goal!
Care has been taken to ensure that the material presented is informative and factu-
ally correct. However, the format of the book does not allow in-depth discussion of the
various nuances that may exist and be applicable to a clinical case. Equally, the random
nature of the questions and the limited volume of this book do not allow a systematic
and comprehensive review of the subject matter. Although I recognize these
shortcomings, I urge the reader to see beyond the limitations of the format and use this
book to explore the fascinating world of veterinary dentistry.
Frank J.M. Verstraete
February 1998
3
Contributors
David A. Crossley, BVetMed, MRCVS,
Philippe Hennet, DV, Dipl AVDC
Fellow AVD
Clinique Véterinaire,
Animal Medical Centre,
Neuilly-sur-Seine, France
Manchester, UK
Steven E. Holmstrom, DVM,
Linda J. DeBowes, DVM, MS,
Dipl AVDC
Dipl ACVIM (Int. Med.), Dipl AVDC
Companion Animal Hospital,
Kansas State University, Manhattan,
San Carlos, California, USA
Kansas, USA
J. Geoffrey Lane, BVetMed, FRCVS
Gregg A. DuPont, DVM, Dipl AVDC
University of Bristol, Langford,
Shoreline Veterinary Dental Clinic,
Bristol, UK
Seattle, Washington, USA
Kenneth F. Lyon, DVM, Dipl AVDC
Edward R. Eisner, AB, DVM,
Mesa Veterinary Dental Service,
Dipl AVDC
Mesa, Arizona, USA
Denver Veterinary Dental Service,
Sandra Manfra Marretta, DVM,
Denver, Colorado, USA
Dipl ACVS, Dipl AVDC
Peter P. Emily, DDS, Hon Fellow AVD.
University of Illinois, Urba na,
Hon Dipl AVDC
Illinois, USA
Lakewood, Colorado, USA
W. Leon Scrutchfield, DVM,
Peter Fahrenkrug, DrMedVet,
Dipl ACVIM
DrMedDent, Fellow AVD, Zsbz.
Texas A&M University, College Station,
Tierzhk.
Texas, USA
Quick born, Germany
Andries W. van Foreest, DrMedVet
Patricia Frost, DVM, Dipl AVDC
Veterinair Specialisten Centrum *De
Veterinary Dental Consulting,
Wagenrenk*
LaCenter, Washington, USA
Wageningen, The Netherlands
Cecilia Gorrel, BSc, MA, Vet MB, DDS.
Frank J.M. Verstraete, DrMedVet,
Hon Fellow AVD, MRCVS
BVSc(Hons), MMedVet, Dipl AVDC.
Veterinary Dentistry & Oral Surgery
Dipl ECVS
Referrals, Pilley, Hampshire, UK
University of California, Davis.
California, USA
T. Keith Grove, DDS, MS, VMD,
Dipl AVDC, Dipl ABP
Chris J. Visser, BVSc, DVM, MRCVS,
Florida Veterinary Dental Clinic,
Dipl AVDC
Vero Beach, Florida, USA
Aid Animal Dental Clinic,
Scottsdale, Arizona, USA
Colin E. Harvey, BVSc, FRCVS,
Dipl ACVS, Dipl AVDC, Dipl ECVS
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA
4
Picture acknowledgements
9 Photographs reproduced with permission from van Foreest, A.W. et al. (1997)
Long-term success rate of resin bonded metal crowns on the canine teeth of
working dogs.Veterinary Quartertly, 19(1): 23-28.
14, 110, 142, 174 Photographs reproduced with permission from van Foreest, A.W.
(1996) Verkleuring van gebitselementen bij gezelscha psdieren. Tijdscbrift voor
Diergeneeskunde, 121(11): 316-322
33 Reprinted with permission from Verstraete, F.J.M. (1993). Dental pathology and
microbiology. In D.G. Slatter {ed) Textbook of Small Animal Surgery (2nd edn),
W.B.Saunders, Philadelphia,USA.
36 Photograph 36a and table reproduced with permission from van Foreest, A.W.
(1996) Verkleuring van gebitselementen bij gezelscha psdieren. Tijdschrift voor
Diergeneeskunde, 121(11): 316-322. Photograph 36b reproduced with permission
from Verstraete, F.J.M. and Ligthelm, A.J. {1992) Dental trauma caused by
internal fixation of mandibular osteotomies in the dog. Journal of Veterinary and
Comparative Orthopaedics and Traumatology,5: 104108.
60 Reprinted with permission from Verstraete, F.J.M. (1993) Behandeling van orale
tumoren bij de hond. Vlaams Diergeneeskundig Tijdschrift, 62: 143-150.
133 Reprinted with permission from Verstraete, F,J.M., Van Aarde, R.J., Nieuwoudt.
B.A., Mauer, E. and Kass, P.H. (1996). The dental pathology of feral cats on
Marion Island. Part I: congenital, developmental and traumatic abnormalities.
fournalofComparativePathology,115:26S-282
52, 138, 198, 215 Ilustrations courtesy of Hu-Friedy Mfg. Co., Chicago, USA.
173 Ilustration courtesy of PERIOgiene, Fort Collins, Colorado, USA.
206 Micrograph reproduced courtesy of Dr. Bjorn Klinge, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.
218 Illustrations accompanying the answer were redrawn from Shillingburg, H.T.
Jacobi, R. and Brackett, S.E. (1987) Fundamentals of Tooth Preparations for Cast
Metal and Porcelain Restorations. Quintessence Publishing Co., Chicago.
5
Suggested reading material
Anusavice, K.J. (1996) Phillips' Science of Dental Materials, 10th edn, W.B.
Saunders, Phila delphia.
Carranza, F.A. and Newman, M.G. (1996) Clinical Periodontology, 8th edn, W.B.
Saunders, Phila delphia.
Cohen, S. and Burns, R.C. (1998) Pathways of the Pulp, 7th edn, C.V. Mosby, St.
Louis.
Crossley, D.A. and Penman, S. (1995) B.S.A.V.A. Manual of Small Animal Dentistry,
2nd edn, British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Cheltenham, UK.
Easley, J., Scrutchfield, W.L. and Rucker, B.A. (1996) Dentistry: in-depth seminar.
American Association ofEquine Practitioners Proceedings,42:1-25.
Emily, P. and Penman, S. (1994) Handbook of Small Animal Dentistry, 2nd edn,
Pergamon Press, New York.
Evans, H.E. (1993) Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edn, W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia.
Goaz, P.W. and White, S.C. (1994) Oral Radiology -Principles and Interpretation,
3rd edn, C.V. Mosby, St. Louis.
Gorrel, C., Penman, S. and Emily, P. {1993) Handbook of Small Animal Oral
Emergencies, Pergamon Press, New York.
Harvey, C.E. and Emily, P.P. (1993) Small Animal Dentistry, C.V. Mosby, St. Louis.
Harvey, C.E. (Guest editor) (1992) Feline dentistry. Veterinary Clinics of North
America: Small Animal Practice, vol. 22(6), W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Kertesz, P. (1993) A Colour Atlas of Veterinary Dentistry and Oral Surgery, Wolfe,
London.
Rateitschak, K.H., Rateitschak, E.M., Wolf, H.F. and Hassell, T.M. (1989) Color
Atlas of Dental Medicine - Periodontology, 2nd edn, Thieme Medical Publishers,
New York.
Regezi, J.A. and Sciubba, J. (1993) Oral Pathology - Clinical-Pathologic
Correlations, 2nd edn, W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Shillingburg, H.T., Jacobi, R. and Brackett, S.E. (1987) Fundamentals of Tooth
Preparations for Cast Metal and Porcelain Restorations, Quintessence Publishing
Co., Chicago.
Shipp, A.D. and Fahrenkrug, P. (1992) Practitioners' Guide to Veterinary Dentistry,
Dr. Shipp's Laboratories, Beverly Hills.
Ten Cate,A.R. {1994) Oral Histology: Development, Structure,and Function,4th
edn, C.V. Mosby, St. Louis.
Wiggs, R.B. and Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice,
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
6
Classification of cases
General
Manual endodontic instruments 129
Acid-etch techmique 4
Medicated endodontic sealers and pastes 67
Alveolar bone 97
Mental foramina 79
Amalgam 98, 173, 193
 Odontological nomenclature 42
Antibiotics 26
Oral mucous membrane 47
Apicoectomy 80
Oral tumor radiology 202
Attrition, abrasion and the dentin-pulp
 Palatal development 11
complex 70
 Palatal obturator 86
Biopsy technique 60
 Parapulpal pins 51
Bridge terminology 139
Periodontal curettes and scalers 93, 198
Caries 142
Periodontal surgery 159, 194
Cells of Malassez 101
Periodontal trauma 225
Chlorhexidine 28
Pharyngotomy intubation 186
Dental indices 126
 Preanesthesia blood testing 170
Dental calculus 196
Polishing 73, 208
Dental infections 29
 Probing depth and attachment loss 87
 Dental plaque 164 
Prosthetic crowns 9, 82, 120, 177, 218
Dentin sensitivity 109
Radiography 16, 94, 102, 134, 153, 195, 219
Dentin structure 3
 Radiometer and light-cure unit 163
Diagmostic dental charting 12, 161
Restoration of endodontic access sites 167,
Diet texture and periodontal disease 157
175
Discoloration of teeth 36, 174
 Scaling, root planing, gingival curettage 57
Enamel composition 224
Squamous cell carcinoma 127
Endodontic chelating and lubricating agents
Suture materials 39
130
Root canal treatment 30,45,49, 180, 204
 Endodontic plugger and spreader 138
Tetracycline staining 174
Extractions 24,52,88,183,184,215,220
Tooth apex 32,
Furcation lesion 87
Tooth implant 53
Gemination 19
Triadan system 53
Gingival sulcus 65
Ultrasomic scaling 179, 216
Gingivectomy/gingivoplasty 7
Glass-ionomer luting cement 191
Cats
Guided tissue regeneration 63
Acromegaly 68
Gutta-percha 121, 162
Cardiac concerms 6
Halitosis 124
 Crown root fractures/secondary periodontitis
Handpieces and burs 169
118
Histology 135, 206
Eosinophilic granuloma complex 41
Impression materials 10, 55,84, 122, 150
Feline inductive odontogenic tumor 66
Impression trays 154
Lingual molar salivary gland 8
Interdental wiring 85
Chronic gingivostomatitis 2, 35, 103, 212
Lentulo@ paste filler 123
Malocclusion 200, 201
Mandibular fracture 74
Maxillary secondary premolars 133
7
Cats (continued)
Prosthetic crown 152, 187
Normal dentition  1
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism 95
Odontoclastic resorption lesions 15, 20, 31,
Root canal treatment 78, 221, 222
34,59,61,108,175
Root fracture 23, 197
Palatal defect 111
Squamous cell carcinoma 165
Radiography 58, 147
Suborbital draining sinus tract 148
Root canal treatment 182
Supermumerary root 176
Root fracture extraction techmique 125
Temporomandibular ankylosis 71
Sublingual salivary mucocele ‘ranula’ 76
Temporomandibular luxation 18
Temporomandibular joint 17, 83 
Tooth brushing and periodontal health 199
Traumatic cleft hard palate 158
Traumatic mucosal hyperplasia 151
Widened incisive ducts 213
Ulcerative stomatitis 172
Uremic stomatitis 166
Dogs
Ameloblastoma 22
Horses
Bone sequestrum maxilla 44
Abrasion (crib-biting and wind-sucking) 141
Chew toys and periodontal disease 192
Cemental necrosis infundibulum 128
Cleft palate repair 223
Conchal mineralization due to periapical
Crown root fractures 43, 114
pathology 181
Dental fractures (classification) 114
Eruption cysts 190
Dentigerous cyst 48
Extractions 96, 211, 217
Embedded third incisor 189
Floats 5
Enamel hypoplasia 14, 105, 110
Forming a 'bit seat' 207
'Epulides' (classification) 33
Incisor fracture 161
Fibrosarcoma maxilla 50
Incisor malocclusion 37
Fracture of a deciduous canine tooth 203
Mandibular fracture 75, 137
Immune-mediated oral disease 104, 136
Odontoma (mandible)  209
Lip fold dermatitis 171
'Parrot mouth' conformation 64
Lip laceration 46
Persistent deciduous incisor 149
Mandibular fracture repair 56, 214
Premolar cap and wolf tooth 156
Mandibular frenulum and
Premolar hook 185
frenotomy/frenectomy 92
Sialolith 69
Mandibular/maxillary fracture repair 100
 Supermumerary and impacted maxillary
Maxillary fracture 54
cheek teeth 168
Maxillectomy 143
 Supermumerary maxillary molar 117
Malocclusion 21, 38,40,72,107,112, 144,
'Wave mouth' 13
178
Oronasal fistula 77
Rabbits and rodents
Orthodontic evaluation 115
Fracture of an incisor tooth 188
Partial coronal pulpectomy 25, 146
Incisor crown length reduction 188
Periapical pathology 119
Malocclusion 106,140, 210
Periodontic-endodontic lesion 113
Normal dentition 205
Periodontitis 62, 90,145
Radiographic examination 155
Persistent deciduous canine teeth 27
8
I, 2: Questions
la
1 The dental formula of the primitive carnivore consists of 44 teeth {three incisors,
One canine, four premolars, and three molars in each quadrant). The modern carni-
vore dentition shows several adaptations of the primitive carnivore dentition.
i. Which teeth in the cat {1a) are reduced in number compared with the primitive
carnivore dentition?
ii. What is a carnassial tooth?
m. Which are the carnassial teeth in the cat?
2 This young adult cat is healthy with the exception of the oral disease shown (2) which
is painful and results in anorexia. What would you recommend for medical
management of this patient's oral problem?
I,2:Answers
1b
M1
M
P4
P4
P3
P3
P2
C
321
1 i. The premolars and molars (1b). The maxillary first premolar and mandibular first
and second premolars have disappeared in the modern cat dentition. The correct
anatomic designations of the first premolars actually seen in the upper and lower jaws
are the maxillary second premolar and mandibular third premolar, respectively.
Moreover, the cat only has one molar tooth per quadrant. This is the first molar
tooth. The maxillary molar is a small, non-functional, single or double-rooted tooth
and the mandibular molar has lost its grinding surface and become a carnassial tooth.
i. A “dens sectorius'. The premolars and especially the carnassials are secodont, i.e.
they have sharp cutting edges which function as scissors during jaw movement.
ii. The maxillary fourth premolar and the mandibular first molar.
2 This patient has severe gingivitis, stomatitis and faucitis. Initial management would
include a complete evaluation of the oral cavity and teeth; a biopsy should be taken for
histopathology if neoplasia or other oral problem is suspected. A complete scaling and
polishing should be performed. Medical management of oral inflammatory disease is
aimed at plaque control and/or suppression of the inflammatory/immune response.
Long-term (e.g. 6-8 weeks) or continuous antibiotic administration may result in a
decrease in oral inflammation and pain; exacerbations may occur during antibiotic
administration and usually occur after antibiotics are discontinued. Methylprednisolone
(15-20 mg per cat, subcutaneously) generally results in significant improvement of oral
inflammation, pain, and appetite. The duration of response depends on the severity of
the oral inflammation; treatments generally are required every 3-6 weeks. Oral gluco-
corticoids (e.g. prednisone) are usually not successful in initial management of severe
inflammatory disease; they may be used for long-term management in some cats with
milder inflammation. Some cats show a better response to combination therapy with
antibiotics and glucocorticoids. Gold salts as a single agent or in combination with
glucocorticoids have been reported to be successful in the management of some cats
with oral inflammatory disease; however, treatment in immunosuppressed cats should
be carefully monitored.
10
3-5: Questions
4a
3 The bulk of most mature teeth is com-
4 What technique could be used to im-
posed of dentin (3).
prove the adhesion of composite resin
i. What are the main components of den-
restorative material to the tooth (4a)?
tin?
ii. What are primary, secondary, tertiary
and reparative dentin?
ii. How is dentin formed?
5 These dental instruments are
used in what equine dental pro-
cedure (5)?
11
3-5:Answers
3 i. Dentin is composed of a mineralized collagenous matrix. The mineral component is
principally calcium hydroxyapatite.
ii. Primary dentin is the dentin produced before a tooth erupts and comes into function.
Secondary dentin is produced once a tooth has erupted. Functional stresses on the tooth
usually affect the structure and rate at which secondary dentin is produced, leading to
the formation of a distinctly visible line within the dentin at the interface between
primary and secondary dentin. Tertiary or reparative dentin is dentin produced as a
result of pathologic influences or injury to the tooth. Reparative dentin is often pro-
duced very rapidly and may have a very irregular structure.
ii. Dentin is formed by odontoblasts, the cells lining the pulp cavity. These cells lay
down a collagenous matrix known as predentin which is then mineralized to form den-
tin. Throughout life the odontoblasts continue producing dentin, gradually reducing the
size of the tooth's pulp cavity. The odontoblasts have long, fine cellular processes, the
odontoblastic processes, which extend within the dentinal tubules. These odontoblastic
processes may extend the full thickness of dentin, and occasionally slightly beyond the
interface with cementum and enamel.
4 Adhesion of dental materials can be by mechanical
41b
interlock and by achieving micromechanical reten-
tion and sealing. Enamel and dentin are different
structures and require different treatment to achieve
bonding. Enamel should be etched with a phos-
phoric acid gel (4b). The time for etching ranges
from 30-60 seconds. There is no clear-cut answer as
to acid-etching dentin. Some researchers have
reported that the greatest bond strength occurs in
unetched dentin, while others report better success
by briefly (5-10 seconds) etching. Etching is per-
formed to remove the so-called “smear layer" and
open up the dentinal tubules, allowing improved
penetration of the restorative material. Over-etching
may destroy the integrity of the dentinal tubules and actually weaken the bond strength.
The next step is to apply a bonding agent. The aim of modern bonding agents is to
create a link between enamel and dentin (which contain water) and the dental adhesive
resins which are hydrophobic. By so doing, the bonding strength between the restorative
material and the tooth is increased. After application of the bonding agent, an unfilled
resin is applied to the tooth. This layer is cured with a light-cure gun. The filled resin is
then placed in 2-3 mm layers if necessary to build up the restoration. This filled resin
bonds to the previously applied filled restorative material.
5 These are all types of “floats’ used in removing the sharp enamel points from the
buccal aspect of the maxillary cheek teeth and the lingual aspect of the mandibular
cheek teeth. Floats are also used to correct abnormalities such as tall/long teeth, hooks,
ramps, and breaks, and to round the mesial aspect of the second premolars.
12
6, 7: Questions
6 Oral examination of a three-year-old male cat reveals periodontal disease and
odontoclastic resorptive lesions. The remainder of the physical examination is
unremarkable with the exception of a regurgitant systolic murmur, heard best over the
sternum, and a gallop rhythm. The cat is strictly “indoors? and is fairly inactive, and the
owners have not noticed any respiratory or attitudinal changes.
i. What is your assessment of the findings found on cardiac auscultation?
i. What diagnostic testing would you recommend before general anesthesia?
7 i. What procedure is being
7a
performed here (7a, b)?
i. Discuss the principles, indi-
cations, and contraindications
of this procedure.
7b
13
6, 7: Answers
6 i. The differentials for the murmur, which is consistent with mitral valve regurgitation,
include cardiomyopathy, congenital heart defect {i.e. mitral valve dysplasia) and
infective endocarditis. A congenital defect should be suspected if the murmur has been
present from a very early age. Infective endocarditis is uncommon in cats and would be
considered if the murmur was known to be of recent onset, is associated with a fever, or
if systemic signs are present. Cardiomyopathy is most likely if this is an acquired
murmur. Based on the signalment, history and physical examination, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy is the most likely diagnosis. The gallop rhythm indicates ventricular
diastolic dysfunction and is common in cats with cardiomyopathy.
i. A complete blood count, biochemical profile and urinalysis are performed if systemic
signs are present. Anemia and neutrophilia with a left shift are common in cats with
infective endocarditis. A cardiac evaluation is required to diagnose the cardiac disorder
and to determine appropriate treatment. The cardiac evaluation should include an
electrocardiogram, thoracic radiographs, and an echocardiogram. An echocardiogram is
required to diagnose the presence and form of cardiomyopathy. The anesthesia and
dental care should be delayed until the cardiac disorder has been diagnosed and
should be evaluated and discussed with the owners. Appropriate adjustments in
anesthetic protocols should be made based on the underlying cardiac disease. The
clinician should be prepared to manage complications that may occur during anesthesia
as well as during recovery and following anesthesia.
7 i. Gingivectomy/gingivoplasty.
7c
i. Gingivectomy is primarily an excisional pro-
cedure performed to remove the soft tissue wall of
a periodontal pocket. It signifies complete removal
whereas gingivoplasty signifies partial removal for
reshaping soft tissue contour. The procedure is
initiated by marking pocket depths with bleeding
points on the surface of the mucosa. An incision is
begun apical to the bleeding point to contour the
gingiva physiologically and completely remove the
pocket wall (7c). These bleeding points can be
made with a probe or special transgingival mark-
ing forceps (7a). Gingivectomy may be made with
gingivectomy knives (7b), cold steel blades, or electrosurgery. After excision, the roots
are cleaned thoroughly. Healing occurs after epithelial migration over the wound which
takes one day for each 0.5-1 mm covered. For this reason, the gingivectomy bevel is not
made greater than necessary to achieve good post-healing tissue contour.
Gingivectomy is indicated for gingival hyperplasia and associated pseudopockets. It is
contraindicated in infrabony defects where incomplete pocket removal and reverse
architecture would result. Also, a narrow band of attached gingiva may preclude gin-
givectomy which might remove too much tissue. Gingivectomy is contraindicated where
14
8-- 10: Questions
8 This cat has a membranous bulge lin-
gual to the mandibular molar tooth (8).
i. Of what does this membranous bulge
consist?
i. Is there an equivalent structure in the
80p
i. What consequences would you expect
if this bulge was removed?
9 The photograph (9) shows a working
dog with four abraded canine teeth
covered with prosthetic crowns. These
crowns have been in place for nearly four
years.
i. What kind of material can be used for
crown restoration in dogs?
ii. In working dogs, fragile crowns are not
useful. Crown restorations must therefore
be strong and adapted in form. Discuss
the choice of alloy and the shape of such
crowns.
10 Compare in table form the reproduction of detail, dimensional stability, tear
strength, maximum time until pouring, and comparative cost of alginate, reversible
hydrocolloid, polyether, and vinyl polysiloxane impression materials.
1.5
8-10: Answers
8 i. A small, mixed-salivary gland.
ii. No.
ii. A specific function for this gland has not been reported. Following excisional
biopsy of this structure, there were no clinical changes evident in tongue function,
moistness of the mouth, or calculus deposition.
9 i. A prosthetic crown is an artificial restoration which replaces a part of the natural
crown of the tooth. There are various types of crowns made of various materials. A
  a   (   s a   o n  
substance, or it can be made as a combined post-crown prosthesis. A post may be used
to aid retention but this weakens the root and increases the risk of subsequent root frac-
ture. A tooth-colored crown can be made by fusing porcelain to a metal shell; however,
the porcelain layer is fragile and this technique requires the removal of more dental sub-
stance.
Full-metal crowns are most commonly used and many different alloys are available.
Non-precious alloys are silver-colored, inexpensive, and very hard; however, they are
not cosmetic and are prone to black discoloration. Gold alloys are gold-colored, softer
but esthetically more pleasing; most are too soft for use as prosthetic crowns for distal
teeth and in working dogs. Gold is weaker than steel which is weaker than
nickel-chrome or titanium.
ii. Alloy crowns are most commonly used in veterinary dentistry. The composition of
the alloy is normally chosen in consultation with the dental laboratory preparing the
crown. The choice depends on strength, cost, and corrosion resistance. An alloy of
cobalt-chrome-molybdenum has been successfully used in working dogs. This alloy is
very hard, corrosion-resistant, hypoallergenic, non-irritating, and inexpensive. The
metal crown should be made slightly shorter and with a rounder tip than the original
tooth to minimize occlusal and shearing forces.
10
Alginate
Hydrocolloid
Polyether
polysiloxane
Reproduction of detail
Poor
Fair
Excellent
Excellent
 Dimensional stability
Poor
Fair
Very good
Excellent
Tear strength
Very low
Very low
Moderate
High
Ma ximum time for
Immediate
7hours
sAL
14 days
pouring
kept wet
kept dry
Comparative cost
Very low
Low
Very high
High to
very high
(See also 150 (on the classification of impression matierials).)
16
I1--I3: Questions
11 Knowledge of palatal development helps in understanding facial malformations.
i. What is the sequence of events in palatal development?
il. What may interfere with normal palatal development?
12 Interpret the chart (12), and
describe the periodontal status
of the teeth shown.
123
1（
P
2
3F
4P
Y
4
13 Is this a young or an old
13
horse (13)? What abnormality
can be noted?
17
II-I3: Answers
11 i. During embryogenesis, at about day 23, the paired maxillary processes, the paired
mandibular processes and the median frontonasal process surround the primitive oral
cavity (stomodeum). Median and lateral nasal processes originating from the fronto-
nasal process extend on each side of olfactory placodes. In contrast to humans - where
the upper lip is formed by the maxillary and nasal processes - in dogs and cats the
upper lip and the primary palate are both formed by the midline fusion of the maxillary
processes. At this stage of the development, the choanae open at the caudal end of the
primary palate. Later, lateral palatine processes move towards the midline and fuse
around day 33 with the nasal septum originating from the nasal proces. This con-
stitutes the secondary palate which will ossify (hard palate), except in the caudal part
where it will form the soft palate.
i. Numerous causes, inherited or not, may interfere with normal palatal development.
Malformations are primarily due to lack of development or fusion of facial processes
during embryogenesis. According to the stage of development and the severity of the
cause, other physical or neurologic a bnormalities may be present. In humans, more than
200 conditions have been found to be associated with cleft lip and/or palate. Terato-
 genic causes include metabolic disorders such as diabetes, teratogenic substances such as
antimitotic drugs, corticosteroids, and vitamin A. Experimental studies have shown that
the potential teratogenic effect of a substance depends on the dosage for a particular
 species, the duration of the effect, and the stage of development of the embryo. Hence,
no specific list of substances able to induce cleft lip and/or palate has been identified in
dogs and cats.
12 Interpretation of the symbols and letter codes on the chart illustrated describing the
periodontal status and treatment of this left maxilla would be as follows: (1) Canine
tooth: moderate calculus, mild gingivitis, normal gingival attachment. (2) First pre-
molar: missing. (3) Second premolar: heavy calculus, severe gingivitis, moderate
mobility, grade 3 furcation, and pocketing of 3 mm buccally and 4 mm palatally with
gingival recession over the furcation area. An extraction is planned. (4) Third premolar:
moderate calculus and moderate gingivitis, 3 mm pocketing at the distal/buccal area;
otherwise normal. (5) Fourth premolar: moderate calculus and moderate gingivitis, gin-
gival recession of 3 mm over the mesiobuccal root with 4 mm pocketing, a grade 1
furcation, and slight gingival recession over the distal root with 3 mm pocketing at the
distal aspect. Treatment was closed root planing. (6) First molar: this tooth was ex-
tracted. It had severe calculus, moderate gingivitis, severe mobility with extensive gin-
at the palatal root. (7) Second molar: moderate calculus, mild gingivitis, and normal
attachment levels. These are only a sampling of the symbols and letter abbreviations
that can be used to denote dental changes. The reader is referred to additional
references for further information on charting.
13 This is an old horse with severe "wave mouth'. It is difficult to decide if this severe
wave mouth' is due to normal or abnormal dental wear, as many old horses (more than
20 years old) wear their teeth as shown in 13. Yearly routine dental care should prevent
'wave mouth' formation by keeping the arcades level.
18
14, 15: Questions
14a
14 i. In the dog shown (14a), what is your diagnosis, and which dental hard tissue is
disturbed?
i. How can the different phases in the development of this dental hard tissue be dis-
tinguished and their disturbances explained?
15
15 What radiographic abnormalities can you see in the mandible of this cat (15)?
19
I4, 15: Answers
14 i. Enamel hypoplasia; the
14b
enamel is disturbed.
ii. The development of enamel
occurs in two phases: {1) the
enamel matrix formation stage;
and (2) the maturation phase
during which the mineraliza-
tion of the enamel takes place.
Disturbances during amelo-
genesis can cause hypoplasia,
hypomineralization, or a com-
bination of both. These condi-
tions may be caused by sys-
temic, local, or hereditary factors and can affect both dentitions.
Enamel hypoplasia is defined as an incomplete or defective formation of the organic
enamel component. In cases of enamel hypoplasia, there exists a deficiency in the thick
ness of the enamel: the defects in the enamel can be limited to a circumscribed area or
be recognized as a single narrow zone of smooth or pitted hypoplasia.
If maturation is lacking or incomplete, enamel hypomineralization will develop (14b),
The mineral content of the enamel is deficient and therefore the enamel persists as a soft
enamel matrix. Shortly after eruption the hypomineralized teeth show normal shape,
but the surfaces appear dull. Enamel is opaque but the soft enamel matrix will be
discolored by extrinsic factors (yellow-brownish). In cases of hypomineralization, the
quality of the enamel is abnormal. The lower the mineral content of the enamel, the
faster will discoloration be seen and the faster the soft and brittle enamel will peel off.
15 The third premolar tooth had a clinically evident feline odontoclastic resorptive
lesion (FORL) at its buccal gingival margin. The radiograph demonstrates severe radio-
 graphic changes - there is root and crown resorption (seen as sharp-edged, but irregular
areas of radiolucency) and ankylosis, affecting primarily the mesial root. Note that the
adjacent tooth is entirely normal. Radiographs often delineate the extent of the resorp-
tion more accurately than clinical examination alone (often the clinical lesion is only the
tip of the iceberg), and no FORL should be treated without prior radiographic examina -
tion. Teeth with resorptive lesions rarely lose their endodontic blood supply, so pulp
necrosis followed by a clinically or radiographically evident periapical lesion is unusual.
Lesions that are evident at the gingival margin often have some periodontal bone loss
and loss of attachment, or there may be concurrent periodontal disease. This third pre-
molar tooth is typical of the radiographic features of FORLs. As cats age, generalized
osteoclastic resorption and osteoporosis are seen as areas of absent or reduced mineral-
ization of the mandible; this change generally develops from rostral to caudal. In addi-
tion, in some cats the periapical bone may become thickened and irregular so that the
roots appear more club-shaped than in younger cats.
20
16--18: Questions
16 What radiographic error is evident on the radiograph of 15?
17 The temporomandibular
17
joint (TMJ) (17) functions
mainly as a hinge joint in car-
nivores.
 i. Describe the anatomy of the
TMJ.
ii. What types of movement
are possible?
运i.What is the most common
cause of TMJ pathology in the
cat? Name two common con-
ditions.
iv. What is the most common
type of TMJ luxation? Outline
the management of such a
case.
18 This dog was presented with
18
an acute inability to close the
mouth but no lateral deviation
of the mandible (18).
i. What is your tentative clinical
diagnosis?
i. How can this diagnosis be
confirmed?
ii. Presuming that the tentative
diagnosis is confirmed, what is
the treatment?
21
16-18: Answers
16 The embossed dot is superimposed on the apical part of the mesial root of the third
subtle lesions or be falsely diagnosed as a pathologic lesion. When positioning the film
in the oral cavity, the dot should be located away from structures of potential interest,
such as the roots, and rather be placed where there is no overlap with dental structures.
This does not affect the use of the embossed dot in orienting radiographs (see 102).
17 i. The joint is comprised of the articular process of the mandible and the man-
dibular fossa of the temporal bone. An articular disk separates the joint into a dorsal
and a ventral compartment. The disk is a flat fibrocartilaginous plate. The joint cap-
sule is enforced by fibrous tissue which forms a strong ligament laterally. The caudo-
ventral end of the zygomatic arch forms the retroarticular process which protects the
joint and largely prevents caudal luxation.
i. The shapes of the condyloid process of the mandible and the mandibular fossa of
the temporal bone do not match exactly, which allows for some sliding movement as
well as the hinge action. The sliding movements are very limited due to the precise
interdigitation of teeth in the cat.
im. TMJ pathology in the cat usually occurs as a result of trauma. Two common con-
ditions are luxation and fracture {intra-articular or periarticular).
iv. Luxation is usually in a rostrodorsal direction. This causes rostromedial displace
ment of the mandible on the affected side and prevents closure of the mouth because
of the resulting abnormal interlock of the teeth. Treatment of acute luxation consists
of closing the animal's mouth with a wooden or plastic rod inserted between the
upper and lower carnassials and closing the mouth, pushing the mandible backwards
until the condyloid process slips back into the mandibular fossa. Chronic luxation is
best treated by condylectomy. Caudal luxation is less common, and may be associated
with a fracture of the retroarticular process.
18 i. Bilateral traumatic luxation of the temporomandibular joint.
i. The diagnosis is confirmed by radiography. Two views are currently in use: the
dorsoventral closed-mouth skull radiograph and the closed-mouth lateral oblique view
(15-20°, nose tilted up). Unilateral or bilateral luxation is radiologically evidenced by
the fact that the condyloid process is not located within the mandibular fossa. Capsular
osteophyte formation is evidence of a long-standing or recurrent luxation. Usually, the
condyloid process displaces rostrodorsally. If unilateral, the animal is presented with a
typical lateral deviation to the side opposite the luxated joint.
mi. Reduction is accomplished under general anesthesia by forcing the condyle ventrally.
This can be done by inserting a fulcrum (e.g. pencil, syringe, dowel - depending on
patient size) in between the molar teeth and gently forcing the mouth closed; this in turn
levers the condyloid process in a ventrocaudal direction back into the condyloid fossa.
Aftercare may include the use of a tape muzzle. Recurrent and chronic luxations can be
treated by condylectomy.
22
19, 20: Questions
19a
19 i. What developmental disturbance in the shape of teeth can is shown (19a)?
i. What other teeth in the dog and cat can be affected?
ii. What are the related conditions?
20
20 One of the most common indications for extraction in the cat is odontoclastic
resorptive lesions {20)
i. Outline the problems associated with extraction of teeth affected by these lesions.
ii. What is the recommended extraction technique?
23
19, 20: Answers
19 i. This is a case of gemina-
196
tion of the mandibular fourth
 premolar in a cat. Dichotomy is
a synonym mostly found in
older literature. Gemination is
defined as an attempt to make
two teeth from a single tooth
germ, resulting in partial cleav-
age. A geminated single-rooted
tooth usually has two incom-
pletely separated crowns and a
single root canal. In this case of a premolar, three roots were present, the central one
having a very wide root canal.
i. Gemination of single incisors (19b) is relatively common in the dog, while geminated
canines and premolars in the dog and cat are rare. No reference to the occurrence of
geminated molars could be found. Gemination can also be present in the deciduous
dentition.
. Fusion and concrescence are related conditions. In cases of fusion, two tooth buds
are united and the dentin is confluent. In cases of concrescence, the teeth are united by
cementum only. If fusion occurs between two normal teeth, the total number of teeth is
reduced, which is not the case in gemination. However, it may not be possible to dif-
 e   s  u p n pu e jo u a
 geminated tooth. Twinning may be used to designate the presence of a normal and a
20 i. Depending on the stage of disease, different problems may occur during extraction.
If a tooth is in a resorptive phase, the main problem will be its increased fragility and
risk of fracture during extraction. In the reparative phase, the formation of new bone or
cementum-like tissue will serve to anchor the root firmly in the alveolar bone and
increase the risk of iatrogenic root fracture.
i. Extraction of cat teeth need not be frustrating if the correct technique and suitable
instrumentation are used. The first step should be to incise the soft tissue attachment
using a scalpel blade or a sharp luxator into the gingival sulcus around the whole cir-
cumference of the tooth. It is useful to raise gingival flaps to improve visibility and
access. Tooth sectioning of multirooted teeth and removal of buccal bone plate if re-
quired is facilitated if the flap has already been raised. Moreover, it prevents iatrogenic
injury to the gingiva.
Cat teeth can be extracted using standard elevator or luxator techniques {after
sectioning of multirooted teeth into single-rooted segments). Impatient or incorrect use
of elevators or luxators will usually result in tooth fracture. Fractured remnants can be
removed using a root tip elevator or root tip pick. Often it is necessary to bur away buc-
cal bone to retrieve the fragments. Consequently, iatrogenic fracture is best avoided by
using a gentle technique and the correct size of instruments. Preoperative radiographs
are mandatory to allow accurate planning of the extraction, while postoperative radio-
graphs will assess complete removal of the roots.
24
21, 22: Questions
21 i. Describe three possible
21a
etiologies for this malocclusion
(21a).
ii. Name the two principal
means of moving teeth to cor-
rect a rostral crossbite, and
briefly describe the techniques
and risks.
m. Describe the sequelae of no
treatment.
22
22 i. How would you describe the radiologic findings associated with the oral mass
found in this three-year-old dog (22), and what is your tentative radiologic diagnosis?
ii. Provided the radiologic diagnosis is confirmed on biopsy, what would be the recom-
mended treatment and prognosis?
2.5
21, 22: Answers
21 i. (1). Persistent deciduous
21b
incisors can result in palatal or
lingual displacement of the
permanent incisor(s). Persistent
deciduous teeth in humans is
believed to be of genetic origin
in that the permanent tooth
bud is displaced away from the
deciduous precursor and can-
not cause a resorptive action
upon the deciduous root. (2)
Discrepancy in jaw length
(prognathism, brachygnathism,
wry malocclusion) alters the
normal occlusal relationship of the incisors. (3) Trauma to the premaxilla or mandible
of a neonate or juvenile can result in an acquired rostral (or ‘anterior') crossbite. Dis-
placement of the permanent incisor tooth bud results in an abnormal path of eruption.
i. The two means of movement are mechanical or surgical. Mechanical movement
requires placement of an orthodontic appliance (21b). Commonly used appliances are
arch wires and various screw-type expansion devices. The risks include periodontal
trauma, root resorption, failure to move, and relapse. Surgical movement involves resec.
tion of periodontal hard and soft tissues and repositioning of the tooth/teeth. Risks
movement therefore cannot be recommended.
i. Rostral crossbite rarely requires correction for the health and welfare of the patient.
There is no masticatory interference or soft tissue trauma and rarely any periodontal
involvement.
22 i. This is a large, space-occupying lesion of the rostral part of the left mandible,
expanding over the symphysis into the right mandible. The border of the lesion consists
of thinned cortical bone, with little or no periosteal reaction. The overall radiographic
density of the lesion is low and it seems to consist of one large cystic area with a few
smaller ones on the periphery. The surrounding bone is expanded but the cortical bone
is not disrupted. The left mandibular first premolar is absent. The left mandibular
canine is marginally displaced but is no longer supported by bone. All left mandibular
incisors and to a lesser extent the right first and second incisors are displaced. The tenta-
tive diagnosis is an intraosseous, benign tumor suggestive of a central (or intraosseous)
ameloblastoma. This diagnosis was confirmed on biopsy.
ii. A bilateral, partial (rostral) mandibulectomy would be indicated and would likely be
curative. Adequate surgical margins would probably be mesial to the mandibular first
molar on the left and mesial to the third premolar on the right. Metastasis of amelo-
blastoma in the dog has not been reported. A bilateral rostral mandibulectomy that far
distally is likely to result in the tongue hanging out and may necessitate tying off or
repositioning the openings of the mandibular and sublingual sa livary ducts.
26
23, 24: Questions
23 This radiograph (23) shows a healing
23
horizontal root fracture of a maxillary
canine in a dog.
i. Define crown-root fracture and root
fracture.
il. Which type of root fracture offers the
best prognosis for maintaining the tooth?
道. What treatment options are available
for the different kinds of root fractures?
24 The roots of multirooted
24
teeth are rarely parallel, often
diverging to a marked degree
(24). This provides the tooth
with additional mechanical
retention, but it complicates
extraction. Extraction of single-
rooted tooth segments is usual-
ly straightforwa rd.
i. List four items of equipment
suitable for sectioning multi-
rooted teeth.
i. Once a multirooted tooth
has been sectioned, what addi-
tional actions may be required in order to extract the roots?
. Extracting cats" teeth can be frustrating as the teeth are brittle and root fracture
below the crestal bone is common when leverage is {deliberately or accidentally) applied
to the crown. How may this occurrence be reduced?
27
23, 24: Answers
23 i. A crown-root fracture is a fracture involving enamel, dentin, and cementum.
These fractures may further be classified as complicated or uncomplicated depending on
whether or not the pulp is involved in the fracture line. A root fracture is a fracture
involving dentin, cementum, and the pulp, and is generally complicated.
ii. The treatment and prognosis of crown and root fractures depends on: (1) the degree
of displacement and mobility of the fracture segments; (2) the extent of contamination;
and (3) the amount of damage to the alveolar crestal bone. Generally, horizontal root
fractures involving the apical segment as well as mid-root level, respond well to treat-
ment. Fractures of the root close to the gingival margin are unlikely to heal. If the root
is to be retained, it will need endodontic therapy.
ii. Treatment options depend on the type of fracture. The fracture level determines the
choice of treatment for horizontal root fractures. Many fractures involving the apical
third of the root heal without treatment, largely because the fracture is stable and the
blood supply is intact. The chances of successful healing decrease as the fracture line
moves coronally because of the reduced stability. Mid-root fractures usually heal well if
the tooth is immobilized using ligature wire and acrylic. A horizontal fracture of the
coronal part of the root is unlikely to heal. The coronal segment should be extracted
and the root treated endodontically if retained. Oblique root fractures are unlikely to
heal because the segments separate and slide apart. The coronal segment should be
removed and the apical segment either extracted or treated endodontically depending on
its size.
24 i. In general, it is easiest to ensure that a tooth is sectioned in the right place by
starting cutting at the furcation. Access to this area is frequently improved and the risk
of soft tissue injury reduced by raising a gingival flap. Implements which may be used to
section teeth include, in order of preference: (1) crosscut taper-fissure or coarse
diamond taper bur in a high-speed dental handpiece; (2) a similar bur in a low-speed
handpiece; (3) embryotomy wire (threaded through the furcation); (4) hacksaw blade
(useful in an emergency); (S) diamond disc in a low-speed handpiece (this is a dangerous
implement and is not recommended).
i. Each segment of the tooth should be treated as a single-rooted tooth. As much as
possible of the periodontal ligament is sectioned using dental luxators or elevators and if
necessary, a portion of the alveolar supporting bone can be removed to reduce root
retention. The rotational use of an elevator between tooth segments or on the crestal
bone aids extraction.
m. There are two simple ways of reducing the risk of accidental leverage against the
crown. One involves odontoplasty, removing the bulge of dental substance above the
neck of the tooth; this permits easier access to the root and periodontal ligament for
luxation/elevation. A more extreme method is to totally remove the crown of the tooth.
This gives even greater access and visualization of the periodontal space. This dog's
maxillary fourth premolar has been sectioned to assist extraction (24). Additionally,
odontoplasty has been performed on the distal aspect of the tooth to both provide
access for elevation and to provide space for the distal tooth segment to be wedged and
(rotationally) levered distally.
28
25, 26: Questions
25 A nine-month-old German
25a
Shepherd Dog sustained an
acute fracture of the upper right
canine. The tooth was treated
with a partial coronal pulpec-
tomy (pulpotomy) and direct
pulp cap procedure within 48
hours of the injury. Shown here
are the pretreatment radiograph
(25a) and the nine-month
follow-up radiograph (25b).
i. What are likely causes of the
radiolucency below the restor-
ation, visible on the follow-up
radiograph?
25b
i. What other parameters can
be evaluated on this radiograph
to determine if the procedure
was successful?
mi. What are some additional
complications associated with a
pulpotomy procedure?
26 Antibiotics are often used in dentistry as most orodental diseases are of bacterial
origin.
i. Are there reasons why antibiotics should not be used systematically in orodental
infections?
il. Antibiotic prophylaxis: what is the rationale and use?
. Antibiotic thera py: what is the rationale and use?
29
25, 26: Answers
25 i. This post-treatment radiograph (25b) shows an adequate dentin-bridge formation
with the radiolucency coronal to the dentin bridge. The likely causes are: (1) improper
restorative technique leaving a gap between the composite restorative material and the
base material placed over the calcium hydroxide; and (2) microleakage around the res-
happened in this case where the restorative had become cracked, leading to a carious
lesion.
ii. You can compare the width of the root canal with the pretreatment radiographs and
see the continued secondary dentin formation, as in this case, and look for periapical
changes. It is beneficial to evaluate the tooth two or more times at six-month intervals to
assess pulp vitality. Tooth color and transillumination of the tooth - looking for a trans-
necrosis. This may lead to periapical inflammation and eventual abscessation. Tooth dis-
coloration can occur secondary to hemorrhage seeping into the dentinal tubules coronal
be seen (25b).
stop their growth so that the defense mechanisms can eliminate all infection. Bacteria are
normal inhabitants of the oral cavity and this goal cannot be achieved with an
indigenous infection. Systematic use of antibiotics can lead to bacterial resistance. Anti
biotics are not 100% safe; toxic or allergic reactions may develop as well as superinfec-
tion when the ^good bacteria” have been killed.
i. To avoid systemic consequences of bacteremia that may occur during dental
treatment. In healthy animals, bacteria in the blood stream are quickly eliminated by the
reticuloendothelial defense system. Antibiotic prophylaxis should only be necessary in
geriatric, immunosuppressed or debilitated animals, in patients with pre-existing heart
disease, in patients where periodontal treatment is combined with elective surgery, and in
extractions is anticipated.
The choice of antibiotic and dosage remain controversial. A good first choice for anti-
biotic prophylaxis is an intravenous or intramuscular injection of 25 mg/kg ampicillin or
amoxicillin given one hour before the procedure followed by a second injection of
12.5 mg/kg four hours later.
im. To deal with infections. Most orodental diseases are infectious diseases; however,
antibiotics are almost never the sole treatment. The treatment of periapical lesions is
endodontic treatment and the treatment of periodontitis is periodontal treatment or
extraction. The choice of antibiotic is based on the current knowledge of bacteria in-
volved in the condition, and not on culture and sensitivity tests, as few diagnostic labs are
able to perform these tests properly for orodental anaerobes. Most severe orodental
infections are either mixed infections or predominantly anaerobic infections. Suitable
antibiotics include amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, clindamycin, doxycycline, metronidazole,
spiramycin, and tinidazole.
30
27-29: Questions
27 i. What is the develop-
mental abnormality (27) seen
in this one-year-old dog?
ii. What is the clinical impor-
tance of this condition?
ni. What is the identification
of this tooth using the Triadan
system and the anatomic
identification system?
28 Chemical antiplaque agents
28
are a useful adjunct to mechani-
CHX-Guard
cal plaque removal (28).
i. List two properties of a
chemical antiplaque agent
which determine its expected
effect in the oral cavity.
CHX
i. Which is the most proven
chemical plaque retardant to
Nolvadent
date?
AORALLTO
i. What formulation and what
concentration are generally
recommended?
iv. What is the main disadvan-
tage of this agent?
v. List two clinical situations where chemical plaque control is indicated. Outline the
rationale for this recommendation.
29 When educating clients on the importance of oral health in their pet, the potential
systemic effects of untreated dental disease should be considered. What are the
potential systemic consequences of untreated dental infections?
31
27-29:Answers
27 i. A persistent deciduous canine on the right maxilla. Although the term retained
deciduous canine is more commonly used for this condition, persistent is more correct.
“Retained’ strictly-speaking refers to failure to erupt {retentio dentis), while ‘persistent”
in this context means failure to exfoliate.
ii. In most cases the permanent tooth develops normally, although the time and direc
tion of eruption are influenced by the persistent deciduous tooth. Persistent deciduous
canines may cause linguoversion of the erupting mandibular canines and facial devia-
tion of the maxillary canines (see 178). Furthermore, persistent deciduous teeth alter the
gingival contour, which results in plaque and debris accumulating between the decidu-
Ous and permanent teeth.
 as s   u to n si a s a n a 
and is abbreviated anatomically as cl.
28 i. (1) Antibacterial spectrum of the active agent and (2) substantivity. (Substantivity
implies that the adherence of the agent to the oral tissues should be greater or more
extended than would occur following simple mecha nical deposition.)
ii. Chlorhexidine.
mi. Chlorhexidine gluconate is generally preferred to chlorhexidine diacetate. A 0.12%
concentration is widely used in human dentistry, although it has been shown in wound
healing experiments that a O.os% solution may be preferable because chlorhexidine is
less cytotoxic at this concentration. For the same reason, alcohol-free solutions are pre-
ferred.
iv. The main disadvantage of chlorhexidine is that it may stain the teeth. Moreover, it is
inactivated by the presence of organic material. For best results, chlorhexidine should be
used together with tooth brushing which physically removes the plaque and reduces
tooth staining.
v. Chemical plaque control is used to augment the effect of mechanical plaque removal.
It can also be used on its own if mechanical plaque removal is not possible, e.g. due to
postoperative pain, but where plaque control is required to allow resolution of inflam-
mation. Two clinical situations where chemical plaque control, preferably in addition to
   s (h   a   d 
g s  s   A  ( 
as the animal will allow it.
29 Oral infections such as periodontal disease, periodontal abscess, or periapical abscess
are sources of bacteria that may result in a distant infection. Patients with an altered
immune system are at increased risk for distant site infections. When oral disease is
present, bacteremia from oral origins may occur with tooth brushing or chewing. Inter
mittent bacteremia of oral origins may significantly affect overall health. The kidneys,
liver, and myocardium may potentially be affected secondary to chronic periodontal
disease.
32
30, 3 I: Questions
30
30 This is a procedural radiograph of a root canal therapy of a canine {30)
i. Evaluate the quality of the root canal fill.
ii. Why is a good obturation of the apical third of a root canal important?
31
31 How common are feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions {FORLs) {31) in domestic
cats, and which teeth are most commonly affected?
33
30, 3 I: Answers
30 i. Although the coronal two-thirds of the canal has a dense fill, the apical third has a
poorly condensed fill.
i. A dense fill in the coronal two-thirds (along with the access restorations) would pre-
vent contamination of the apex from materials in the oral cavity. However, even in a
well-cleaned canal, apical voids may cause eventual failure. If a space exists between the
root canal-obturating material and the dentin, percolation of fluids can occur. Residual
bacteria, bacterial breakdown products, toxins, or organic debris in the canal can act as
periapical tissue irritants. Even in a well-cleaned canal, fluid ingress from periapical
tissues can stagnate in microvoids in the canal. Fluid breakdown products can then dif-
fuse back out, acting as an irritant. A third source of potential problems is the seeding 
of bacteria from transient bacteremia causing reinfection of a previously non-infected
canal. In veterinary dentistry, most of the teeth on which root canal therapy is per-
formed have an apical delta rather than a large apical foramen. An apical delta consists
of many small canals at the apex. In endodontic therapy, good technique achieves a
three-dimensional fill to treat and obturate all the portals of exit (POE), including any
, a o   e s     rie r s 
canals in the apical 1-4 mm of the root. A small blush' of sealant from the apical POEs
indicates a treated and well-filled apex.
31 The table below summarizes the results of several surveys. The prevalence increases
with age, with a plateau effect as teeth are lost and thus not counted as having FORLs.
Most of these surveys are based on clinical examination only, and as a result they
under-report radiographically obvious mid-root lesions in canine or premolar and
molar teeth (see 61). Also, the surveys generally ignore incisor teeth, which are often
missing. As a general statement, it is fair to state that about 50% of domestic cats aged
six years or more have one or more FORLs. Reported surveys agree that the teeth most
commonly affected, based on clinical examination alone, are the mandibular third pre-
molar and first molar teeth, and the maxillary fourth premolar teeth; the canine teeth
tend to be under-reported.
Summary of prevalence of FORLs in canines, premolars and molars in domestic cats
Cats
Source
% with
No. of
Age
Teeth most
examined
of cats
FORLS
FORLslcat*trend
often affected
200
Unknown
29
2.9
↑ as age ↑
Premolars
64
Mixed+
52
3.2
↑ as age ↑
 Premolars
306
 Dental cases
46
152
Dental cases
43
432
Dental cases
62
2.8
↑ as age ↑
Premolars
78
 Dental cases
67
4.1
↑ as age ↑
Premolars
796
Mixed+
26
2.3
↑ as age ↑
Premolars
*In cats that have at least one lesion.
+Cats presented for treatment of dental or other conditions.
34
32, 33: Questions
32 The apex of the tooth is the
32a
tip of the r0ot (32a).
i. What are the anatomic land-
marks of this area in humans?
ii. How does the apical mor-
phology differ in dogs and cats
compared with humans?
iii. What is the clinical rel-
evance of this morphologic fea-
ture?
33 There is continuing con-
33
fusion with regard to the origin
 and nomenclature of epulides in
the dog (33). In broad terms,
what is the current understand
ing and classification of these
lesions, and what is their clini-
cal significance?
3.5
32,33:Answers
32b
Human
Dog
Cementum
Dentin
Pulp
Apicalterminus
Apical
Few apical
ramifications
ramifications
'Apical delta'
Foramen
Multipleforamina
32 i. The apical terminus of the canal is the end of the root canal which is synonymous
with the apical constriction, the narrowest diameter of the canal. The foramen is the
opening created by the canal ending on the external root surface. There is a funnel-
shaped space between the apical constriction internal to the foramen and the foramen
on the external root surface {32b). The cementum invaginates inside this cone and ends
at the cementodentinal junction {CDJ) at or close to the apical constriction. The CDJ
delimitates where pulp becomes periapical tissue.
i. In humans, the apical area is composed of a principal foramen with sometimes a few
of the apex of mature teeth. Between 10 and 20 foramina are seen in dogs’ and cats?
canine teeth and the apical ramifications connecting the apical terminus to the foramina
are 1.75-2 mm long.
m. The rationale of root canal therapy is to seal the root canal at the level of the CDJ in
order to achieve apical healing. During root canal preparation, care must be taken not
to over-instrument the canal by passing through the principal foramen. In dogs and cats
with an unmodified apex, the endodontic instruments tend to stop at the end of the root
canal (apical terminus) where the small ramifications of the apical delta begin.
Subsequently, over-instrumentation is less likely and clinical assessment of working
length is easier. Mechanical preparation of the ramifications of the apical delta is
impossible and necrotic tissue may remain inside.
33 The term epulis refers to any tumor or tumor-like lesion on the gingiva {33). It is a
clinically descriptive term with no specific histopathologic connotation. Most authors
agree that epulides can be classified into four groups: {1) A group of non-neoplastic,
reactive lesions occurring as a result of chronic low-grade irritation, e.g. focal fibrous
gingival hyperplasia and pyogenic granuloma. (2) Benign neoplastic lesions of
odontogenic origin, e.g- peripheral odontogenic fibroma. (3) An infiltrating epithelial
tumor, previously known as the acanthomatous epulis and recently reclassified as
peripheral or canine acanthomatous ameloblastoma. (4) Various malignant non-
odontogenic tumor types, e.g. squamous cell carcinoma and fibrosarcoma.
The clinical importance of epulides can be summarized as follows: (1) An epulis must
be biopsied. (2) If multiple lesions are present in an oral ca vity, all must be biopsied. (3)
Surgical margins for definitive excision must be determined by the biopsy result. (4)
Appropriate dental treatment is indicated for reactive lesions.
36
34, 35: Questions
34
34 What causes feline odontoclastic resorption lesions (FORLs) such as this {34) to be
so painful in some cats?
35
 35 Full-mouth extraction is a last-line resort in managing patients with chronic gingivo-
stomatitis {35).
i. What does the procedure encompa ss?
ii. Describe your immediate postoperative regimen for these patients.
37
34, 35: Answers
34 FORLs can start anywhere on the periodontal attachment for on the surface of the
pulp tissue in the case of internal resorption). When the lesion is entirely below the
epithelial attachment, it is usually asymptomatic. However, lesions that are present at
the gingival margin result in bacterial contamination of the diseased area, causing acute
inflammation. Occlusal pressure then results in compression of inflamed bone and tooth
substance, or trapping of inflamed soft tissue against a hard surface. Another possibility
is that the contamination of the lesion will result in endodontic inflammation, swelling
and pain - one of the characteristics of these lesions microscopically is that they do not
result in overwhelming endodontic disease that leads to pulp death; thus, the
endodontic pain may continue. Antimicrobial treatment will reduce the bacterial
activity and thus lessen the inflammation, and anti-inflammatory drugs will have a
similar effect in reducing the pain, as will analgesic medications. However, all of these
medical treatments will have only a short-term effect, and the lesion itself must be
addressed to provide permanent relief from local infection and discomfort. Fortunately,
most FORLs occur on the buccal surface of the tooth and are thus more readily
apparent on clinical examination. Unfortunately, the inflammation associated with
 FORLs often is not readily distinguisha ble from plaque-induced periodontal disease.
is essential that the whole tooth, i.e. crown and rootfs), is completely removed. The least
traumatic means of doing this is surgical extraction using a flap technique. Preoperative
radiographs are always indicated. Following extraction, radiographs should be taken to
ensure that there are no root remnants. Any remaining root fragments should be
removed before flap closure.
Extractions should be completed one quadrant at a time. A mucogingival flap is
raised to expose the furcations and buccal bone plate of the premolars and molars.
Multirooted teeth are sectioned into single-rooted segments using a bur in either a high-
speed or slow-speed handpiece. Buccal bone is also removed with the bur to facilitate
extraction. Water cooling of the bur is mandatory. Enough bone should be removed to
allow easy extraction yet trying to maintain as much as possible of the alveolar bone
height. The teeth are then gently elevated or luxated out of their sockets. Following
hemostasis, ensuring a clean clot in each alveolus, the mucogingival flap is closed by
attaching the buccal gingiva to the palatal/lingual mucosa using fine, resorbable suture
material on a swaged-on needle. The closure must be tension-free.
i. The immediate postoperative consideration is analgesia. Cats which have had full
four-quadrant extraction are usually uncomfortable. An anesthetic regimen which
includes opioids and/or regional anesthetic blocks will give pain relief for a few hours
after recovery. Further opioids or the use of a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent
should then be used. Hospitalizing and feeding these cats by means of a nasogastric tube
for the first few days is useful. The cat should not be discharged until it can feed itself.
In some instances, it is useful to stagger the surgery, ie. extract the maxillary and
mandibular teeth on one side on the first occasion and then do the other side a few
weekslater.
38
36, 37: Questions
36a
36 Discolorations of teeth can be classified as generalized, local, or pseudodis.
colorations.
i. Which type can be seen here (36a), and what are the possible causes?
ii. Is treatment necessary and, if performed, will the discoloration disappear?
37a
37 What should be done with this old horse's incisors{37a)?
39
36, 37:Answers
36 i. The list below summarizes the causes of dental
36b
discoloration. The case in question is a local dis-
coloration, probably of endodontic-traumatic
origin. Hemorrhage or necrosis of the pulp causes
lysis of the erythrocytes. The hemoglobin breaks
down into pigments which penetrate the dentinal
tubules and are responsible for the different dis-
colorations. The color of the crown may vary from
pink-red to blue-gray or dark gray. In the case of a
minor hemorrhage, the pulp may survive, blood
pigments may be resorbed and the discoloration
may be transient. Another possible cause of crown
discoloration is acute pulpitis of hematogenous
origin. A localized pink-red area on the crown may
be indicative of vital pulp with internal resorption,
the vascular resorbing tissue being visible through
the enamel ('pink spot' - 36b, arrowed). Generalized discolorations: (1) Genetic: amelo-
genesis imperfecta; dentinogenesis imperfecta; odontodysplasia. (2) Metabolic disturb-
ance (prolonged): enamel hypoplasia; enamel hypomineralization. (3) Ageing: enamel
infarction; attrition/abrasion. {4) Iatrogenic: tetracyclines; fluorosis. Local discolora-
tions: {1) Genetic: odontodysplasia. (2) Metabolic disturbance (short period): enamel
hypoplasia; enamel hypomineralization. (3) Ageing: enamel infarction; attri-
tion/abrasion. (4) Trauma/endodontic: pre-eruptive: mechanical/chemical trauma; peri-
apical pathology deciduous tooth; post-eruptive: pulp hemorrhage; pulp necrosis;
internal resorption. (5) Dental caries. (6) Iatrogenic: endodontic and restorative
materials. Pseudodiscolorations: (1) Dental plaque and calculus. (2) Agents in food.
ii. Radiographic examination and pulp-vitality testing (if available) are indicated and
endodontic treatment is most often the treatment of choice. It is important to note that
discoloration may persist following endodontic treatment.
37 The tall mandibular incisors need to be
37b
shortened so the occlusal surfaces of all
the mandibular incisors are level from
side-to-side (37b). This is easily done with
a rasp, file, or float. If a large amount of
dental substance needs to be removed, a
straight dental handpiece or a DremelIM.
type instrument with a diamond cut-off
wheel and/or bur are very helpful. If an
incisor is to be cut off with cutters or nip-
pers, it should be scored first or the in-
cisor may fracture when cut.
40
38, 39: Questions
38a
38b
38 The normal canine tooth occlusion in the dog comprises interdigitation of the
mandibular canines which diverge laterally, slotting evenly into the maxillary third
incisor-canine diastema without tooth-to-tooth contact. Palatal contact by malposi-
tioned mandibular canine teeth is a commonly recognized malocclusion in domestic
dogs (38a, b). Describe four different patterns of ma ndibular canine tooth malocclusion
which commonly result in palatal trauma.
39 A wide variety of suture
39a
materials have been recom-
mended for use in the oral
cavity (39a).
i. Chromic catgut persists in the
human oral cavity for 4-7
days, which is considered to be
ETHILON
ideal since this approximates
the time limit for removal of
non-absorbable suture mate-
rial. Which recently introduced
synthetic suture material combines a rapid and predictable absorption time with mini-
mal infla mmatory response and minimal tissue drag?
i. What type of needle is recommended for intraoral suturing?
ni. Which suture material was found to be superior in a study comparing suture
materials for partial maxillectomy in the dog?
iv. In a study comparing seven different suture materials in the feline oral cavity, which
of the following suture materials had the least and the greatest tissue reaction based on
gross visual grading: chromic catgut, polydioxanone, polyglactin 910, polyglycolic acid,
polypropylene, stainless steel, or nylon?
41
38,39:Answers
38 The four most common patterns of malocclusion resulting in palatal contact by the
mandibular canine teeth are: {1) Lingual deviation of the mandibular canine teeth
(upright canines) in a normal-width jaw. This condition may be unilateral or bilateral.
Under normal circumstances the mandibular canine teeth initially erupt in a
rostrodorsal direction, using the pathway provided by the resorbing deciduous tooth
root. Once the crown appears in the mouth, the tooth then tips laterally, so avoiding
palatal contact. Sometimes the adult tooth erupts at an abnormal angle, leading directly
to abnormal positioning. On other occasions, for whatever reason, the deciduous tooth
root may not be resorbed, so that the permanent tooth is prevented from tipping
laterally as it erupts. (2) An abnormally narrow (*base-narrow') mandible can result in
the mandibular canines contacting the palate even if they do diverge laterally at a
normal angle. In many dogs with base-narrow mandibles the condition is masked by
excessive lateral tipping of the canine teeth so that they do not cause palatal trauma. (3)
Mandibular brachygnathism can lead to palatal injury by the ma ndibular canine teeth.
In some cases the mandibular canines are positioned level with the maxillary canines
  a  a  u   n r ae ra 
relative base-narrow effect due to the natural divergence of the maxillary dental arcades
distally. This is the case with an underdeveloped mandible (mandibular micrognathia),
which is a skeletal malocclusion characterized by a mandible that is too narrow and too
short. {4) A fourth condition which will often result in palatal contact by one of the
mandibular canine teeth is wry jaw.
39 i. Poliglecaprone 25 (MonocrylIM, Ethi-
39b
con, Inc., Somerville, NJ) (39b) is a synthetic,
5-0(1.0
MONOCRYL'Y463
monofilament suture material which com-
bines the rapid absorption comparable with
P-3
ETHICON
that of catgut with the inertness, strength
and smoothness previously only found in
monofilament, synthetic non-absorba ble
suture materials such as polypropylene.
i. Although taper needles have been recommended in the past, small, swaged-on, 3/8-
circle, reverse-cutting needles {e.g. FS-2 or P-3, Ethicon, Inc.) cause less tissue drag and
are therefore recommended for intraoral suturing.
. The healing of suture lines closed with polypropylene was superior to that of those
closed with polyglactin 910 (Vicryl1m, Ethicon, Inc.) based on suture line bursting pres-
sures and the degree of suppurative inflammation and tissue necrosis at the suture sites.
Because of its multifilament structure and capillarity, polyglactin 910 harbors more
bacteria and thus elicits more inflammation than polypropylene.
iv. Polypropylene caused a minimal reaction with <1 mm of erythema around the intra
orally placed sutures, while polyglactin 910 and polyglycolic acid caused a marked reac-
tion with a >3 mm area of erythema with ulceration around the sutures.
42
40-42: Questions
40
40 i. What are the possible etiologies of the condition shown (40)?
il. Is there any functional impairment associated with this malocclusion?
. Is any treatment indicated?
41 The eosinophilic granuloma
41
complex in cats refers to a
group of lesions affecting the
skin and oral cavity {41). Oral
eosinophilic granulomas also
occur in dogs.
i. Which lesions affect cats, and
where are they typically lo-
cated?
ii. In which breed of dog is this
lesion most common, and
where do they usually occur in
the oral cavity?
. What are the recommended
treatment options?
42 It is important for the veterinary dentist to use correct odontologic nomenclature.
What are the correct terms to describe the dentition of the dog, horse, and rabbit?
43
40-42: Answers
40 i. A genetically narrow caudal maxilla or an abnormally wide mandible can result in
result in a unilateral distal crossbite.
i. There is generally no functional impairment resulting from distal crossbite, except for
possible abnormal attrition of premolars and/or molars that are in occlusal contact.
ili. Treatment is generally not indicated and would technically be very difficult.
41 i. Oral lesions in cats are usually eosinophilic ulcers or linear granulomas. Eosino-
philic ulcers {e.g. indolent, rodent, and lip ulcers) are non-painful, non-pruritic lesions
most commonly found on the upper lip. They are usually well-circumscribed, firm, red.
brown to yellow, ulcerated lesions located on each side of the midline (41). Eosinophilic
granulomas (linear granulomas) may occur as single or multiple lesions in a nodular
pattern in the oral cavity. Histologic evaluation of these oral lesions is necessary for
definitive diagnosis and to differentiate them from neoplasms, mycotic infections, and
foreign body reactions.
i. An eosinophilic granuloma may occur in any breed but occurs most commonly in
 young Siberian Huskies. These lesions are typically identified as proliferative tissue, with
or without superficial ulcerations, located primarily on the lateral and ventral surfaces
of the tongue. They also occur on the soft palate.
m. Allergies (e.g. flea, mosquito, biting fly, food, atopy), parasites (e.g. fleas), infectious
diseases {e.g. bacterial, dermatophytes, viral), and miscellaneous (genetic, immune-
mediated, idiopathic) problems have been suggested as underlying causes or pre-
disposing factors for the eosinophilic granuloma complex. When an underlying etiology
is identified or suspected, treatment should be directed at eliminating or controlling it.
Lesions generally respond to glucocorticoid administration. Cats are usually ad-
ministered injectable methylprednisolone {2 mg/kg, minimum 20 mg) subcutaneously
every two weeks for a total of 2-3 treatments. Dogs are administered prednisone orally
at a dosage of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg every 12 hours for seven days then a tapering dose over
the following 2-3 weeks. Progestin compounds are not recommended; they are not
licensed for use in cats and may be associated with severe side-effects. Refractory
eosinophilic ulcers have been successfully treated with CO, laser treatment in two cases.
Eosinophilic granulomas may regress spontaneously.
42 Dog: a heterodont, diphyodont dentition with anelodont, brachyodont teeth. Animals
with heterodont dentition have teeth of mixed form and function; being diphyodont,
there is a set of primary {deciduous) and secondary (permanent) teeth. Anelodont teeth
have a limited period of growth as they develop anatomic roots. In a brachyodont den-
tition the root is longer than the anatomic crown. Horse dentition: heterodont,
diphyodont and anelodont, like in the dog. However, horses have hypsodont teeth. A
hypsodont (radicular hypsodont) tooth has a long anatomic crown and a very short root
when fully mature. Much of the crown is held in reserve subgingivally in the alveolar
bone. The root is short in comparison with the length of the crown. Rabbits: heterodont,
diphyodont dentition with all teeth being elodont {aradicular hypsodont): elodont teeth
grow throughout life and never develop anatomic roots. Although diphyodont, the
deciduous teeth are not functional and are exfoliated shortly before or after birth.
44
43, 44: Questions
43
43 This patient (43) was presented for a fractured tooth.
i. What are the considerations when assessing this fracture?
i. What type of restoration may be used?
44 This is an intraoral view of
44
the premaxillary region of an
11-year-old, spayed, female
Cocker Spaniel presented be-
cause of a six-month history of
chronic, purulent nasal dis-
charge, severe halitosis and a
large, progressive, painful
swelling on the dorsal nasal
region {44). Six months before
this presentation, the left and
right maxillary first and second
incisors were extracted and the
remaining teeth were scaled
 and polished.
i. What is your tentative diagnosis, and what diagnostic tests are recommended to con-
firm your diagnosis?
i. Based on the results of further diagnostic testing, what is the diagnosis and appro-
priate treatment in this case?
4.5
43, 44: Answers
43 i. This fracture extends below the gingival margin; it is therefore called a crown-root
fracture. There has been some compromise of the attachment of the attached gingiva.
This type of fracture can be treated; however, follow-up maintenance of oral hygiene is
very important.
i. After endodontic treatment has been performed, options for treatment include
restoration of access and fracture sites or full-crown restoration. Restoration of the
access and fracture sites provides primarily an economic advantage to the client. With
good home care, simply closing the fracture and access sites with a light-cure composite
resin may be sufficient. Periodontal surgery may be indicated to improve the gingival
contour. It is much less expensive to place a composite resin restoration than it is to
place a full crown. In addition, full-crown restoration requires a second anesthetic
episode to place the crown. The advantage of a full-crown restoration is two-fold. First,
the full crown allows greater protection for the tooth against further trauma. The tooth
was weakened in the initial fracture occurrence, and may be further weakened in the
therapy. The full crown will help to protect the tooth's integrity. Secondly, the full
crown allows better restoration of the anatomy of the tooth. This can help to prevent
may be created by the loss of attached gingiva.
44 i. Based on the history and the appearance of the lesion, a bone sequestrum is
suspected, although an underlying neoplastic process cannot be ruled out. Thoracic
radiographs are necessary to reveal the presence of detectable metastatic disease.
Hematologic and serum biochemical testing is recommended to rule out underlying
disease; skull radiographs are recommended to further evaluate the lesion; and an in-
cisional biopsy followed by histopathologic examination is recommended to determine
the exact nature of the condition.
The results of further diagnostic testing revealed normal thoracic radiographs, and an
elevated white blood cell count with a shift to the left. Skull radiographs revealed a bone
sequestrum in the region of the remaining maxillary incisors and canine teeth. Histo-
pathologic examination revealed a severe chronic inflammatory reaction.
i. This is a case of a bone sequestrum in the premaxillary region. Appropriate treatment
involves the removal of the bone sequestrum and all teeth associated with it. In this case
this involved both remaining ma xillary incisors and canine teeth. Following extraction
of affected teeth the surrounding bone is thoroughly debrided with rongeurs and
curettes until normal, healthy bleeding bone is revealed. The excised tissue is submitted
for histopathologic examination to confirm the diagnosis and tissue is submitted for
bacterial culture and sensitivity testing. The surgical site is liberally flushed and the gin-
giva is sutured. Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy is initiated pending the results of bac-
terial culture and sensitivity tests. Conservative surgical treatment, such as limited curet-
tage of obviously necrotic bone, followed by a prolonged course of antibiotics, is
usually only temporarily successful. Radical resection of affected tissue back to normal
bone is much more likely to cure this condition.
46
45, 46: Questions
45 A two-year-old dog is presented with
45
discoloration of the left mandibular can-
ine one year after root canal treatment of
both mandibular canines (45 ).
i. Describe the radiologic findings asso-
ciated with the left mandibular canine.
i. List the possible causes for treatment
failure.
m. What is your recommendation for sal-
vaging this tooth?
iv. What could have been done during the
initial treatment to improve the likelihood
of success?
46 The appropriate manage-
46
ment of traumatic lesions of lips
in dogs and cats varies depend-
ing on the clinical presentation
(46).
i. What should be included in
the initial wound management
of lip lacerations?
ii. What factors influence
whether or not a lip laceration
should be closed primarily or
closed utilizing delayed primary
closure?
47
45, 46: Answers
45 i. Immature tooth with a root canal filling; overfilling with root canal cement and
s
cleaning leaving debris in the canal; overfill of material acting as tissue irritant; leakage of
the coronal restoration allowing bacteria and fluids eventually to reach the periapical
tissues. The fact that this tooth was still immature, with an incompletely formed apex at
the time of root canal therapy, largely contributed to the occurrence of this complication.
. Surgical approach for root tip amputation (apicoectomy) and retrograde filling
(surgical endodontics) to remove the overfilled material, debride the periapical lesion,
 and obturate the apex. The large periapical radiolucency indicates that the cortical bone
plate is involved. With the extent of the periapical lesion which is now evident, the
prognosis for this tooth is guarded to poor.
iv. Apexification. An immature permanent tooth with an incompletely formed apex has
weak walls and no apical stop or seat against which to compress a filling material. The
open foramen has thin and fragile dentinal walls which would complicate an apico-
ectomy and make it difficult to obtain a seal. Apexification allows the apex to mature
and close. To perform this, the canal is emptied, cleaned and dried similar to routine
endodontic treatment. Then the canal is filled with a temporary material (usually
Ca(OH),) until radiographic evidence of apical closure is demonstrated. Mixing a small
amount of barium sulfate with the CafOH), allows radiographic monitoring. If the
material is resorbed before apical closure, the remaining material may need to be
removed and the canal refilled with fresh Ca{OH),. Once the apex has closed, routine
root canal filling may be performed. Other materials, such as tricalcium phosphate and
collagen-calcium phosphate, have also been shown to promote apexification. The im-
portant point is cleaning the necrotic material from the canal and preventing ingress of
46 i. Initial wound management should include debridement of devitalized tissue and
copious lavage. The condition of the wound following debridement will influence the
decision on timing and method of wound closure.
i. Several factors influencing primary wound closure include: degree of contamination,
time interval since injury, presence of devitalized and damaged tissue, adequacy of
blood supply, availability of tension-free closure, overall status of the patient, and client
compliance with wound management. Acute wounds can usually be debrided and
closed primarily. A full-thickness lip laceration should be closed in two layers. The
mucosa is apposed with simple-interrupted absorbable sutures with the knots located
within the oral cavity, while the skin is apposed with simple-interrupted non-absorbable
sutures. In general, the number of sutures should be kept to a minimum. The suture size
should be as small as possible; usually 5-0 suture material is adequate and the sutures
should be carefully placed, taking care not to devitalize tissues. Delayed primary closure
is indicated when the wound is grossly contaminated, purulent, extensively devitalized.
edematous, or inflamed. Delayed primary closure is performed 3-5 days after injury.
The advantage of delayed primary closure is that it permits evaluation of the progres-
sion of wound healing and serial debridement of devitalized tissue.
48
47, 48: Questions
47
47 The oral cavity is lined by a continuous mucous membrane (47).
i. What is the difference between free and attached gingiva?
i. What are the structural differences between attached gingiva, alveolar mucosa, and
palatal mucosa?
48
48 The intraoral examination of an 18-month-old Shih Tzu revealed two 15 mm,
smooth, soft, non-painful, fluctuating swellings in the edentulous areas distal to the
mandibular canine teeth and mesial to the mandibular second premolars. Aspiration of
the swelling produced a serous, slightly blood-tinged fluid. Intraoral radiographs were
taken of the rostral mandible (48).
i. What is your tentative diagnosis?
i. What is the appropriate treatment for this condition?
m. What complications may be encountered in the management of this patient?
49
47, 48: Answers
47 i. Gingiva covers the alveolar processes of the maxilla and mandible and surrounds
the teeth. The gingival mucosa comprises the oral gingival epithelium, sulcular epithe-
lium, and junctional epithelium with the underlying connective tissue (lamina propria )
contributing to the attachment apparatus of the tooth (see 65 and 206). The gingiva
coronal to the cementoenamel junction is called the marginal or free gingiva.
ii. The attached gingiva is demarcated from the alveolar mucosa by the mucogingival
junction and is tightly bound to the underlying periosteum of the alveolar bone. The
oral gingival epithelium has a keratinized surface layer. Parakeratinization, charac.
terized by the presence of pyknotic nuclei in the flat, horny scales, is common. The basal
cells continuously produce new epithelial cells. The oral gingival epithelium and the
lamina propria are dove-tailed with one another through pegs and ridges. The network
of collagen fibers in the sub-epithelial connective tissue, which form bundles, extends
into cementum, periosteum, and the surface of the outer cortical plate of the alveolar
process.
The alveolar mucosa is a loose, movable, highly vascularized, non-keratinized epithe-
lium. Compared with the oral gingiva, the connective tissue consists of a submucosa
located below the lamina propria. Collagen and elastic fibers are present and the latter
give the oral mucosa its mobility. The mucosa of the lips and cheeks and the mucosa of
the floor of the mouth is similar in structure to that of the oral mucosa. The epithelium
of the mucosa of the floor of the mouth is very thin.
The mucosa of the hard palate consists of keratinized, stratified, squamous epithe
lium. It is developed in several transverse curved ridges (palatine rugae). It has a thick,
periodontal liga ments of the maxillary teeth.
48 i. A bilateral dentigerous cyst, containing an unerupted mandibular first premolar.
Although dentigerous cysts occur infrequently in dogs, it should be a primary con-
sideration in young dogs presenting with oral swellings in an edentulous area.
i. Treatment involves making an incision over the cyst, burring away any buccal
cortical bone overlying the cyst, drainage of fluid, and extraction of the unerupted tooth
following minimal elevation. The cyst wall is thoroughly curetted to ensure complete
removal. The entire cyst lining should be submitted for histopathologic examination.
The use of a cancellous bone graft is recommended. The oral mucosa is closed with
multiple, simple-interrupted sutures.
m. Incomplete removal of the cystic epithelium may result in recurrence of the denti-
gerous cyst. Malignant transformation of the epithelial lining cells of the dentigerous
cyst to primary osseous carcinoma, adenomatoid odontogenic tumor, and amelo-
blastoma has been reported in humans; this potential, although rare, exists in dogs.
making thorough histopathologic examination and careful postoperative evaluation of
the surgical site mandatory. The structure of the mandible will be considerably
weakened as a result of the cysts and surgery, and care should be taken to avoid frac-
ture of the mandible.
50
49, 50: Questions
49 This radiograph (49) shows a poten-
49
tial complication of an endodontic pro-
cedure.
i. What is the complication evident on
this radiograph, and why can this be a
problem?
i. What can be done to help prevent this
or similar instrument complications?
i. When this complication occurs, what
steps can be taken to correct it?
50 This tumor on the caudal palate in a
50
seven-year-old dog was diagnosed as a
fibrosarcoma (50).
i. What are important factors in the thera-
peutic decision-making process?
il. Of what possible specific complications
should the client be informed if a maxil-
lectomy is considered?
51
49, 50: Answers
49 i. The radiograph shows a separated Lentulo? paste filler tip in the root canal. This
can be a problem if the presence of the tip prevents adequate obturation of the canal or
becomes forced through the apex during obturation. This canal has been previously
cleaned since this complication occurred during placement of the root canal cement. If
an endodontic file tip becomes separated during the filing stage of the root canal, it may
make it impossible to completely clean and shape the canal.
 i. Measures to prevent separation of instrument tips during a root canal procedure
include: (1) Having a straight-line access to minimize bending of the instrument. (2)
Starting with the smallest file that will go to the apical limit of the canal and increasing
in size. {3) Using a lubricating agent and lavage during filing. (4) Checking files and
spiral filling instruments for signs of weakening {unraveling of the twists or cracks). (5)
Keeping a steady hand so the instrument is moved straight in and out of the canal. (6)
Using the instrument appropriately fe.g. do not twist Hedstrom files, use a reduction
contra-angle with spiral fillers).
i. If a separated instrument tip does occur, the procedure may still be able to be
salvaged. An attempt can be made to remove the instrument tip by using a magnetized
file, ultrasonic endodontic files to loosen and flush the tip out, or try to snag the instru-
ment with another file if in a larger canal. If the tip becomes wedged, it can be impos-
sible to remove it. If the canal is clean and the mishap occurred later in the procedure, it
may be possible to fill the canal with a heated gutta-percha technique and follow it
along radiographically. If there is failure of the procedure or the separated instrument
tip prevents satisfactory completion of the root canal procedure, an apicoectomy can be
performed to ensure a clean and filled apical portion of the canal.
50 i. In addition to the general considerations of overall health, life expectancy, and
wishes of the client, an accurate assessment of the extent of the tumor is extremely im-
portant. An oral fibrosarcoma infrequently has regional lymph node involvement but
distant metastasis is occasionally present. Of particular importance in this case is to
determine the extent of the primary tumor. Good-quality oral and nasal radiographs are
essential to establish whether the tumor has invaded the nasal cavity. More advanced
diagnostic modalities (e.g. CT, MRI) may be very useful. If modalities other than
surgery are contemplated, it is important to know that the response of oral fibrosar-
coma to radiation therapy is only fair to poor.
ii. The main intraoperative complication is hemorrhage, which can be life-threatening
with inadequate anesthetic support and suboptimal surgical skill. Wide surgical margins
are indicated as a fibrosarcoma is known to infiltrate deeply. Given the fact that this is a
large tumor, tumor-free margins and tension-free closure may be difficult to achieve.
The client should be informed that local recurrence is a distinct possibility. Partial
dehiscence of the buccal flap used for closure of the maxillectomy site is generally due to
closure under tension. The cheek on the operated side may be visibly pulled inwards.
The mandibular teeth, the first molar in particular, may occlude with and traumatize
the flap covering the ma xillectomy site.
52
51, 52: Questions
，1
51 The use of pins in this case has contributed to the failure of this restoration (51)
i. Explain why this has occurred.
ii. What precautions can be taken to avoid complications when using this technique?
. What would have been a better alternative for restoration of this tooth?
52a
52 i. Which dental instruments are suita ble for use as levers {52a), and what precautions
should be applied to their use in this manner?
i. What is differential rotational leverage, and why is it better than simple leverage for
tooth extraction?
53
51, 52: Answers
51 i. Pins do not add strength to the restoration; however, they do increase the retention
Of dental materials. In this case, the pins have actually made the restorative material more
subject to fracture due to shear. While the pins may have increased the retention of the
material, they have made the material subject to fracture.
i. Pin holes must be carefully planned. They must be placed no closer than 1 mm from
the restorative edge and dentinoenamel junction to avoid crazing of enamel. Caution
must be used in vital teeth to avoid pulp exposure. In all teeth, pinholes should be
positioned to avoid perforations into the periodontal ligament. The process of drilling
into the tooth removes tooth structure and weakens the tooth.
m. While the placement of pins may be an advantageous economic alternative, a better
dental alternative in this case would have been a full prosthetic crown.
52 i. Dental elevators may be used
52b
as levers. The tips of luxators are
A
made from softer metal and are
less robust, making them unsuit-
able as levers. Dental luxators are
efficient wedges, using the mech-
anics of a slope.
Carefully applied, the mech-
anical advantage produced by
leverage can assist with extraction
B
of teeth. Levers apply forces in two
directions, one way at the working
end and in the opposite direction
at the pivot (52b (A). To minimize
the risk of damage (52b (B)), when
it is necessary to apply simple
leverage, an area of hard tissue
should be used as a fulcrum rather
than a point contact. Teeth which
are to remain in the mouth should
never be used as a fulcrum. Lever-
age against the crown of a tooth
(accidental or deliberate) is liable to cause root fracture below the level of the alveolar
bone. In order to minimize this risk, odontoplasty or full-crown amputation can be
performed on the tooth to be extracted before extraction of the tooth's root(s).
i. Differential rotational leverage (52b (C)) applies a powerful force over a very short
distance, thus reducing the risk of causing unnecessary damage. Elevators and luxators
are designed with large-diameter handles; gentle rotation of the handle rotates the
semicircular working end, thus applying a considerable force over a very short distance.
The fulcrum used during rotational leverage can have a large surface area, usually of
crestal bone or another portion of a tooth which is to be extracted, thus minimizing the
risk of unnecessary damage to remaining tissues.
54
53, 54: Questions
53
53 i. What is the device shown on the radiograph (53)?
ii. What are the indications for its use?
mi. What are the contraindications for its use?
iv. What are the complications in the installation of this device?
v. What are the complications after placement?
54 This is an intraoral view of
54
the premaxillary area of a
seven-month-old intact female
Labrador Retriever, which was
kicked in the mouth by a horse
(54). Palpation and intraoral
radiographic evaluation re-
vealed a segmental fracture of
the premaxilla involving an
interdental bone fracture be-
tween the left maxillary second
and third incisors and the right
maxillary second and third in-
cisors. The fracture segment
contained the left and right maxillary first and second incisors.
i. What is your diagnosis and treatment of the soft tissue injury?
i. What non-invasive, inexpensive technique could be utilized to stabilize the segmental
fracture of the premaxillary region?
ii. What postoperative dental complications may be associated with this type of injury?
5.5
53, 54 Answers
53 i. A titanium implant. It has been coated with hydroxyapatite to promote
osteointegration.
ii. The indications for this device are to replace lost teeth in working dogs.
i. The contraindications are uncontrolled periodontal disease, inability of the client or
        e     o  
tooth as been lost due to periodontal disease, there is very little likelihood of improve-
ment in overall oral hygiene. This will lead to infection and loss of the implant.
iv. A few of the possible complications in the placement of implants include overheating
of bone, improper alignment, perforation into the nasal cavity, and damage to adjacent
teeth. Overheating of bone can be prevented by using ultra-slow speed (300-500 r.p.m.)
handpieces with sterile saline irrigation through the handpiece. Failure to take this pre-
caution may cause fibrous scar tissue to form rather than bone. This will not be as
strong as bone and may result in implant failure. Improper alignment, perforation into
the nasal cavity, and damaging adjacent teeth may be prevented by careful measurement
and the use of a pilot hole.
v. Complications immediately after placement include failure of osteointegration and
procedure. Without good home care, bacterial invasion will occur into the adjacent tis-
sue. Bone will be lost and osteomyelitis may result. Eventually the implant may be
rejected or implant removal may become necessary.
54 i. This is a midline avulsion of the gingiva from the maxilla. Initial therapy in these
cases should include thorough debridement and flushing of the wound. Following
thorough debridement, the avulsed gingiva is sutured to the palatal mucosa with fine,
 monofilament, absorbable suture material. Sutures may be placed around adjacent teeth
to improve the retention of sutures.
i. The premaxillary fracture segment contains the right and left maxillary first and
second incisors. The maxillary second and third incisors are interdentally wired to each
other on the left and right to provide initial reduction of the fracture site. Once the
 fracture segment is reduced, an acrylic splint is applied to the facial aspect and the inter-
dental spaces of the six maxillary incisors to provide rigid stabilization until fracture
healing occurs.
m. The trauma sustained to the premaxilla may result in postoperative endodontic
disease of the maxillary incisors. Although the incisor teeth were not fractured in this
case, periodontal trauma (concussion, subluxation) can displace the root apex and com-
promise the blood supply to the pulp. Pulp that is impaired or devoid of a blood supply
may become colonized by bacteria via hematogenous spread through the apical fora-
men, resulting in pulpitis or pulp necrosis. Periodic reevaluation of the premaxillary
region will determine the need for subsequent endodontic therapy in this case.
56
55, 56: Questions
55 i. What are the important
55
considerations regarding time
and pouring for alginate and
vinyl polysiloxane impressions
(55)?
ii. How can air bubbles be
avoided when pouring a stone
model?
56
56 This is a four-month follow-up radiograph of a mandibular fracture stabilized with
 an external fixateur. It indicates that a non-union is present, even though the repair is
still very sta ble (56).
i. What is/are the likely cause(s) of this complication?
ii. What are the recommended guidelines for preventing this problem?
i. What would the therapeutic approach be at this stage?
57
55, 56: Answers
55 i. Alginate impressions: the stone models should be poured within 30 minutes.
Excess water should be removed from alginate impressions. If the stone model is not
poured immediately, the impression should be wrapped in a dampened paper towel and
kept in the refrigerator. After 24 hours, discard the impression.
Viryl polysiloxane impressions: delay the stone model pouring for one hour in order
to obtain the best surface on the model (small gas bubbles may come to the surface
during the first hour). Pouring may be delayed up to 14 days without loss of accuracy.
ii. Wet the stone in the center of the mixing bowl by stirring with a spatula. Once the
stone is wet, begin spatulating it on the side of the mixing bowl. Spatulate in one
direction to minimize air bubbles. The bowl can be placed on the vibrator to remove
any air bubbles. The mixing time should be less than two minutes. One end of the
impression is placed on the vibrator and small amounts of dental stone are placed at the
opposite end of the impression. The vibration will cause the stone to flow into the
impression. The flow should be controlled to avoid air being trapped in the deep
recesses of the impressions. Once the teeth and floor of the impression have been
carefully filled with stone, the vibrator is turned off and small brass pins (Pindex@,
Coltene/Whaledent Inc., Mahwah, NJ) are gently inserted into the canine teth so that
only the tips of the pins appear from the stone. The remainder of the stone is thickened
and added to the top of the model. It is important to build up the model to strengthen
it. The model is then placed on a level surface to allow the initial set to occur which
takes approximately 10-15 minutes. The mixing and pouring of the dental stone should
be done in less than five minutes. After 45-60 minutes the impression can be separated
from the stone model.
56 i. The distal root of the mandibular fourth premolar and the mesial root of the first
molar are involved in the fracture line. These roots are poorly supported by bone, and a
severe periodontal-endodontic lesion is present at the distal root of the mandibular
fourth premolar. A large bone defect is present, which has also contributed to this non-
viable, non-union.
i. It is common for an alveolus to be involved in the fracture line. If the tooth involved
is luxated, it should be removed. If there is still enough healthy periodontal attachment,
evidenced by the fact that the tooth is non-mobile, retention of the tooth is usually
indicated as it will contribute to the stability of the fracture fixation. The presence of a
tooth in the fracture line increases the incidence of infectious complications; however,
the immediate removal of the tooth cannot reverse these effects. If a tooth involved in
the fracture line is retained, it should be carefully monitored subsequently for any
evidence of periodontal or endodontal pathology; appropriate treatment should be
instituted as soon as either is recognized.
li. The two affected teeth should be extracted, the area debrided, and a cancellous bone
intraoperatively is indicated. The external fixateur may be left in place if it is still stable.
Progress should be monitored radiographically and the bone graft may have to be
repeated.
58
57, 58: Questions
 57 Define scaling, root planing,
57a
and gingival curettage, and ex-
plain how these three proce-
dures may form part of routine
periodontal treatment (57a))
58a
 58 Obtaining a good radiographic picture of the ma xillary premolars and molar in the
cat may be difficult. This radiograph {58a) was taken using an extraoral technique.
Briefly explain this technique.
59
57, 58: Answers
57 Scaling (57b (A)) is the
57b
removal of accretions (plaque
and calculus) from the teeth.
Scaling implies a procedure to
clean the accessible part of the
tooth,in order to remove ac-
quired material which is likely
to promote the development of
disease. It does not signify pre-
paration of the surface invol-
ved. When there is severe gin-
gival inflammation, 'gross" scaling is performed to remove the majority of local irritants,
with the intent to proceed to more thorough and exacting techniques. The rationale for
staging treatment in this manner is that some tissue healing can occur before other more
delicate procedures are instituted - usually at least a few days later. The end point in
scaling is visual cleanliness. Root planing (57b (B) is removal of accretions and
smoothing the root surface. Root planing may be directed at cementum irregularities or
notches left in the tooth surface by previous therapeutic procedures. The end point of
root planing is tactile smoothness of the root. An instrument, such as an explorer, is
used to feel the root surface which, when properly smoothed, should feel “smooth as
glass'. Overlapping short smooth strokes with a sharp periodontal curette are used to
create this surface. Gingival curettage {57b {C)) indicates removal of granulation tissue
and diseased epithelium from the sulcus or pocket lining by scraping the soft tissue with
a curette. A universal curette held in the reverse position from that used for normal
a ais u i ae i pia u e tard sn rog pas a u 
 o   aa r d a  a  
pressure to apply in scraping the soft tissue: enough to remove the friable diseased tissue
but not so much that the gingiva is badly torn. Gingival curettage is generally performed
in a closed fashion, i.e. without creating a gingival flap. The rationale behind this proce-
dure is that the defect created is expected to heal by epithelial regeneration, resulting in
long but healthier junctional epithelium and some connective tissue reattachment.
58 Image overlap of the zygomatic arch and
58b
opposite maxillary premolars commonly
Occurs in the cat. In order to avoid this prob-
lem, the extraoral, near-parallel technique is
recommended (58b). With the animal in
lateral recumbency, the dental film is placed
under the head {under the side which you
wish to radiograph) with the mouth propped
open. Visualize the central X-ray beam to be
perpendicular to the maxillary root axes.
Any films used extraorally must be marked
to separate them from intraorally exposed film to ensure proper orientation.
60
59, 60: Questions
59
59 What causes feline odontoclastic resorption lesions (FORLs) (59)?
60 What are important considerations
G0
and guidelines when taking a biopsy of a
suspected oral tumor (60)?
61
59, 60: Answers
59 The cause of FORLs remains a mystery. However, the tooth substance is destroyed
once the process has started. Many years ago, these lesions were called "feline caries';
however, they are not the result of enamel demineralization caused by acids produced
by bacteria, so “caries’ is an incorrect term. Circulating stem cells are attracted to the
cementum and differentiate into odontoclastic and osteoclastic cells. In most other
species, it is the alveolar bone that is attacked by these cells,whereas for FORL it is the
cementum and then the dentin that is attacked (59). The odontoclastic cells clamp on to
the cemental surface and secrete acid to leach out the mineralized tissue to create a
defect. They continue to bore into the tooth, reaching in all directions - the crown may
be externally intact but riddled underneath, and in other cases the lesions extend into
the pulp tissue. As the cavity advances, vascular tissue follows, and eventually a
reparative tissue known as *bone-cementum tissue” is laid down. The pulp maintains its
viability. However, the reparative tissue causes ankylosis between alveolar bone and the
tooth substance, and thus the shock-a bsorbing effect of the normal periodontal ligament
is lost, and the tooth often fractures. We do not know what attracts the stem cells to the
area that will become affected. Since there is very often severe gingivitis associated with
    s e s  a  a
calculus accumulation causes release of the inflammatory mediators that have been
identified in the area of early lesions (prostaglandins, osteopontin); there is now
gathering evidence that this is not the case. Other specific factors that have been
investigated, such as nutritional deficiencies or alterations to the surface of cat food,
have failed to identify a cause. Since we do not know the cause, we cannot do much
aboutprevention.
60 An incisional biopsy is preferred if: {1) One is uncertain whether the lesion is neo-
plastic. (2) The result of the biopsy might influence the therapeutic plan. (3) The plan-
The client desires an accurate prognosis.
All of these considerations were valid in the case illustrated (60), which turned out to
be a poorly differentiated sarcoma. This case also illustrates the wide variety of histo-
pathologic entities which may clinically present as an epulis (see 33). In selected cases of
very small tumors on the gingival margin, an excisional biopsy by means of gin-
In taking a biopsy, the following important technical details should be borne in mind:
(1) Taking a biopsy must be done as atraumatically as possible, to prevent exfoliation
and seeding of neoplastic cells. (2) The site of the biopsy must fall within the boundaries
of the tissue to be excised. {3) A representative tissue sample should be obtained and
normal tissue should not be included in order to avoid opening previously unopened tis-
sue planes.
The biopsy should be adequately fixed and submitted to a pathologist with ex-
perience in oral pathology. The result of the histopathologic examination should be
compatible with the clinical findings; if not, the matter should be discussed with the
pathologist. If any doubt remains, an additional biopsy may be indicated.
62
61, 62: Questions
61a
61 Are this cat's mandibular canine teeth normal (6la)?
62
62 This radiograph of a dog with periodontitis illustrates the radiologic findings typical
of this disease process {62). Describe the radiographic features of periodontitis.
63
61, 62: Answers
61 Absence of gingival inflam-
61b
mation, normal sulcus depths,
and normal appearance of the
crowns leads to a clinical diag-
nosis of 'normal tooth'. How-
ever, the teeth may be very ab-
normal in their root structure.
In the radiograph (61b), one
canine tooth has a normal
crown, but has extensive root
resorption. Root ankylosis is so
severe that the cemental margin
of much of the root cannot be
followed. There are less severe
FORL changes on the mesial surface of the mid root of the other canine tooth. The
third premolar tooth is missing on the right side, and the left third premolar has a severe
FORL. FORLs have often been referred to as “neck lesions' or “cervical line lesions",
because they were originally recognized as clinical lesions occurring at the gingival
      o ,  a n  a 
recognition that these lesions can occur anywhere on the cementum. Radiographs are
mandatory before considering restoration of even a 'minor FORL lesion. Once we
know that the tooth is abnormal, we then have to decide what to do about it {see 15,
20, 35 and 175).
62 In advanced cases of periodontal disease, the supporting bone peripheral to the
lamina dura can appear either as more dense (sclerotic) or less dense (osteolysis) than
healthy bone. The alveolar crest will often be lowered apically because of bony resorp-
tion. With horizontal bone loss the alveolar crest recedes parallel to the line connecting
the cementoenamel junction and this can be seen affecting two or more adjacent teeth
(62). Vertical bone loss {infrabony pockets) is seen involving single teeth or a single root
of a tooth, and radiographically is either visualized as a wide periodontal space or as a
“crater appearance of bone loss. Loss of bone attachment, advanced tooth mobility,
gingival recession, and pocket depth confirm periodontitis.
Radiographic assessment also reveals evidence of furcation involvement. When the
crestal bone in the furcation area is lost this is called furcation involvement. This can be
incomplete {a probe can enter the furcation but not pass through) or complete. Peri-
apical loss of bone is also evident leading to loss of attachment and tooth mobility.
Reports state that 30-60% of the bone must be demineralized before it can be detected
radiographica lly.
Because of the unique patterns of periodontal bone loss associated with certain forms
of periodontal disease, radiogra phs can provide useful diagnostic information. The main
information provided by traditional radiography is an estimate of alveolar bone loss at
the time of the radiographic survey. By comparing radiographs at different times, it is
possible to estimate the loss or gain of bone at selected locations in the dentition.
64
63, 64: Questions
63 What is this technique called (63), and
63
what are the major principles involved?
64a
64 What is the significance of maxillary prognathism/mandibular brachygnathism ('par-
rot mouth' conformation) (64a) to the oral health of a horse?
6.5
63, 64: Answers
63 The barrier (A) over the infrabony defect (B) signifies guided tissue regeneration
surgery. The defect must regenerate from cell populations with bone and periodontal
ligament characteristics. The barrier excludes gingival connective tissue and oral
epithelium which proliferate more rapidly and would otherwise fill a significant portion
of the defect. Thus, guided tissue regeneration often allows regrowth of bone and perio-
dontal ligament where it had formerly been lost due to periodontitis. Successfully
treated teeth have stronger support and may have improved long-term survival rates
because deep active infra bony pockets are not as likely to recur.
A variety of modifications have been proposed for guided tissue regeneration. The
barrier is common to all but the character of the barrier is quite variable. Non-resorb-
able barriers which must be removed in a second surgery, resorbable barriers which are
bioabsorbable, reinforced barriers which prevent collapse and thus preserve space for
tissue growth under the membrane, and extraskeletal barriers which allow guided bone
regeneration to the periosteal surface of the maxilla and mandible are all commercially
available. A wide variety of implant materials are available to act as stimulants or scaf-
folding to bone growth below membranes. Hydroxyapatite, demineralized bone matrix,
glass, calcium sulfate and others are commercially available. Growth factors have been
added to implants experimentally in order to test their effect on the principles of bone
regeneration, and the results have been encouraging.
64 Horses with ‘parrot mouth'
64b
usually show little difficulty in
the prehension of herbage, and
even those severely afflicted
rarely lose bodily condition
through an inability to take in
ingesta. The most important
aspect of this disparity in the
relative lengths of the mandible
and maxilla is that abnormal
attritional wear takes place
with a tendency for hooks to
form on the maxillary second
premolar and mandibular third molar. Sharp points on the latter tooth can impinge on
the soft tissues of the opposite jaw to cause extreme discomfort and marked dysphagia.
They are best resected using purpose-made instruments to guillotine the dental over-
growths without fracture of the remainder of the tooth or damage to neighboring
crowns. The incidence of periapical abscessation of this tooth has increased markedly
with the advent of unqualified equine dental technicians and through inept attempts to
remove hooks using chisels {64b)
 po d     o o sss  'sn  
prepurchase examination, beca use faults are likely to lead to poor occlusion, dysphagia
and limit the long-term usefulness of the horse. Horses with *parrot mouth? should not
be used for breeding as this defect is genetica lly transmitted.
66
65, 66: Questions
65 The gingival sulcus is a very
65a
important area (65a).
i. What is the gingival sulcus,
junctional epithelium, and sul-
cular epithelium?
ii. How does the gingival sulcus
differ from a periodontal
pocket?
66 This is an oral tumor found
66a
in an 18-month-old cat {66a,
b).
i. What is your tentative radio-
logic diagnosis?
i道. What is known about this
tumor type?
66b
67
65, 66: Answers
65b
A
R
1
GS
SE
H
SE
SE
65 i. In dogs not exposed to dental plaque (germ-free dogs or dogs subjected to
thorough dental home care since tooth eruption) there is no gingival sulcus (6sb (A)).
The gingival margin ends on the tooth surface in a thin, narrow-angled margin with
the junctional epithelium (JE) extending directly to the level of the gingival margin.
This characterizes a histologically normal gingiva (no inflammation).
With plaque accumulation after tooth eruption, a sulcus forms {6sb (B). This is the
normal feature in what is called clinically healthy gingiva (not histologically healthy as
a subclinical inflammation already exists). The gingival sulcus (GS) is defined as a nar-
row groove between the gingival margin and the tooth surface. Its depth is usually
1-3 mm in the dog and around 1 mm in the cat. The sulcular epithelium (SE) forms
the lateral wall; its interior wall is formed by enamel or, with ageing, by root
cementum, and the bottom of the sulcus is formed by JE. The JE is located at the level
of the cementoenamel junction in young dogs, whereas it is apical to it in old dogs.
The interface between JE and subepithelial connective tissue follows a fairly smooth
line with usually no rete pegs, contrary to the epithelial-connective tissue interface of
the oral gingival epithelium. Both JE and SE are non-keratinized, although some para-
keratinization is occasionally observed in SE
 a Pos s  l    s os g 
ferentiated from a true periodontal pocket (6sb (D)), which is a space around a tooth
   sd  o   as a ro sa e 5
measured clinically by inserting a probe into the space and measuring the distance
from the base of the pocket to the free gingival margin (probing depth). A more ac-
curate measure of attachment loss is to measure the distance from the base of the
pocket to the cementoenamel junction.
66 i. This is a typical example of a feline inductive odontogenic tumor.
i. The feline inductive odontogenic tumor, originally described as inductive fibro-
ameloblastoma, is an uncommon tumor-type occurring mainly in young cats. It is
characterized by ameloblastic epithelial cells arranged around dental pulp-like stroma.
The rostral maxilla is the most common site of occurrence. The tumor may be locally
invasive, but metastasis has not been recorded.
68
67-69: Questions
67 These are examples of medicated
G/
endodontic sealers and pastes (67), rarely
used in the USA but still popular in some
parts of Europe.
i. What do these products generally
contain?
ii. How are or were these products used?
iii. Why is the use of these products
Kril
strongly discouraged?
68a
68b
68 i. What endocrinopathy should be considered in a cat with insulin-resistant diabetes
mellitus, hepatomegaly, and a large head with a protruding mandible (68a, b)?
i. What would be the most likely cause, and how would the diagnosis be confirmed?
69 This structure (which has
69
been bisected) (69) caused a
palpable swelling over the max-
illa of a horse and was subse-
quently surgically removed
from the parotid salivary duct.
i. What is it?
i. What is the pathogenesis of
this condition?
69
67-69: Answers
67 i. A strong antiseptic (formaldehyde, iodoform), heavy-metal compounds (mercury,
lead), and corticosteroids. For example, N-2 Medical1M (right) contains
paraformaldehyde, phenyl mercuric borate, lead oxide, and corticosteroids in a zinc
oxide and eugenol basis. The purpose of the paraformaldehyde is to sterilize the root
canal system. The heavy-metal compounds increase the radiopacity and the hardness of
the material once set. The corticosteroids are there to suppress the inflammatory
reaction associated with the leakage of the irritating compounds through the apex.
ii. Most of these products are used as pastes for root canal obturation without a solid
core. Some, such as N-2 Medicalim, can also be used as root canal sealer cement in
combination with gutta-percha. Others, such as Kriim-paste {left), are used more with
the mummification technique, whereby a small amount of paste is placed on the vital or
non-vital pulp, in order to achieve sterilization and fixation of the root canal contents.
i. Numerous studies have shown that a considerable periapical inflammatory tissue
response occurs in reaction to the irritating compounds. In addition, the dissemination
of heavy-metal ions raises systemic health concerns. All US dental schools, and various
regulatory and professional organizations {e.g. Food and Drug Administration,
American Dental Association), strongly discourage the use of these products.
68 i. Chronic hypersecretion of growth hormone (GH) results in acromegaly. Growth
hormone excesses induce peripheral insulin resistance. Other clinical features that may be
present include cardiomegaly, congestive heart failure, nephromegaly, nephropathy
(proteinuria, azotemia), renal failure, weight gain/loss, body enlargement, arthropathy,
large tongue, and central nervous system signs.
il. A GH-secreting tumor of the pituitary gland is the most common cause of acromegaly
in cats. Hyperadrenocorticism and hyperthyroidism are other endocrinopathies that may
be associated with insulin-resistant diabetes and they should be excluded in the diag-
nostic evaluation of an insulin-resistant diabetic cat. Demonstrating significantly elevated
circulating GH concentrations is diagnostic for acromegaly; however, there is limited
availability of veterinary laboratories performing feline GH assays. Indirect evaluation of
growth hormone concentration by measuring somatomedin C (insulin-like growth
factor-1) may be beneficial. A presumptive diagnosis of acromegaly is made when the
thyroid and adrenal glands are normal and the cat has characteristic clinical signs and
laboratory data, and a pituitary mass is identified. Computed tomography (CT) or mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used to demonstrate a pituitary mass.
69 i.Asialolith.
s e jo aseo aun an si u sa e aso si ui o uiay suo u t
sialolith within a salivary duct. The sialolith consists of concentric layers of mostly cal-
cium phosphate crystals around the organic nucleus. They are usually elongated in
shape. In the dog and cat, dystrophic calcification of inspissated saliva in salivary muco-
celes may also result in sialolith formation; in these cases, multiple small sialoliths may
be present. A single, large sialolith located in a salivary duct may give rise to some reten-
tion of saliva but is generally believed not to cause a salivary mucocele.
70
70, 71: Questions
70 Ageing and pathologic
70a
effects, such as attrition, abra-
sion, erosion, uncomplicated
fractures, and caries, elicit a
reaction of the dentin-pulp
complex.
i. Define the terms abrasion
and attrition.
ii. Describe the defense mech-
anism of the dentin to wear of
dental hard tissue.
im. In cases of attrition or abra-
sion, the central area of the incisal or occlusal surface of the tooth may have a dark
can this be differentiated from caries or the exposed pulp of a complicated crown
fracture?
71 This dog was hit by a car and develop-
71
ed a progressive inability to open its
mouth (71).
i. What is your diagnosis?
i. What is the treatment, aftercare, and
prognosis?
71
70, 7I: Answers
70 i. Attrition and abrasion are terms that are often
70b
confused. Attrition is a physiologic process that can
be defined as a gradual and regular loss of tooth
substance {wear) as result of natural mastication. If
attrition is caused by abnormal function or
malocclusion, the excessive wear caused by tooth
to-tooth contact is called pathologic attrition.
Abrasion refers to mechanical wear other than by
normal mastication or tooth-to-tooth contact, e.g.
wear caused by chewing rocks, bars, or wire.
ii. The primary dentin are the first layers of dentin
formed during odontogenesis. Under normal con-
ditions, formation of dentin continues throughout
life and so-called secondary dentin is deposited on
the entire pulpal surface of the primary dentin.
Extensive wear exposes the odontoblastic processes
of the odontoblasts and these cells may degenerate
as a result of this wear. However, it is more com-
mon for these cells to survive the traumatic insult
and to be stimulated to form the so-called reparative or tertiary dentin. Tertiary dentin
 s sis p u ars p ard u as pass e s
is evidenced as a brown area in the middle of the incisal or occlusal surface. At times, the
teeth may be worn to the gingival margin without exposure of the dental pulp. This is
possible because the pulp responds with a progressive formation of tertiary dentin.
im. A fresh exposure of vital pulp will bleed and cause acute pain when probed with a
dental explorer. If left untreated, the opening in the pulp chamber with the exposed pulp
stays open and becomes brown or black in appearance and occluded with necrotic
material. However, it always remains possible to introduce a dental explorer into the
pulp chamber, as seen in this photograph (7ob). In case of attrition or abrasion the
colored central area is hard with no pulp exposure. An early carious lesion usually ap-
pears brown or black and will feel slightly soft or 'sticky' when probed with a fine dental
explorer. A carious cavity involving the dentin is filled with disintegrated dental sub-
stance and debris. The walls of the cavity are lined with contaminated decalcified dentin,
in contrast to resorption defects, which are lined by healthy, hard dental substance.
71 i. This is a case of temporomandibular joint ankylosis, likely due to osteophyte forma-
tion as a post-traumatic complication, usually after a fracture involving the condyloid
process. Another, less common cause of this condition is a bony bridge between the distal
aspect of the mandible and maxilla following a mandibular fracture.
i. Treatment consists of a condylectomy and excision of all osteophytes. Aftercare
should ensure plenty of chewing activity, by feeding large-size kibble and providing
chew-toys to prevent reankylosis. The prognosis is guarded to poor, as the cut bony sur-
faces are inclined to reankylose.
72
72, 73: Questions
72
72 Developmental abnormalities are commonly seen in puppies.
i. Describe the abnormality shown in the photograph (72).
i. What is the most common cause of this type of abnormality?
m. Why is immediate treatment required, and what are the aims of treatment in a
puppy?
iv. What is the most practical treatment in this puppy?
73
73 What is being done to this tooth, and why is this important (73)?
73
72, 73: Answers
72 i. The puppy has a pronounced mandibular brachygnathism resulting in maloc-
clusion of the deciduous dentition. The mandibular incisor teeth occlude against the
incisive papilla and the mandibular canines are damaging the palate on the mesiopalatal
aspect of the maxillary canines.
ii. Jaw length is determined primarily by heredity. The actual length attained by the jaw
is also influenced by factors such as diet, metabolic disease, traumatic injury, infection,
and both natural and artificial orthodontic forces. These factors rarely cause dramatic,
symmetric changes in the mandible alone.
i. Palatal and incisive papilla contact by the mandibular canines and incisors leads to
discomfort, ulceration, and pain. The abnormal dental interlock with the tips of the
lower canine teeth embedded in the palate will also interfere with further growth of the
mandible. The maxilla and mandible grow at different rates and may have growth
spurts at differing times. Development of an abnormal dental interlock, whether simply
due to eruption of teeth during a growth spurt or due to a jaw deformity, results in
abnormal forces affecting the upper and lower jaws, restricting or enhancing growth
depending on the direction of the forces. Early relief of an abnormal dental interlock
may permit the jaws to grow to their full genetic potential. It must be remembered that
the genetic potential may be for further deterioration of, rather than an improvement in,
thesituation.
iv. Interceptive orthodontic extraction is the most practical treatment. It gives rapid
relief from palatal trauma and removes the abnormal dental interlock. All the teeth
which have an abnormal interlock or are causing palatal injury/irritation should be
 xa   i a     zh a a 
order to minimize the risk of damaging the developing permanent tooth buds. A sur-
gical approach is often preferable to closed extraction. It is generally recommended that
extractions are performed in a bilaterally symmetric pattern so that both sides of the
jaw are equally influenced by the resultant changes in functional forces.
73 The tooth is being polished using the standard cup-and-pumice technique. When
teeth are scaled for calculus removal during a dental cleaning, regardless of the method
used, microetching of the enamel occurs. These surface irregularities appear as deep
grooves under high magnification. This effect occurs even when the teeth are hand-
scaled, and some power-scaling equipment can cause marked damage. These grooves
act as plaque-retentive sites. Polishing the teeth using a low-speed handpiece, a rubber
prophylaxis cup, and pumice removes these surface irregularities. The rubber cup is
filled with a slurry of a mildly abrasive prophylaxis paste or pumice polish. The slow-
speed unit may be powered by compressed air or an electric motor. It should be rotated
at less than 3,000 r.p.m., using only enough pressure to slightly flare the edge of the
cup. Using too fast a rotation speed, too little paste, or polishing for too long a time on
one tooth can all generate heat which can injure the pulp.
Some dental hygienists prefer not to polish teeth due to concerns about iatrogenic
loss of enamel. However, the amount of enamel lost over the lifetime of a dog or cat is
negligible and this does not outweigh the beneficial effects of careful polishing after any
type of tooth scaling.
74
74, 75: Questions
十/
74 What are the indications, advantages, disadva ntages, and principles of application of
intraoral acrylic splint fixation of mandibular fractures?
75a
75 A six-year-old gelding has been kicked when at pasture with other horses. It has
sustained a fracture of the incisor quadrant of the left mandible (75a). Can you suggest
a simple method to restore normal occlusal alignment and to provide stability of the
fracture during healing?
75
74, 75: Answers
 74 Indications for intraoral acrylic splint fixation of mandibular fractures include uni-
lateral, relatively stable fractures of the rostral part of the mandible, e.g. a fracture
between the canine and first premolar. There must be at least two teeth on each side of
the fracture which are stable and large enough to provide adequate support (74). One
advantage is firm fixation on the tension surface of the fractured bone. Also, the pro-
cedure is less invasive than most other options. Other methods require driving pins or
wires into the mandible on each side of the fracture line. This introduces the danger of
perforating or damaging tooth roots or periodontal ligaments. Roots which have been
damaged in this way require either extraction, root canal treatment, or periodontal
therapy as complications develop.
The biggest disadvantage of acrylic splint fixation is the gingivostomatitis which
inevitably accompanies the areas covered by the splint. Food, debris, and bacteria
accumulate and irritate the tissues. Flushing helps and the gingivitis generally resolves
quickly following splint removal. Also, the setting reaction of acrylic produces heat
{exothermic reaction), but incremental additions of acrylic minimizes this.
To apply a mandibular acrylic splint, the mouth is flushed with a 0.05-0.12% chlor-
hexidine solution, and the teeth are thoroughly cleaned and polished with pumice
polish. They are then acid-etched, rinsed well, and dried. There are two methods of
building the splint. In the first method, the powder is poured on the area and drops of
the liquid are applied. Then more powder is added and the sequence is repeated until
the splint acquires the desired shape. In the second method, the powder and liquid are
mixed in a paper cup until it thickens. The prepared teeth are painted with some of the
liquid, and the premixed acrylic is pushed onto the teeth and shaped. With both
methods, the fracture must be held in reduction and with proper alignment to provide
normal occlusion until the acrylic has hardened. Then it should be checked for any
sharp edges which could irritate the tongue or gingiva. The splint can be built up
slightly on the buccal aspect as far back as the fourth premolar. On the molars, any
build-up must be on the lingual aspect to avoid occlusal interference.
75 Simple in-and-out wire fixation with
75b
monofilament steel is very effective for the
fixation of incisor quadrant fractures of
the mandible or maxilla (75b). The canine
teeth provide stabilizing points but when
these are not present in mares, geldings,
or young horses, a lag screw inserted at
the buccal aspect at an equivalent level
can be used. Normal occlusion is checked
after removal of the endotracheal tube.
Absorbable sutures are used to close the
mucosal wounds. Care should be taken to
protect the soft tissues from laceration by the sharp ends of the fixation wire. This can
be achieved either by tucking the ends between teeth or by covering them with bone
cement or dental wax.
76
76, 77: Questions
76
76 This soft, fluid-filled, fluctuating swelling (76) is fairly typical for a condition com-
monly seen in the cat, but also in the dog.
i. Name and define this condition, and explain its pathogenesis.
ii. What are the treatment options?
77a
77 This is an oral view of a 15-year-old Miniature Poodle, immediately following the
extraction of the right maxillary canine tooth (77a). Following extraction of the tooth, a
small amount of blood was evident at the right nostril.
i. What is your diagnosis, what is the most common cause of this condition, and where
does it usually begin?
i. What general principles should be followed during the repair of this condition to en-
sure successful flap surgery? What are the indications for utilization of a single versus a
double-layer flap repair?
77
76, 77: Answers
76 i. A rarula is a clinically descriptive term for a salivary mucocele that occurs speci-
fically in the floor of the mouth and sublingually. Salivary mucoceles in the dog and cat
are generally considered to be caused by extravasation of saliva, largely of unknown
origin. Usually there is no history of trauma. Obstruction, simple transection of the duct,
or trauma to glandular tissue does not cause a mucocele. Ligation of the duct causes
atrophy of the gland involved. It is generally accepted that there is a lesion of the sub-
lingual or mandibular salivary duct, or in one of the small ducts of the polystomatic sub-
lingual salivary gland. Saliva leaks out and is not absorbed. This is irritating and causes
the formation of a pseudocyst, lined by granulation tissue and macrophages. This
pseudocyst is sometimes multilocular.
i. A ranula may be treated by intraoral marsupialization. An elliptical part of the ranula
wall is excised. The edges are oversewn with a simple continuous suture, using thin
synthetic absorbable suture material, to prevent premature closure.
Alternatively, or if the above procedure is unsuccessful, surgical resection of the mono-
stomatic sublingual and mandibular salivary glands on the affected side is performed.
Alternatively - or in addition - the polystomatic sublingual salivary gland can be
resected, which is very difficult but fortunately only rarely necessary.
77 i. This is an acquired oronasal fistula which
77b
is most commonly caused by periodontal
disease. Periodontal disease that results in the
development of an oronasal fistula most
frequently begins on the palatal aspect of the
maxillary canine tooth, when periodontal
disease causes the destruction of the thin
alveolar bone between the alveolus and the
nasal cavity (77b). Other teeth that can poten-
tially be involved in oronasal fistula formation
are the maxillary incisors, the maxillary first
and second premolars, and the mesial root of
the third premolar. Fistula formation between
the oral cavity and the maxillary recess may be
associated with advanced periodontal disease
of the distal root of the third premolar, fourth
premolar, and first molar.
ii. General principles that should be followed
to ensure successful flap surgery include the
 s  i o a oi sa a   aa Pos s i 
apposed without tension by releasing the periosteal layer and removing prominent buccal
alveolar bone. (3) Tissues should be sutured to appose edges that do not have an intact
epithelial surface. (4) Tissues should be gently handled. (5) Relatively large bites of tissue
should be taken. (6) A single-layer flap is recommended for the repair of most fresh
 oronasal fistulas. Recurrent or large fistulas may require the use of a double-layer flap.
78
78, 79: Questions
78
78 The file is in the access site for performing standard root canal therapy on this ten-
year-old Golden Retriever (78).
i. Is the access site in the correct place?
ii. What is the purpose of the red material pierced by the file?
ii. Should the pulp chamber coronal to the access site shown be prepared and obturated
in a non-fractured crown?
79a
79 i. What is the round radiolucency located ventrally to the mandibular third premolar
in this cat (79a)?
ii. Where can similar radiolucencies be found in the dog and cat?
i. Which nerves and blood vessels are associated with these structures?
79
78, 79: Answers
 78 i. Yes, although the access ideally would be made more mesially, the clinician should
take into account that the third incisor might interfere with the head of the handpiece,
obstructing clear and easy penetration of the pulp cha mber. In the dog, the canines are
curved, so straight-line access to the apex is best made at the buccomesial aspect of the
tooth, about 1-2 mm coronal to the gingival margin. The third incisor will interfere
with the access if the entrance is made too far mesially. If the entrance site is too
coronal, one may place excessive stress on the endodontic file, subjecting it to unneces-
sary fatigue. Also there will be a tendency to over-prepare (strip) the distal aspect of the
canal or gouge and perforate the mesial aspect of the canal.
ii. An endodontic stop. This rubber-like material is perforated by the endodontic file
before being inserted into the access hole. It is used first as a measuring device in
determining the working length of the file during standard root canal preparation, and
subsequently serves to assure that over-instrumentation does not occur with successive,
sequentially larger files.
mi. It is controversial whether the pulp chamber coronal to the main access site should be
instrumented. Human endodontic texts recommend removal of all pulp chamber con-
tents. It is generally accepted that percolation of fluids can occur from the pulp chamber.
Residual bacteria, bacterial breakdown products, toxins or organic debris in the pulp
that infection within the pulp chamber will be contained and prevented from further
periapical contamination by the combined installation of root canal sealer, gutta-percha,
and the intermediate restorative. If the canine tooth is not fractured, additional access to
treat the pulp chamber can be made at the buccomesial line-angle at the level of the pulp
chamber's roof. The site for access should be determined radiographically.
79 i. A mental foramen.
79h
i. There are usually three mental fora-
mina, both in the dog (79b) and the cat.
The middle mental foramen is the main
one and is located ventrally to the mesial
root of the second premolar in the dog. In
the cat, the middle mental foramen is
usually located distal to the apex of the
canine tooth. A smaller mental foramen is
found further distally, opposite the third
premolar. A third mental foramen is situ-
ated near the mandibular symphysis, at
the level of the apices of the first and
second incisor, but this foramen can usually not be seen radiologically.
ii. The mental nerves are branches of the inferior alveolar nerve which branches from
the mandibular nerve. The mental nerves are sensory to the lower lip and the skin of the
rostral intermandibular region. The caudal mental artery, middle mental artery, and
rostral mental artery and associated veins accompany the mental nerves. The middle
mental artery is the largest of the three.
80
80, 81: Questions
80 i. What endodontic proce-
80
dure is shown in this illustra-
tion (80)?
ii. What are the indications for
this procedure?
ii. What are three types of fill-
ing materials that can be used
in this procedure?
81 The use of dental radio-
81
 graphic film is recommended in
veterinary dentistry (81). These
films are flexible and are avail-
able in various types and sizes.
i. Discuss the dental radio-
graphic film commonly used in
Kodak
veterinary dentistry.
ii. Which sizes of dental film are
recommended for veterinary
dentistry?
81
80, 8I: Answers
80 i. A completed apicoectomy with a retrograde filling (surgical root canal).
i.A surgical endodontic procedure is indicated if there is failure of conventional root
canal therapy associated with underfill or overfill of the root canal. Often, retreatment
with improved obturation will be sufficient to correct the problem and may be tried
first. If there is evidence of persistent or increasing periapical changes radiographically
after conventional root canal therapy with adequate obturation, an apicoectomy can be
performed to remove the diseased root end and granulation tissue harboring persistent
infection. Surgical endodontic therapy is often indicated if there are mishaps during con-
ventional treatment, such as a broken instrument that precludes further treatment or a
root end perforation that leads to failure. Additional indications for an apicoectomy
would be if coronal access is impossible due to a stricture or calcified pulp chamber or if
there is a horizontal fracture of the root tip.
. After the apex has been removed, a cavity preparation is made in the canal for the
retrograde filling material. The three materials that are generally recommended for this
are a zinc oxide-eugenol intermediate restorative material {IRMIm, Caulk), a zinc-free
amalgam, or a zinc oxide-cement with alumina (Super EBATM, Bosworth). Zinc-free
amalgam is preferred when an amalgam is used as it is less sensitive to the moisture that
might be present in this procedure. The cavity preparation for all three should be under-
cut since all of these materials are kept in place by mechanical retention.
81 i. Both D- and E-speed films are routinely used in veterinary dentistry. D-speed film
(Kodak Ultra-speedIM) is a high-contrast, fine-detail film. The E-speed film (Kodak
Ektaspeed PlusIm) is a film that allows a 50% decrease in radiation to the patient
speed film with the same processing characteristics. It is a little lower in contrast.
Exposure times can be reduced by one-half of that used with Ultra-speed film, allowing
a 50% reduction in patient radiation. Some films are available in waterproof plastic
packets (Super Poly-Soft, Kodak), which are easy to wipe clean before processing. Addi-
tional infection control can be achieved using barrier envelopes (Clinasept, Kodak).
Double-film packets are also available, which allow one automatically to produce a
duplicate record of the ra diographic exa mination.
i. Five sizes are available but three sizes are most commonly used in veterinary dental
practice. Sizes # 0 and 2 are known as periapical films, and size #4 as occlusal film.
SizeKodak
Kodak
Dimensions
Possible use
Ultra-speed
Ektaspeed Plus
(mm)
#0
DF-54
EP-01P
22 × 35
Mandibular P3-M1 in cats
and very small dogs
#2
DF-58
EP-21P
31 x 41
Standard size
#4
DF-50
EO-41P
57 x 76
Occlusal views, large dogs
82
82, 83: Questions
82a
82 i. A post-and-core build-up was used in this case (82a).
i. What does this technique involve, and what is it used for?
i. Describe the procedure used.
ii. What are the potential complications?
83
83 This four-year-old cat was still not eating well ten days after an apparently well-
performed repair of a mandibular symphysis separation (83).
i. What is your diagnosis?
ii. How common is this type of injury?
i. What are the treatment options?
83
82, 83: Answers
 82 i. There are two types of post-and-core build-ups.
82b
The first type is the use of a post in the pulp chamber?
root canal and build-up of a restorative material
around the post before a crown preparation, as in
82b. The second type is the shaping of the pulp
chamber and subsequent creation by a dental labora-
tory of a custom post-and-core with a crown to fit
over the post-and-core. A post-and-core technique is
used to lengthen the crown height when the remaining
natural tooth does not have enough height for the
placement of a prosthetic crown.
i. First, endodontic therapy is performed. In the first type, an endodontic post or dowel 
is selected that is slightly less than one-third the width of the tooth. A Peeso-reamer of
corresponding size or, in some cases, a bur is used to open the canal and remove the
gutta-percha down to the desired depth. It is important to make as clean a cut into the
tooth as possible. Wobble of the reamer may cause a non-circular canal and prevent a
tight fit of the post. A trial fit of the dowel is made. The dowel is cemented in place with
a glass-ionomer or resin cement. A small pin may be placed parallel to the post to in-
crease stability. A composite resin is placed over the post to build up the crown. A rou-
chamber is prepared with a S-10° wall preparation. A routine crown preparation is per-
formed. Impression material is first inserted into the pulp chamber and then around the
remaining crown and adjacent gingiva. To strengthen the post impression, a needle,
toothpick, small wire, or other object may be inserted into the pulp chamber before
inserting the impression material; or, these stiffeners may be inserted just after inserting
 the impression material but before coating the crown with the impression material.
i. The greatest complication of this type of treatment is subsequent fracture of the
tooth due to the external stresses that may cause fracture of the supporting walls of
tooth. To overcome this, the ratio of the exposed length should be at least one length of
exposed post to one to two lengths of post depth. For example, if the desired height of
post build-up is 1 cm, the post depth should be 1-2 cm. This added length of the post
helps to distribute the forces down the root.
83 i. There is an intra-articular fracture of the condyloid process of the mandible.
i. It has been found that this type of injury is relatively common, as mandibular frac
tures in the cat mainly involve the rostral and the caudal part, contrary to the dog
where the body of the mandible is most commonly affected. However, these lesions can
easily be overlooked as excellent radiographic technique is required to diagnose them.
ii. Because of the limited size of the fracture fragments, internal fixation would prove
very difficult, if not impossible. These fractures may heal as a pain-free and functional
non-union. Intra-articular or comminuted fractures, however, are likely to result in tem-
poromandibular joint ankylosis; this complication is characterized by a progressive
inability to open the mouth (see 71). Alternatively, a condylectomy, i.e. the surgical
removal of the condyloid process, can be performed.
84
84-86: Questions
84 i. What factors should be
84
taken into consideration when
deciding on the type of impres-
ALGINATE
sion material to be used (84)?
ii. Which impression material
ASTSET
would be ideal for crown and
Extrude"Putty
bridge restorations, and why?
m. Which impression material
is generally recommended for
KERR
orthodontic evaluation, ortho-
dontic appliances, as a record
of treatment progress, and to
aid in treatment planning?
 85 i. Name the cormmon types of interdental wiring.
ii. When is interdental wiring indicated?
86 Numerous attempts to close
86
this mid-palatal defect (86)
have been unsuccessful. Poor
surgical technique (closure
under tension, poor flap design,
etc.) is the most important
cause of failure in palate sur-
gery. Repeated surgery de-
creases the chances of success,
even with the proven proce-
dures (e.g. double-flap closure),
because the adjacent tissue is of
poor quality as a result of the
frst failed closure. What sal-
vage procedure may be indi-
cated in these cases?
8.5
84-86: Answers
84 i. Important factors include: accuracy (surface reproduction, dimensional sta bility),
rheologic properties (viscosity), elasticity {tear strength, resistance to deformation),
setting time, shelf life, and cost.
ii. Vinyl polysiloxane {also called addition polymerizing silicone). It is very accurate, has
a medium-to-long working time, high tear strength, excellent reproduction of detail, very
high resistance to deformation, excellent dimensional accuracy, and pouring the impres-
sion may be delayed up to 14 days without loss of accuracy. The putty form can be used
to fabricate a custom tray. The medium and light-body types come in easy to use
automixer dispensers. Vinyl polysiloxanes are relatively expensive impression materials.
i. Alginate is also known as an irreversible hydrocolloid. Alginate is inexpensive, easy to
remove, and acceptable for less accurate stone models. Alginate is hydrophilic and is af-
fected by the presence of blood and tissue fluid.
85 i. Ivy, Stout, Essig, and Risdon wiring. Ivy
85
a a sanbun dooi-adn snos pue doo
most commonly used. Both involve a straight
run of 22- to 26-gauge wire on the buccal aspect
of the teeth, with the other arm of the wire
running on the lingual aspect of the teeth. The
lingual arm has loops of wire extending buccally
between the teeth: a pretwisted loop into which
the buccal wire is threaded in the Ivy loop and a
single loop placed around the buccal wire in the
Stout multiple loop.
i. Although interdental wiring has frequently
been used in human oral surgery, it is less com-
monly used in veterinary dentistry due to the
anatomy of canine and feline teeth. The large interdental spaces, coronally tapering
crowns, and lack of a cervical “waist' make wiring difficult. Wires placed subgingivally
will predispose to periodontal disease. Some form of fixation, other than merely twisting
them tightly to the teeth, can be added to prevent the wires from slipping off, which
happened in this case (85). This can be accomplished by making a small notch in the
enamel of the teeth (not recommended) or by cementing the wire to etched enamel with
acrylic or composite. Rarely is interdental wiring sufficient as the only stabilization for
fracture repair. It is much more common now to use an intraoral acrylic splint, with the
interdental wiring used merely as an adjunct to help reinforcing the splint. Wiring the
teeth together helps maintain occlusion in highly comminuted fractures. It can also help
to stabilize the fracture fragments during the building of acrylic splints.
86 A removable palatal obturator, either acrylic retained by the cheek teeth or a simple
vinyl polysiloxane plug, can be placed over the defect and adjacent tissue before eating
and removed after eating. The obturator serves to shunt food from the turbinates while
eating or drinking.
86
87, 88: Questions
87 This maxillary second pre-
87
molar (87)has a measured
probing depth (pocket depth) of
5 mm with 2-3 mm of gingival
 recession around the distal root.
i. What is the attachment loss
around the distal root?
ii. What is the significance of
this attachment loss for this
tooth?
88
88 Dental extractions do not always go according to plan. What course of action
would be most appropriate in the following circumstances?
i. Following full periodontal therapy, attempted extraction of an otherwise healthy
tooth root has forced it into the mandibular canal in an 18-year-old cat (88)
i. Continuing minor hemorrhage from the sockets five minutes after closed extraction
Of periodontally disea sed incisor teeth in a dog.
i. A large oronasal fistula becomes evident having extracted the maxillary canine
tooth from a dog with severe gingivitis and periodontitis.
87
87, 88: Answers
87 i. The attachment loss around the distal root of this premolar is 7-8 mm.
pocket to the free gingival margin. A sulcus depth of 3 mm or less is normal in a dog.
while the cat has a normal sulcus of 1 mm or less. A probing depth of 5 mm indicates
there is the beginning of periodontal disease with the loss of periodontal ligament
attachment to the root cementum. Gingival recession is where the free gingival margin
moves apically from the cementoenamel junction (CEJ). When there is gingival recession
along with an increased probing depth this shows there is even greater periodontal
ligament loss and bone loss around this tooth and/or root. The combination of the
gingival recession measurement and the probing depth is called the attachment loss. It
 provides a more accurate mea surement of the periodontal health status of a tooth.
88 i. It is generally stated that all root remnants should be removed; however, the whole
patient must be considered. Extraction of the root in this case would considerably pro-
long anesthesia, with associated risks to the patient. The root was healthy and the
attempted extraction was being performed in a cleaned mouth. In such circumstances it
would be reasonable to leave the root where it was, close the gingiva over the alveolus,
obtain a radiograph for future comparison, advise the owners of the problem, and
arrange follow-up. With an infected root tip there is a serious risk of abscessation or
osteomyelitis so it would be more appropriate to obtain surgical access through the
bone directly over the displaced tooth root for its removal.
i. In most cases, hemorrhage from incisor extraction sockets will not be a serious prob-
     d e  ss  go  n
suture placement to close the gingiva across the affected sockets are likely to control the
hemorrhage. Additionally, the use of tissue-compatible hemostatic agents, such as a
calcium alginate dressing placed loosely into an affected alveolus, can be beneficial. It is
a good idea to perform a bleeding test before surgical procedures which have the
potential for hemorrhage. A simple method of screening for problems involves stabbing
the mucosal surface of the lip or cheek with a hypodermic needle or a special *mucosal
bleeding test' device. In animals with adequate hemostasis, bleeding will stop within
2.6 minutes, often much less. This is not entirely reliable and more sophisticated tests
should be performed in breeds with recognized clotting defects.
m. Oronasal fistula should be expected in cases with advanced periodontal disease
affecting the maxillary canine and, to a lesser extent, premolar teeth, so this possibility
should be discussed with the owner before surgery is performed. There is a high risk of
flap breakdown if fistula closure is performed in inflamed tissue, so in most cases it is
best to delay attempts at closure of the fistula until the gingival inflammation has
subsided. It may be possible to reduce inflammation sufficiently by delaying the extrac-
fistula closure can be combined at a single session.
88
89, 90: Questions
89
89 i. Name the lesion on the fourth premolar {89), and describe a method of charac
terizing its severity.
i. What is the prognostic significance of this lesion?
i. What are the therapeutic options?
90
90 i. Describe the radiologic findings on this radiogra ph (90).
ii. How would you determine whether the described lesions are associated with disease?
89
89, 90: Answers
  an    s  i    
multirooted teeth. The severity of furcation lesions can be graded: Class 1: the division
between the roots can be felt with a probe but is less than 3 mm deep. Class 2: a probe
can pass horizontally into the furcation for more than 3 mm but not all the way
through. Class 3: a probe can be passed all the way through the furcation to the op-
posite aspect of the tooth fe.g. buccal to lingual on a maxillary second premolar in a
dog). Ideally, in charting, each aspect of the division between roots is evaluated and
graded, e.g. a buccal and lingual score is given for the furcation area of the mandibular
first molar of the dog.
ii. This lesion indicates the presence of chronic, advanced periodontitis. Generally, the
of teeth despite therapy because it is more difficult to clean such areas as they are prone
to retain food debris and plaque.
i. Many procedures have been advocated to eliminate furcation exposure: odonto-
plasty, root amputation, obliteration with restorative material, and guided tissue
furcations at the present time. This procedure consists of a flap approach with maxi-
mum tissue conservation by making incisions very close to the gingival margin. A full-
thickness flap is elevated taking care not to tear or damage the vascularity of the flap.
Flap vitality is critical because flap necrosis usually results in failure to regenerate the
furcation. The bony margins of the defect are exposed by curettage and all soft tissue
tags are removed in order to prevent soft tissue from filling in the healing wound. The
roots are cleaned and smoothed so that irregularities do not interfere with flap or mem-
brane adaptation to the tooth. An occlusive membrane is adapted to the tooth and over
the bony walls of the furcation defect in such a way as to create space for bone growth
and occlude overlying soft tissue from the defect during healing. The soft tissue is closed
over the defect and well adapted to the tooth so that fibrin or a blood clot can seal the
furcation defect away from oral bacteria.
90 i. A deep infrabony pocket is evident on the mesial aspect of the mesial root of the
mandibular first molar, also involving the distal root of the fourth premolar. In addi-
tion, there is a distinct periapical radiolucent area associated with the same root. This
lesion may be normal anatomy or represent pathology. Where it represents normal
anatomy, it is a radiographic artifact due to the root apex dipping into the mandibular
canal or lying in close proximity to the canal. Where it represents pathology, it is an
extension of a chronic pulpitis or an inflammatory reaction due to pulpal necrosis.
i. The infrabony pocket can by confirmed by periodontal probing and is associated
be an extension of the root shape, rather than a round ballooning lesion, is suggestive
for normal anatomy. Comparison should always be made with other teeth of the same
type in the same animal. A contralateral radiograph is indicated, particularly if the tooth
-    s      o a  s
ination.
90
91, 92: Questions
91 What causes these frustra-
91
ting ‘stomatitis' lesions in cats
(91)?
9
92 i. Identify this structure (92, arrowed).
ii. What surgical procedure(s) is (are) occasionally performed on this structure, and
why?
91
91, 92: Answers
91 “Stomatitis' simply means inflammation of the tissue lining the mouth. In cats, it is
now commonly used to refer to a chronic clinical entity affecting some or all of the
alveolar mucosa, glossopalatine folds (fauces), and oropharyngeal tissues. The most
severely affected areas typically are the buccal alveolar mucosa (*buccitis") and the fauces
(faucitis'); either or both may be involved. Unless the teeth have been extracted or lost,
there is almost always severe gingivitis in the vicinity of the lesions. The tongue and
mucoperiosteum of the hard palate are rarely affected. In spite of a lot of work examin-
ing several possible causes, there is no accepted cause for this condition. It is possible that
a large part of the problem is that we are dealing not with one “condition' but with
several conditions that end up with a similar effect because of the inevitable bacterial
contamination that occurs. Briefly, the following have been investigated: bacterial
infection fhuge numbers of bacteria are present in the mouths of all cats, so why are
some cats affected and not others; no specific bacterium has been isolated with any
consistency in affected cats, and the list of bacterial species that have been identified is
very long); viral infection {FCV and FVR are discussed in 103, and FIV and FeLV will
result in immunopathy but are not consistently identifiable in affected cats); immu-
possible immunopathies are waiting to be tested once reliable reagents are available for
cats). It is important to differentiate these lesions from eosinophilic granuloma (which
generally responds well to treatment), and squamous cell carcinoma (by far the most
common tumor, benign or malignant, in the mouth of the cat) - any red, asymmetric
chronic or raised lesion in the mouth of a cat should be biopsied.
92 i. The mandibular frenulum.
i. The procedures performed to correct impingement of the frenulum on the gingival
margin are frenectomy and frenotomy. Abnormally high insertion relative to the gingival
margin may be of developmental origin. Alternatively, recession of the gingival margin
where thin gingiva and little alveolar bone overlies a prominent root. Although *muscle
impingement’ has been implicated, most frenulum attachments merely transmit tension
from more apically located facial muscles.
Frenectomy means removal of the frenulum from the raised surface all the way to the
bone. An incision is made from mucosal surface to bone along the entire length of the
frenulum and the intervening muscle, connective, and elastic tissue is excised. Frenotomy
means incision through the frenulum, usually adjacent and parallel to the attached gin-
giva. The incision may be partial-thickness or full-thickness. It usually cuts across the
frenulum whereas the frenectomy incision usually parallels the frenulum. Because the
fibers are removed in frenectomy, the wound may be closed from side-to-side with
sutures. Frenotomy incisions are often not closed so that the fibers do not rejoin and
recreate tension on the gingival margin. Alternatively, the sagittal frenotomy incision may
be sutured in a transverse fashion. Compared with frenotomy, frenectomy appears to be
more predicta ble in correcting the problem.
92
93, 94: Questions
93 The curette on the right has been
93
sharpened many times incorrectly com-
pared with the curette on the left (93).
i. What incorrect sharpening technique
has created the pointed tip of the curette
on the right?
ii. What are three basic sharpening tech-
niques for use on curettes and scalers?
i. What is the proper angle between the
face of a curette and the surface of a flat
stone?
94a
94 i. What radiographic technique is being used here (94a) for taking a radiograph of
the ma xillary fourth premolar in a dog?
 ii. Describe the geometric principle involved and positioning used in this technique.
93
93, 94: Answers
 93 i. A point is created on a curette when too much pressure is placed on the toe of the
instrument during sharpening, or when both sides of the instrument are sharpened in
this fashion. The entire working tip of the curette should be placed evenly against the
stone.
ii. {1) The moving flat stone technique: here, the instrument is held securely in the hand
  d s s a    i ao sa   
working tip in the appropriate angle and then moved steadily in short strokes back and
forth against the instrument. (2) The stationary flat stone technique: here, the stone is
placed on a solid surface or in a stone holder and the instrument is placed on the stone
at the appropriate angle and moved steadily back and forth across the surface. (3) The
conical stone method: here, a narrow conical stone is moved in a sweeping stroke across
the face of the working tip towards the toe of the curette.
Any of the three techniques can be used successfully if done properly and frequently
to ma intain sharp instruments.
mi. The proper angle formed by the face of the curette when placed on a flat stone and
the stone surface is 100-110°.
94 i. The bisecting angle tech-
94b
nique is depicted (94b), which
is one of the two basic intraoral
Dental X-ray unit
radiographic techniques, the
 Long axis
parallel technique being the
/ofroot
other (see 134). Because of the
morphology of the oral cavity,
the lack of a vaulted palate in
X-ray
particular, the film cannot
bea rm
Bisecting
always be placed parallel to the
angle
 teeth being radiographed. If the
Maxillary
film and the teeth cannot be
4th premolar
Hard palate
positioned parallel to each
other, the image on the film
will either be shorter or longer than the actual teeth. To obtain a radiographic image on
the film which is equal in length to the teeth, the bisecting angle technique is used.
i. The bisecting angle technique involves the application of the geometric principle of
equilateral triangles. In equilateral triangles, if two triangles share a side and both have
an equal angle at their apex, then the opposite sides are the same length. When utilizing
the bisecting angle technique, the intraoral film is placed in a position to allow for pro-
jection of the tooth onto the center of the film. The angle formed by the intraoral film
and the long axis of the tooth is visualized. An imaginary line bisecting this angle is
visualized. The central X-ray beam is then directed perpendicular to this line, which is
the case when the flat end of the cone is parallel to the bisecting angle.
94
95, 96: Questions
95 i. What is the primary differential diag-
95a
nosis in this eight-month-old dog on a
balanced diet (95a, b)?
ii. What is the mechanism for the develop-
ment of this problem?
95b
96 What alternative to repulsion is available for tooth removal in the horse?
9.5
95, 96: Answers
95 i. Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. Radiologic changes in renal secondary
hyperparathyroidism include generalized bone loss with a greater extent of loss occurring
in the bones of the skull. The bones of the head are affected before involvement of the
axial skeleton or long bones. The mandible is affected first followed by the bones in the
maxilla. The earliest radiologic evidence of bone loss is loss of the lamina dura {the
radiologically apparent radiopaque line surrounding the tooth roots; see 59); bone loss
continues in the interdental and interradicular regions with severe cortical bone loss
eventually occurring.
ii. The skeletal changes occur secondary to chronic renal insuffciency, which results in
secondary hyperparathyroidism. The “classic explanation' is that phosphorus retention
Occurs as the kidneys progressively lose their ability to excrete phosphorus; phosphorus
retention decreases extracellular calcium due to the mass law equation; the parathyroids
are chronically stimulated to maintain extracellular calcium concentration within the
normal range. An alternative theory has been proposed, namely the 'vitamin D trade-off
hypothesis.’ According to this theory there is a decrease in vitamin D synthesis in the
proximal renal tubules; decreased serum vitamin D levels result in loss of negative
feedback on the parathyroid gland; decreased serum vitamin D levels also result in a
decreased serum calcium level; an increase in serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) level
occurs as a result of decreased serum vitamin D and calcium.
96 An alternative method to extract the more
9%
mesial cheek teeth is achieved by buccotomy
(96). This surgical procedure entails a
horizontal incision through the cheek,
followed by removal of the buccal bone of
the alveolus and delivery of the tooth in a
buccal direction. The dissection through the
soft tissues of the cheek must negotiate the
dorsal and ventral branches of the facial
nerve, the buccal venous plexus, and the
parotid duct. When the oral cavity is entered
at the dorsal or ventral buccal cleft, the tooth
to be removed can be positively identified and
a mucogingival flap is raised to expose the buccal cortex of the maxilla or mandible. The
buccal bone plate overlying the diseased tooth is removed either with an oscillating saw,
a surgical bur, or a chisel to expose the reserve crown and roots of the tooth. Space for
extraction is created by a longitudinal cut in the tooth, again using a bur. After removal
of the tooth, the alveolus may be packed with medicated bandage which is led out
through a stab wound to the side of the face to be withdrawn a few inches at a time over
the following 14 days. The oral defect is plugged with a cap of dental impression
compound and the buccotomy wound is closed in four layers, starting with the oral
mucosa. Extraction by this route is restricted to maxillary cheek teeth 1-3 or 4 and
mandibular cheek teeth 1-4 because of the position of the masseter muscle, paranasal
sinuses, and local vasculature.
9%6
97, 98: Questions
97
97 The bony portion of the jaw in which the dental roots are located is called the
alveolar process (97)
i. What is the structure and composition of the alveolar bone?
ii. What is its relationship with the teeth?
. What is the lamina dura?
98
98 Which type of bonding agent would be a ppropriate for this restoration (98)?
97
97, 98: Answers
97 i. The alveolar process consists of an outer bony plate of varying thickness and
covered by periosteum (the cortical bone), an inner, heavily-perforated bony lamella
(the alveolar bone proper or lamina cribriformis), and cancellous bone (spongiosa) be-
plate is continuous with the inner plate {lamina cribriformis) at the orifice of the
alveolus and this part of the alveolar process is called the alveolar crest. The structure of
the cortical plates and of the cancellous bone is similar to that of other bones. The cor-
tical plate of the mandible is thicker than that of the maxilla. The dry weight of alveolar
bone is made of about 70% inorganic material (calcium phosphate crystals of the
hydroxyapatite type and amorphous calcium phosphate) and 30% organic material
(90%collagen).
i. The alveolar crest is located at about 1 mm below the neck of the tooth. The alveolar
bone is a tooth-dependent structure, developing with the eruption of the tooth and
resorbing after its loss. The lamina cribriformis is attached to the trabeculae of the can-
cellous bone. The multiple foramina of this inner plate correspond to the Volkman
canals and connect the periodontal ligament to the bone marrow spaces. Blood and
lymph vessels as well as nerves pass through these openings. The surface of the alveolar
bone proper adjacent to the periodontal ligament is made of multiple layers of bone
parallel to the surface of the alveolar wall, which are penetrated by bundles of Sharpey's
fibers embedded almost perpendicular to the surface.
i. On a radiograph, the lamina cribriformis appears as a radiopaque line distinct from
the spongiosa, which is called the lamina dura. This denser line appears because of an
Overla pping effect and not beca use it is more mineralized that the surrounding bone.
98 A self-cure or dual-cure dentin-bonding agent. Under amalgam, light-activated
materials would not cure. There are now multiple-purpose dual-cure agents which bond
to dentin, etched enamel, metal, composite, and amalgam. These can be used both for
light-cure composites and for amalgam bonding. Bonding amalgam is a recent trend in
human restorative dentistry, replacing the lining of the cavity preparation with cavity
varnish before placing the amalgam. When amalgam is bonded, although bond
strengths are not high, a far superior dentinal seal is formed which nearly eliminates
postoperative sensitivity. This same sealing action occurs when these multiple purpose
(or other moist dentin) bonding agents are used with composite restorations. Universal
bonding agents bond to both etched enamel and to acid-treated dentin through micro
mechanical retention. The fourth and fifth generation bonding agents produce dentin-
bonding by using an initial hydrophilic agent which allows the composite to flow into
the opened dentinal tubules. A hybridized layer of composite and collagen forms the
interface between the dentin and the overlying restoration if the dentin has not been
allowed to dehydrate. Over-drying the dentin collapses the collagen fibers, preventing a
good bond. The hybridization layer - although not contributing significantly to the
pue spnu ieio jo aaeyeal suuaaaid ueieas juaioa ue se sioe - qiauaus puog
bacteria. Multipurpose bonding agents allow the veterinary dentist to use one bonding
system for multiple uses rather than to stock a number of different adhesive systems.
98
99, Io0: Questions
99
99 Describe this lesion (99) and the clinical picture associated with it, and suggest
methods of treatment.
100 A three-year-old, 20-kg
100
mixed-breed dog is presented
because of severely comminut-
ed, maxillary and mandibular
fractures with multiple pre-
molar and molar fractures fol-
lowing a gunshot wound to the
head.
i. Briefly describe the appro-
priate initial management of
this case.
would be appropriate for this
type of injury?
ii. What potential complica-
tions are possible with the per-
cutaneous skeletal fixation
devices pictured here (100)?
99
99, I00: Answers
99 An infrabony pocket resulting from periodontitis on the palatal aspect of a dog's
maxillary canine. These pockets are typically crescent-shaped with the widest part
centered on the mid-palatal surface. The lesion usually ends in a pointed fashion at the
mid-mesial and mid-distal aspect of the canine. Clinically, these lesions are often seen in
older dolichocephalic and small-breed mesaticephalic dogs, such as Dachshunds and
Toy Poodles. There may be a unilateral purulent or serohemorrhagic nasal discharge
and sneezing or coughing during eating and drinking. Typically, the gingival margin is
preserved near the cementoenamel junction on the palatal surface due to the flat palatal
architecture. Usually, the soft tissue of the gingival margin is only slightly inflamed and
well adapted to the tooth because the most active disease process is much deeper. The
lesions are usually discovered on periodontal probing rather than visual inspection and
may even be difficult to detect on radiographs. The pockets are often quite deep (more
than one-half the length of the canine) and there may be nasal bleeding on probing
when the palatal bone of the alveolus has been resorbed to the level of the nasal mem-
brane.
Treatment depends of the integrity of the buccal bone. Where the buccal bone is
totally missing, extraction and soft tissue closure after extraction are indicated. When
the bone on the buccal surface has been preserved, guided tissue regeneration is the best
method to salvage affected teeth. Evaluation for pulp vitality should be carried out,
especially when a combined periodontal-endodontic lesion is suspected. Regular follow-
up re-evaluation is recommended. Repeated guided tissue regeneration attempts or
extraction are indicated for failing cases.
100 i. Initially, the patient should be assessed for problems that may be associated with
head trauma, including upper airway obstruction, hemorrhage, edema, and cerebral
injury. In addition, the patient should be evaluated for shock and other injuries. After
stabilization of life-threatening problems, attention may be focused on the management
of the jaw fractures.
i. External fixation using Kirschner wires or Steinman pins placed into each fracture
fragment and embedding the exposed cut ends of the pins into acrylic bridges. The
inherent advantages of external fixation include: (1) They are minimally invasive. (2)
The fracture fragments and associated soft tissue and blood supply are not disturbed.
{3) The implant is not located at the fracture site. External fixation devices are parti-
cularly useful in the management of fractures in which there is a large amount of soft
tissue trauma, a high degree of comminution, or a large bony defect.
m. The rostral pins in the maxilla and mandible may have potentially traumatized the
rostral dentition. The atraumatic application of pins in the rostral mandible and maxilla
is difficult because of the limited amount of bone and the large root structures in these
areas. Sequelae to inadvertent dental trauma during placement of external fixation
 devices include endodontic disease with periapical lesions and possibly chronic draining
tracts.
100
101, I02: Questions
101
101 i. What are the cells visible on this microphotograph (101, arrowed) of the
periodontal liga ment of a dog?
i. What is the origin and clinical importance of these cells?
ii. Where in the oral cavity can similar cells be found, and what are they called?
102a
102 i. "Left’ and *Right' markers are generally not used on dental films, contrary to con-
ventional radiography. If the embossed dot on the film is facing up, which part of the
dog's dentition is this (102a)?
i. Is this any different in the cat?
101
101, I02: Answers
101 i. These clusters of epithelial cells are known as the epithelial cell rests of Malassez.
ii. They are remnants of Hertwig's epithelial root sheath. The double layer of epithelial
cells of this sheath grows around the dental papilla. The cells initiate the differentiation
of odontoblasts on the periphery of the dental papilla and the odontoblasts in turn form
the dentin of the root. As the root is formed, the sheath is stretched and fragments. In
erupted teeth some of these epithelial cells persist next to the root surface within the
periodontal ligament. The epithelial cells of Malassez play a role in the histogenesis of the
periapical cyst, lateral periodontal cyst, and {intraosseous) ameloblastoma. Their role in
the repair and maintenance of the periodontal ligament is unclear, but probably minimal.
mi. Remnants of the dental lamina are occasionally seen in the dense connective tissue of
the gingiva as clusters of epithelial cells, known as the cell rests of Serres. It is thought
that these cell rests may be involved in the pathogenesis of peripheral ameloblastoma
(acanthomatous epulis) in the dog, squamous odontogenic tumor (in man), and gingival
Cysts.
102 i. The premolar region of the right
102b
mandible.
ii. Dental films have an embossed dot on
one corner pointing toward the X-ray
source. Given the fact that the dot must
have faced toward the X-ray source, there
is only one way that the film could have
been placed in the mouth. This enables
you to orient processed dental films as to
left side/right side. By orienting the em-
bossed dot towards you (*bubble up*), you
will be observing the dentition from the
outside. The set of whole-mouth films are
spread out on the view box with the
patient's midline in the center (102b). The patient's dentition will be spread out such that
films to your right will be the patient's left side and films to your left will be the patient's
right side, as (generally) on a dental chart. Orienting films with the embossed dot up
assumes that intraoral technique was used; this is the case for all recommended standard
views in the dog. The first step when identifying a set of films is to place all films with the
embossed dot up. Subsequently, mandibular films are placed on the lower half of the
view box, and maxillary films on the upper half. Useful landmarks are the palatine
fissures, floor of the nasal cavity, three-rooted teeth (maxilla), and mandibular canal.
Next, the maxillary films are oriented such that crowns point down, and mandibular
films such that crowns point up. Left from right can now be determined by identifying
the molars distally and the premolars mesially.
m. Intraoral technique is also recommended in the cat, except for the caudal maxilla {see
146). If the extraoral, parallel technique is used for the maxillary premolars and molar in
the cat, these films should be placed on the view box with the embossed dot down.
102
103, 104: Questions
103 How would you proceed
103
with diagnosis and manage-
ment of this cat (103), which is
drooling and has not been eat-
ing for a few days?
104 The dog in this photo-
104
graph has lesions limited to the
oral cavity and oral mucocu-
taneous junctions (104) and no
systemic signs of illness.
i. Which immune-mediated
diseases should be considered
in this patient?
ii.Which laboratory tests
should be performed to diag-
 nose immune-mediated disease
in this patient?
103
103, 104: Answers
103 Ulcerations of the tongue and palate are common in cats with primary acute viral
infections such as herpesvirus (FVR) and calicivirus (FCV). Careful clinical examination
may reveal dehydration, and other lesions (ocular and nasal discharges) that are indica-
tive of FVR/FCV infection are usually also present. More generalized gastrointestinal
signs or weakness may indicate panleukopenia viral infection. Other than viral isola-
tion, there are no specific tests that will confirm the diagnosis of FVR or FCV infection,
and there is no particular benefit to having the diagnosis confirmed {except in a cattery
situation, in which issues of prevention may be very important). Lingual or palatal
ulcerations resulting from FVR or FCV infection almost always heal within a few weeks
of onset. The loss of condition, or in more severe cases, onset of clinical dehydration,
may be obvious from results of hematocrit or CBC examinations, and panleukopenia
would be an important differential diagnosis if the total white cell count is very low. To
date, there is no direct evidence that FVR or FCV is a primary cause of chronic severe
stomatitis or faucitis. Calicivirus can be isolated from oral or pharyngeal fluids in many
  s    n s  sis   
for the host can account for this finding), and there are strains of calicivirus that will
consistently produce faucitis lesions in specific pathogen-free cats; however, these cats
do not go on to develop the chronic lesions that are so frustrating to manage. The
typical cat with chronic stomatitis does not have lingual or palatal lesions. Differential
diagnosis is much more important for chronic oral lesions (see 91). Since treatment is
symptomatic - nursing care, nutritional support, antimicrobial treatment to prevent
secondary bacterial infections - the most important indicator is the condition and
behavior of the cat. Clinically evident dehydration requires immediate manage-
ment - intravenous fluid therapy if severe, or subcutaneous bolus therapy in less severe
Cases.
104 i. Pemphigus vulgaris and bullous pemphigoid are immune-mediated skin diseases
in which oral lesions are frequently found. Oral involvement, which may include gin-
givitis, stomatitis, and glossitis, occurs in approximately 90% of patients with pemphi-
gus vulgaris and may be the initial manifestation of the disease in about S0% of cases.
Lesions of the skin and/or mucocutaneous junctions are present with bullous pemphi
goid; approximately 80% of patients develop oral lesions at the initial onset of disease
or later during the course of disease.
ji. Histologic and immunologic examination of oral gingival and mucosal biopsies
should be obtained. Multiple biopsy specimens should be obtained from early lesions to
increase the likelihood of identifying the characteristic histologic and immunologic
lesions. Immunologic examination of the biopsy specimen is done to demonstrate
immunoglobulin and/or complement deposition at characteristic sites for each of the
immune-mediated diseases. Consultation with the diagnostic laboratory before sample
collection is recommended to determine correct sample collection and handling for
optimal diagnostic value.
104
105, I06: Questions
105
105 The owner of this one-year-old dog recalled that the deciduous precursor of this
maxillary canine (105) was fractured and extracted a few weeks later.
i. What is your diagnosis?
il. What are the therapeutic options?
106 This photograph (106a) shows the
106a
normal incisor occlusion in an adult,
standard-sized rabbit. The tips of the
chisel-shaped mandibular incisor teeth
occlude between the maxillary first and
second incisors when the jaw is relaxed.
The breeding of animals to alter their ap-
pearance frequently has a detrimental
effect on the function of the affected ana-
tomic structures. As with dogs which have
been bred for a short muzzle and "flat"
face, rabbit breeds with this tendency
suffer from increased respiratory prob-
lems and jaw length mismatch.
i. What is the main structural change in the head of dwarf breed rabbits when compared
with their naturally occurring wild counterparts?
i. At what age are dwarf rabbits with incisor malocclusions usually presented to the
veterinarian, and why?
m. Several treatment options are available for rabbits with incisor malocclusion as a
result of jaw length mismatch. Briefly what are they?
10.5
105, 106: Answers
105 i. Enamel hypoplasia is evident. The ameloblasts of the tooth germ of the
permanent canine were damaged during the first months of life, and subsequently no
enamel was formed (see 14 and 110). There are two plausible explanations in this case.
The fracture of the deciduous canine may have been complicated {i.e. causing pulp
exposure), with resultant pulp necrosis and periapical pathology. The periapical
inflammation may have affected the underlying permanent tooth germ. Alternatively,
deciduous tooth.
ii. Given the fact that only one tooth is involved, restoration is indicated. A composite
restoration using the acid-etch technique and a dentin-bonding agent will yield the most
esthetic result. Alternatively, a metal-alloy jacket crown can be used.
106 i. The dwarf breeds of rabbit have a shorter
106b
head than normal. The main area affected is the
base of the skull. This affects the length of the
upper jaw and location of the temporomandibu-
lar joints. Although the mandible is usually
reduced in length, the degree of shortening is
often insufficient so that there is a relative man-
dibular prognathism.
ii. A high proportion of dwarf rabbits have
relative mandibular prognathism with malocclu-
sion of the incisor teeth. This may be observed in
newborn rabbits, but most cases are presented at
between 9 and 18 months of age. A case of in-
106c
cisor malocclusion in a three-month-old dwarf
rabbit with relative mandibular prognathism is
shown {106b). This condition was not visible
until the lips were lifted. It frequently takes 9-18
  n    o a  s
way that they no longer occlude with the oppos-
ing teeth. As the teeth can then grow unimpeded,
it is not long before the teeth become visibly
elongated. This is the most common reason for
owners to present affected animals. The second
most frequent reason is loss of weight or condi-
tion. This was the case in this 13-month-old dwarf rabbit (106c). The owners were not
aware that the visible elongation of the mandibular incisors was abnormal and they had
not noticed that the tips of these teeth were penetrating the nasal skin. This abnormality
drastically restricts the ability of affected animals to prehend and chew food.
m. The most frequent treatment used in cases such as those described in (i) is tooth
shortening. Extraction or attempts at arresting tooth growth are two other possible
dental treatments. In severe cases, especially those with additional problems, euthanasia
is the most humane option.
106
107-109: Questions
107 i. What is the condition
107
shown (107)? Describe the
dental findings and their possi-
ble varia bles.
i. What are the treatment op-
tions?
108 As noted in 34, teeth like
108
this (108) are likely to be pain-
ful, and something must be
done for these cats. While the
initial thought may be to
restore the tooth, restoration is
rarely indicated as treatment
for feline odontoclastic resorp-
tion lesions (FORLs) in any
tooth beca use follow-up studies
have shown that the results are
very poor. The lesion will recur
and the tooth will often frac-
ture out of the mouth, poten-
tially leaving exposed and painful root fragments. Restoration is discussed further in
175. Clinically painful teeth should be extracted (see 20 and 35), but is it essential to
remove all of the tooth?
109 i. Why is dentin sensitive?
i. What generally prevents bacterial access to the pulp when a vital tooth's patent
dentinal tubules are exposed?
107
107-109: Answers
107 i. Wry malocclusion. Wry malocclusion may involve the cranium and the dentition
to varying degrees, or the dentition only. In this case a unilateral mandibular progna-
thism with deviation of the dental midline is present. A normal scissors bite in the oppo-
site incisors, mandibular incisal arch distortion, and asymmetry to the incisal plane are
evident. Wry malocclusion can be found in all domestic mammals. It rarely causes soft
tissue trauma or impairs masticatory function in domestic carnivores. Trauma to the
premaxilla or mandible of a neonate or juvenile can result in an acquired wry maloc-
clusion. Non-traumatic cases are generally considered to be of genetic origin.
ii. Wry malocclusion often is very difficult - if not impossible - to correct. Treatment op-
tions may include removing individual teeth that are causing a traumatic occlusion, to
give the patient a more comfortable bite. If this is performed in a case considered to be of
genetic origin, it is recommended that the patient is neutered.
108 As noted in 61, teeth with FORLs affecting the root but with an intact crown and
gingival margin are usually asymptomatic, and deliberate retention of roots in selected
cases (*crown amputation') can lead to a pain-free mouth and healthy gingiva over the
extraction wound. Crown amputation is a justifiable option if: (1) There is no stomatitis
in the area immediately adjacent to the tooth fi.e. the inflammation at the site of the
lesion does not extend apical to the mucogingival junction). (2) There is no periodontal
pocketing extending apical to the proposed level of amputation of the tooth. (3) There
is no radiographic or clinical evidence of necrotic endodontic or periapical disease
affecting that tooth. If all of these three criteria are met {even if there is extensive radio-
graphic evidence of root resorption), the crown and enough root may be removed so
that the remaining root is well below the level of remaining bone, and the gingival tis-
sues are sutured over the retained root.
109 i. The dentin-pulp complex' is a living tissue. There are presently three theories to
explain the sensitivity of dentin. The direct innervation theory is based on the presence of
nerve endings alongside many of the odontoblastic processes within dentinal tubules,
 n n a u  r s  a   a  
tinoenamel junction. The hydrodynamic theory, which currently predominates, is based
on the belief that fluid movement in the dentinal tubules stimulates the nerve endings.
The transduction theory, for which there is less support, is based on the assumption that
the odontoblasts act as receptors.
i. Healthy pulp is enclosed within a solid casing, the tooth. Pulpal blood vessels are thin-
walled so that pressure within the pulp is at or near to arterial blood pressure. This pres-
sure is sufficient to force tissue fluid to flow out through patent dentinal tubules which
are exposed on the tooth surface. Under natural circumstances, air and fluid pressure
within the oral cavity rarely matches this pressure, so bacteria have difficulty entering the
pulp. Provided that the odontoblasts have not been irreparably damaged, the exposed
dentinal tubules become sclerotic and are sealed by the progressive formation of intra-
tubular dentin.
108
1o, Ill: Questions
110
110 What is known about the etiology of the disorder seen here (110)?
111 This is an intraoral view of a three-
111a
year-old cat that was presented because of
a 10 x 15 mm caudal hard palatal defect
of one-year's duration {11la). Several at-
tempts to repair the defect with sliding
flaps had been unsuccessful.
i. What are the causes of centrally located
hard palatal defects?
i. Large defects located in the caudal
aspect of the hard palate can be frustrat-
ing to repair, and postoperative dehis-
cence is a potential complication. What
surgical procedure utilizes flaps based on
the blood supply to the hard palate and
adjacent soft tissue structures?
fi. What salvage procedure may be in-
dicated when repeated attempts at surgical
repair have been unsuccessful?
109
Ilo, Ill: Answers
110 The etiology of enamel hypoplasia is associated with periods of high fever,
infections, nutritional deficiencies, disturbances of the metabolism, and systemic
disorders. Epitheliotropic viral infections, particularly those caused by morbilliviruses,
such as distemper, are well-known causes, and was also the cause in the case depicted. In
most cases a differentiation between a generalized disturbance and a local one can be
made.
A metabolic disturbance over a longer period during the enamel development will
cause generalized enamel defects. Symmetric belt-like defects and discolorations are
found on the dentition where the enamel was formed during the systemic disturbance. In
cases of generalized enamel defects, all teeth are usually affected.
A metabolic disturbance of short duration during the development of enamel can be
recognized by defects limited to a circumscribed area of the affected teeth. Local enamel
defects typically occur symmetrically and on homologous teeth. Only those ameloblasts
which, at the time of the disturbance, had just started enamel formation, are affected.
Trauma is a common cause of localized enamel defects.
111 i. Centrally located, acquired hard palatal
111b
defects are mainly of traumatic origin: bite
wounds, electrical cord injury, gunshot wounds,
foreign body penetration, and pressure necrosis
from a foreign body wedged between the two
sides of the maxillary dental arcade.
i. The split palatal U-flap can be utilized to
repair large caudal hard palatal defects. In this
technique a large mucoperiosteal U-flap is
created rostral to the defect and then split along
the midline. Each side of the U-flap is gently
elevated, taking care not to damage the major
palatine arteries as they exit through the major
palatine foramina approximately S-10 mm
palatal to the maxillary fourth premolars.
Following debridement of the edges of the
palatal defect, the first half of the U-flap is
rotated into the palatal defect and sutured in
place with synthetic absorbable suture material.
The second half of the U-flap is then rotated
rostral to the first half of the U-flap and sutured to the edge of the first flap. The rostral
o n ro p si ps si d a   ad an po o
covering. This exposed bone at the donor site is left to heal by second intention and
generally will epithelialize within 1-2 months (111b).
mi. The use of an obturator may be considered. Isolated case reports describe the use of
soft silicone rubber, acrylic, or metal alloys for this purpose.
110
112, I13: Questions
112a
112 i. Explain why this dog's malocclusion (112a) should be corrected.
ii. How would you correct this malocclusion?
. If this condition were to occur in a show prospect, how would you resolve the
conflict between orthodontic treatment, American Kennel Club {AKC) regulations, and
American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) ethics?
113
113 i. Identify the pathology evident on this radiograph (113).
ii. Describe how these lesions occur.
ii. How are these lesions classified?
111
112, I 13: Answers
112 i. A rostrally deviated
112b
maxillary canine for so-called
“lance canine’) can impair pre-
hension and can impinge upon
opposing teeth and/or the labial
mucosa, resulting in occlusal
and/or soft tissue tra uma. The
deviated canine disrupts the
normal periodontal contour,
thus creating a plaque-retentive area. The occlusal trauma and plaque retention increase
the likelihood of focal periodontitis.
i. Orthodontic correction. Fixed dental attachments {i.e. hooks, buttons) are placed on
the deviated canine and on one or more anchor teeth. The maxillary fourth premolar
and the maxillary first molar are often used as anchor teeth. Elastic traction (ie. power
chain, rubber bands) creates constant force on the canine. The force is a mesiodistal
tipping around a buccolingual axis. Commonly employed appliances consist of hooks
or buttons with a power chain or rubber band stretched between them.
mi. The AKC dog show rules state that altering the natural appearance of a dog for the
purpose of correcting an abnormality is cause for disqualification of that animal. The
AVMA states that performing a procedure for the purpose of concealing a congenital or
inherited abnormality that sets the animal apart from the breed standard is unethical.
Specifically, any procedure that will alter the natural dental arcade is unethical. Should
the health or welfare of the individual patient require correction of such genetic defect,
it is recommended that the patient is neutered. Genetic counseling is indicated to dis-
courage repeat breeding.
113 i. There is a combined periodontal-endodontic lesion visible on both roots of the
mandibular first molar.
i. Periodontal disease and endodontic lesions can occur as combined lesions. Perio-
 dontal disease that progresses to involve the exposure of lateral endodontic canals, open
dentinal tubules on exposed root surfaces, or the apex can result in endodontic lesions.
Conversely, a periapical lesion of endodontic origin may spread periodontally. The
'true' combined lesion is when a periapical lesion of endodontic origin exists on a tooth
that is also periodontally involved and the infrabony pocket extends to a point where
the two lesions merge. The interrelationship of these systems can be established through
the communication of the apical foramen as well as through lateral, accessory, and/or
furcation canals.
im. Type I: endodontic-periodontal lesions (primary endodontic lesions with secondary
periodontal involvement). Type Il: periodontal-endodontic lesions (primary periodonta l
pocket(s) with secondary pulpal involvement). Type Ill: “true' combined lesions
(concurrent primary periodontal lesions and primary pulpal lesions).
112
114, 115: Questions
114
114 i. Classify this type of tooth fracture {114) according to the WHO classification of
dental fractures.
ii. What are the treatment objectives indicated?
115
115 What are the elements of a complete “bite? evaluation in the dog (115)?
113
114, I15: Answers
114 i. This is a complicated crown-root fracture. The ^complicated’ refers to the fact
that pulp exposure has occurred, and ^crown-root’ to the fact that enamel, dentin, and
a   a  a s  a an   a 
under the level of the gingiva and may extend under the level of the alveolar crest. The
term ‘slab fracture’ is commonly used for this type of fracture but does not specifically
imply pulp exposure or subgingival involvement. In this particular case, the pulp is con
sidered vital beca use there is still some bleeding evident.
i. The primary treatment objectives (if conservative treatment is elected) are to prevent
endodontic disease caused by the pulp exposure, and periodontal disease caused by the
distortion of the normal gingival contour. An additional treatment objective may be to
restore the normal morphology of the tooth.
The decision to perform a partial coronal pulpectomy (pulpotomy) or a total pulpec-
tomy (non-surgical endodontic treatment) is based on the duration of the pulp ex-
posure, the degree of contamination, the age of the patient, the appearance of the pulp
on probing, and the availability of follow-up examination. While a partial coronal pulp-
ectomy offers the advantage that the tooth is expected to remain vital and therefore
stronger, a total pulpectomy has a more predictable and higher success rate (see 43,
146, and 25). Crown-root fractures involve the periodontal ligament and may lead to
periodontitis because of the altered gingival contour. A small fracture fragment and the
overlying unsupported gingiva can be removed to restore a physiologic contour. A
fracture extending under the level of the alveolar crest may be treated by creating a
periodontal flap (see 159), removing the fracture fragment and performing an osteo-
plasty, and repositioning the flap in a more apical position. Deep crown-root fractures
lead to an irreversible periodontitis and are an indication for extraction. Crown restora-
tion is optional but may help in restoring the gingival contour (see 43) and in protecting
a non-vital tooth from further tra uma (see 152).
115 Normal occlusion implies normal interdigitation of teeth, integrity of the dental
arches, and normal functioning of the temporomandibular joints. The normal inter-
digitation of teeth, or *bite', of a dog is characterized by the anisognathic relationship of
the two dental arches (the lower jaw is slightly shorter and narrower) and can be
described as follows: (1) The incisal edge of the lower incisors occludes against the
cingulum of the upper incisors (a scissor bite). (2) The lower canine is centered between
the upper canine and upper third incisor, without touching either of them. (3) The tips
of the crowns of the lower premolars fit into the interdental spaces of the upper pre-
molars, with each lower premolar placed mesial to the upper premolar. (4) The palatal
surface of the upper fourth premolar occludes with the buccal surface of the mesial part
of the lower first molar; the occlusal surface present on the distal part of the lower first
molar occludes with the occlusal surface of the upper first molar.
From the above, it is clear that the evaluation of the interdigitation of teeth should
not only include the incisors, but the canines and premolars as well. A full orthodontic
evaluation includes the following aspects: (1) Incisor relationship. (2) Canine relation-
ship. (3) Premolar alignment. (4) Distal premolar/molar occlusion. (5) Head symmetry.
(6) Number and position of individual teeth.
114
I16, I17: Questions
116a
116 i. What are the various techniques for taking vinyl polysiloxane impressions (116a)?
. What is the purpose of the two-step technique?
mi. Briefly describe how the two-step technique is performed.
117
117 What was this poor horse's main problem (117)?
11.5
116, I17: Answers
116 i. (1) The one-step putty/wash tech-
116b
nique. (2) The two-step putty/wash techni-
que. (3) The double-mix technique. (4)
The single-mix technique.
ii. The two-step over-impression will
change a stock tray into a custom tray in
the putty/wash technique. This reduces the
large dimensional change which occurs
when injection materials are used in a full-
arch tray.
m. (1) An over-impression is taken with
putty-type impression material and a suit-
able impression tray. The use of a solid
tray and tray adhesive is recommended.
 Place only enough putty in the tray to cover the teeth (116b). Excessive putty puts pres-
sure on the tray's side walls and increases the chance of distortion. (2) Wiggle the tray in
the mouth before the putty has set to create an enlarged over-impression. After the putty
has set, remove the tray from the mouth. (3) After a clean, dry field is achieved, apply a
small amount of light-body impression material or “wash' around the tooth that is being
prepared for a crown restoration as well as a thin coat (1-2 mm thick) over all the teeth
to be included in the over-impression. An air syringe can be used to blow the impression
gently into the sulcus. Note that the wash material should not be placed over the palate.
Impression material in the palate will shrink because of the bulk and distort the lingual
margins of prepared teeth. (4) To seat the impression, apply very light pressure and allow
the filled impression tray to slowly settle into place. Slightly pull on the lips so that the
excess material can gently flow out from underneath the tray passively with no
compression until completely set. If an elastomeric impression is removed before it is
completely set, it will distort. (5) Remove the impression in a rapid movement down the
long axis of the teeth. (6) Inspect the impression: the margin of the prepared tooth must
be entire and the crown preparation distinct and without defects. If any putty shows
through in the preparation area, the impression should be taken again. Exposed set putty
creates a pressure spot which will rebound when the impression is removed and result in
a casting that is too small.
117 There are seven right maxillary cheek teeth. The extra tooth is distal to the third
molar and has no opposing tooth. The extra tooth continued to erupt, making it im-
possible for the horse to chew on the right side. All the right maxillary cheek teeth
became long and showed extreme sheer mouth (very steep occlusal surface angle) (117).
The left cheek teeth did all the mastication and were short. Extra (supernumerary) teeth
are fairly rare, but certainly occur. This is a tragic case, as proper dental care would
have allowed this horse to lead a normal, dental-pain-free life.
116
118, 119: Questions
118 This six-year-old domestic
118
shorthair cat was presented for
examination (118). The right
maxillary canine crown is frac-
tured and there is also a small
draining sinus tract visible over
the root area {arrow).
i. What are two possible causes
of the sinus tract in this case?
ii. What locations of this sinus
tract will give you a clue as to
the source of the opening?
i. What additional steps can be
taken to confirm your diag-
nosis?
119
119 The crown of this dog's maxillary fourth premolar {119) was fractured and the
pulp chamber was exposed. It is not known when the injury occurred.
i. Describe the radiologic findings.
ii. What is the most likely etiology?
mi. What are your treatment options?
iv. What follow-up treatment would you recommend?
117
I118, 119: Answers
118 i. (1) Endodontic disease associated with the exposed pulp secondary to the
complicated crown fracture. (2) Periodontal disease.
In this case the sinus tract developed secondary to periodontal disease associated with
a crown-root fracture with a loose root fragment.
ii. A sinus tract coronal to the mucogingival line is typically associated with periodontal
disease. If the lesion is at or apical to the mucogingival line, there is endodontic disease
with a periapical abscess draining through the alveolar mucosa.
m. To confirm your diagnosis when an oral sinus tract is detected, use a periodontal
probe to check for periodontal ligament attachment loss around the tooth and take an
intraoral radiograph. Placing a gutta-percha point into the sinus when taking an intra-
oral radiograph will often dramatically point out the source of the tract. This is parti-
cularly helpful when the sinus is located in the alveolar mucosa away from the tooth or
in the case of the canine tooth where the root lies above the premolar roots.
119 i. The complicated crown fracture, i.e. the pulp is exposed in the fracture line, is
evident on the radiograph. There is a distinct, rounded, radiolucent area associated with
the apex of the distal root. Apical rarefaction on a radiograph usually indicates the
 presence of soft tissue around the tooth root apex. Such tissue can be a granuloma, cyst,
or abscess. Although the radiologic signs are often suggestive of the type of lesion,
definitive differentiation between these three entities relies on histopathologic
examination of the tissue.
Remember that not all apical rarefaction is pathologic in dogs and cats. The peri-
apical bone of healthy canine teeth often appears radiolucent in the dog. Comparison
should always be made with other teeth of the same type in the same animal. A dis-
tinctly round radiolucent area, however, is usually pathologic.
i. The periapical lesion seen is the result of an irreversible pulpitis or pulp necrosis
resulting from the traumatic pulp exposure. Periapical lesions result as an inflammatory
response to chronic pulpitis or necrotic, and generally infected, pulp. Bacteria play a key
yields no growth.
m. Treatment options include extraction and endodontic therapy. If there is evidence of
periodontitis in addition to the endodontic lesions, then extraction is generally the treat-
ment of choice. Endodontic therapy should be limited to periodontally sound teeth.
iv. In the case of endodontic therapy, the result of the treatment needs to be checked
radiographically 6-12 months postoperatively. If the treatment has been successful, the
periapical radiolucency should have filled in or be filling in with bone. If the radio.
lucency is getting larger, this indicates that there is still an ongoing inflammatory pro-
cess resulting in bone destruction. The most likely cause of this happening is that
inflamed or necrotic pulp tissue is still present in the apical segment of the root. Treat-
ment options now include further endodontic therapy or extraction of the tooth.
118
120, I21: Questions
120
120 When performing crown preparations of canine teeth (120), what anatomic
features must be considered? How much tooth must be reduced?
121 i. The unit pictured (121) can be used
121
for what two heated gutta-percha tech-
niques?
ii. To what temperature is the gutta-
percha warmed?
ii. What are the advantages of heated
gutta-percha?
HYGENIG
119
I20, I21: Answers
120 One of the most important considerations when performing a crown preparation is
the occlusion with other teeth, e.g. in the case of the mandibular canine tooth, the
proximity of both the maxillary third incisor and canine tooth. The mandibular canine
tooth must be reduced at the distal lingual wall to allow for clearance of the maxillary
consideration should be given to allow for clearance of the soft tissues in the diastema
between the maxillary teeth. How much reduction depends on the type of crown
employed. A commonly used guideline would be 1 mm for metal crowns and 1.5 mm
for porcelain-fused metal crowns. An additional consideration would be the shape of
the tooth and the fitting of the crown afterwards. As the tooth is curved, a portion of
the mesial buccal wall may have to be removed to eliminate the overhang that may exist
at the gingival margin. Other considerations would be to create precise margins, and to
inspect these margins and the fit before seating the crown. The crown should not have
any gaps between the tooth and crown. The margin should be very smooth and free of
plaque-retentive areas. If the crown has gaps greater than 0.2 mm, new impressions
should be taken and the models returned to the dental laboratory for remake.
121 i. The Successfil1m unit by Hygenic@ can be used to heat a cannula of gutta-percha
with a needle on the end that is placed in an injection gun. The cannula needle is placed
into the root canal and the melted gutta-percha is injected under pressure through the
cannula needle. In shorter canals the needle is slowly withdrawn as the gutta-percha is
injected into the canal until the canal is full. In longer canals it may be necessary to
inject some melted gutta-percha, withdraw the cannula, and reheat it while a plugger is
used to push the gutta-percha apically after it has cooled slightly. Additional gutta-
percha is injected and the process is repeated until the canal is full.
This unit will also heat a syringe of gutta-percha that can be used in a second techni-
que. A file is inserted into the heated syringe end and withdrawn slowly while the
plunger is gently pushed. This will coat the file end with warm gutta-percha. The file is
immediately inserted into the root canal to the apex. After allowing it to set for a few
seconds it is twisted counterclockwise and gently removed, leaving the gutta-percha in
place. This is condensed vertically with a plugger. The process is repeated until the canal
is adequately filled. A combination of the two techniques can also be used to fill large,
long canals.
ii. The heating unit warms the gutta-percha in the cannulas or syringe to 90°C (195°F).
Cannulas come in several consistencies of gutta-percha which determines its ability to
flow when heated.
lateral or accessory canals, and condenses more compactly for a solid hermetic apical
seal. Inadequate apical fill is the most common reason for failure of a root canal pro-
cedure. Heated gutta-percha techniques can be used to create a more complete obtura-
tion of the root canal. Other units are also made that use heated gutta-percha cannulas
or that warm gutta-percha inside the canal before lateral condensation.
120
122. 123: Questions
122 i. What are the main problems that
122a
may be encountered with alginate impres-
sions and that result in an unusable study
model like the one shown (122a)?
ii. How can these problems be avoided?
123
123 This is a Lentulo@ paste filler (123).
i. How is it used?
ii. What are its advantages?
i. What are its disadvantages?
121
122, I23: Answers
122 i. Too grainy material; tearing; air bubbles; irregu-
122b
larly shaped voids; distortion.
ii. Grainy alginate can be avoided by proper mixing
technique; the amount of alginate needed for the size of
the tray should be measured. Cold water will slow
down the set of the alginate and therefore increase the
working time; conversely, warm water will speed up the
set and decrease the working time. All the water should
be added to the alginate at one time. Pour the water into
the premeasured powder, stirring slowly with the
spatula (122b). Once the powder is wet, vigorously
swirl the wet alginate against the sides of the bowl until
there are no lumps of powder left in the mixture. This
process should be completed in less than one minute. Tearing can be caused by inadequate
bulk, moisture contamination, premature removal, and prolonged mixing. To avoid
inadequate bulk, a tray of the correct size should be used. The tray should fit the animal's
mouth, allowing room for all the teeth, without making contact with the impression tray.
Air bubbles can be avoided by using the correct technique, avoiding the incorporation of
bubbles during spatulation and loading the tray. Irregularly shaped voids can be prevented
by ensuring that the impression is clean and free of debris. Therefore, saliva and dental
calculus should be removed. A final rinse and dry should be done immediately before the
impression is taken. Distortion can be prevented by holding the tray steady in the mouth
until the alginate has set; this is very important. The alginate will set in approximately
3-7 minutes, depending on the type used. Touching the alginate around the top of the
impression tray periodically can help to determine when it has set. To remove the tray,
 grip the front of the tray and firmly snap it off Premature and improper removal will
cause distortion. Once the desired impression is obtained, the stone can be poured imme-
diately. If pouring is delayed, the impression should be wrapped in a dampened paper
towel and refrigerated. Alginate is sensitive to air, heat, and loss of moisture, so the stone
should be poured within 30 minutes and the cast should be left to set for two hours.
123 i. Paste fillers are used with a slow-speed handpiece and a reduction contra-angle to
deliver root canal sealers to the apical third of the root canal at the beginning of the
obturation stage of standard root canal therapy. The instrument is inserted, loaded with
sealer, to the apical portion of the canal, and rotated as it is withdrawn from the canal.
The twist of the paste filler is in a counterclockwise direction and it unloads the sealer as
the instrument is withdrawn, being rotated clockwise.
fi. The primary advantage of using a paste fller is in obtaining a uniform coating of sealer
at the apical end of the canal and on the canal walls, ensuring that the open dentinal
tubules will be sealed when gutta-percha is vertically or laterally condensed in the canal.
mi. The instrument must be turned slowly, utilizing an expensive reduction-gear contra-
angle, and it will break easily if stressed. Stress will be applied to the paste filler when it is
rotated within a curved canal, or if it is inserted in a canal that is too narrow.
122
124, 125: Questions
124 Halitosis is a very common complaint among pet owners.
i. What conditions may cause halitosis? What are their respective importance?
ii. How is halitosis produced?
. How can it be assessed?
125
125 Fractured root tips are a common occurrence in the cat (125), either as a result of
odontoclastic resorption or iatrogenic as a complication of extraction.
i. Name two alternatives to conventional extraction of root tips which have been
reported in the literature.
ii. Comment on these two techniques.
123
124, 125: Answers
124 i. Halitosis may have extraoral and oral causes. Extraoral causes are related to diet
(e.g. garlic in humans), metabolic diseases (diabetes, uremia), and infections (respiratory
infections, e.g. pneumonia). Halitosis originating from the oral cavity is mostly due to
bacterial activity in the mouth. It can be enhanced by oral tissue destruction during
disease, by oral stagnation of food, and by stagnation of saliva in a specific area {e.g. lip
fold) as well as by reduction of salivary flow. Halitosis is associated with oral causes in
85% of people affected. Periodontal disease is a very common cause of halitosis. Gastric
stomach, except during the process of belching.
i. Halitosis of extraoral origin is due to the presence of malodorous substances in the
bloodstream which pass through the alveolar membrane of the lungs into the respired
air. These substances may have a metabolic origin or a digestive origin {food). Halitosis 
originating from the mouth is due to the production of malodorous volatile gas by the
putrefactive action of bacteria on exogenous and endogenous protein substrates such as
exfoliated epithelium, salivary components, food debris, and blood. Anaerobes {espec-
ially Gram-negatives) associated with periodontal disease produce volatile sulfur com-
pounds (VSCs), such as particularly hydrogen sulfide and mercaptan, which are
responsible for bad breath.
mi. Halitosis is commonly assessed by orga noleptic methods. With subjective methods, it
is generally accepted that three levels (weak, moderate, strong) can be recognized. How-
ever, this is not accurate, especially if assessment of the same dog over a period of time
or comparison between dogs is necessary. The use of a panel of *blind’ examiners has
been shown effective in halitosis research. Selection, calibration, and training of the
examiners is necessary for optimal results. An objective method based on the measure-
ment of VSCs with an electrochemical sensor has been shown accurate and reliable.
125 i. The two alternative techniques are ^atomization', or burring out root tips, and in-
tentional partial extraction and retention of root tips.
ii. The removal of retained root tips by burring them out is not recommended. Atomiz-
ing a root tip involves drilling away the remaining tooth substance using a round bur in
either a low- or a high-speed handpiece with water irrigation. The procedure largely
relies on tactile sensation to differentiate between bone and tooth substance. In atomiz-
ing a root of a maxillary or mandibular premolar or molar, the close proximity of the
nasal cavity or the mandibular canal should be remembered. Atomization is a last resort
and any need for it should be avoided by a gentle, well-planned extraction technique
(20) from the outset. Coronal amputation with elective retention of the roots using a
flap technique for the management of odontoclastic resorptive lesions has been investi-
gated (108). The results showed that the retained roots tended to continue resorbing. At
the present time, elective retention of roots should not be used as a primary treatment
technique. However, it may be appropriate to consider leaving a healthy root fragment
in place if it fractures during extraction. Radiographs a few months postoperatively are
recommended to ensure that the root remains healthy or is resorbing. Root segments
with endodontic disease or periodontal involvement extending to the level of the root
fracture should always be extracted.
124
126, 127: Questions
126 i. What is a dental index?
i. Name and characterize one index for plaque and one index for gingival inflam-
mation.
127 These are two histopath-
127a
ologically confirmed squamous
cell carcinomas (127a, b). How
would you summarize the clini-
cal presentation and biologic
behavior of this tumor type in
the dog and cat?
127b
12.5
126, 127: Answers
126 i. An index is a numeric score based on defined diagnostic criteria. The presence
and/or severity of pathologic conditions are expressed by assessing a numeric value. A
wide variety of indices exist, primarily for use in humans but also for veterinary use.
Some indices were developed primarily for use in epidemiologic studies, while others are
more applicable to individual patients. An index should be simple, objective, repro-
ducible, quick, and practical.
i. The Plaque Index (Pl) is used to assess the thickness of plaque along the gingival
[a aui on iuale anbed ou sieui 0 ae ' ot 0 jo aeos e sasn i sur
margin. Grade 1 indicates plaque adhering to the free gingival margin visible only when a
probe is run across the tooth surface. Grade 2 indicates a moderate accumulation of soft
deposits within the gingival pocket, on the gingival margins and/or adjacent tooth
surface, which can be seen without staining or use of a probe. Grade 3 indicates an
 A plaque index commonly used in veterinary dentistry is based on the percentage of
the buccal aspect of the crown covered by plaque. A score of 1 means that up to 25% of
the buccal aspect is covered by plaque, a score of 2 indicates 25-49% coverage, a score
of 3 indicates 50-74% coverage, and a score of 4 indicates 75-100%.
The Gingival Index {GI) is used to assess gingival inflammation. It uses a scale of 0 to
3. Grade 0 indicates no inflammation. Grade 1 indicates mild inflammation with slight
edema, slight change in color, and no bleeding on probing. Grade 2 indicates moderate
inflammation with redness, edema, glazing, and bleeding on probing. Grade 3 indicates
severe inflammation, marked redness, edema, ulceration, and a tendency for spontaneous
hemorrhage.
127 The gross appearance of oral squamous cel carcinoma (SCC) may vary from promi-
nent exophytic lesions to flat, ulcerative lesions. As can also be seen in 165, chronic oral
ulceration or non-healing wounds are suspicious for SCC and should be biopsied. Bone
infiltration is variable in the dog but usually very prominent in the cat, with relatively
little of the tumor being visible in the oral cavity. The radiologic findings of SCC also
or new bone formation.
The biologic behavior of SCC is very species- and site-dependent. In general, SCC in
the cat carries a much worse prognosis compared with the dog, with local recurrence due
to deep infiltration being the most important cause of treatment failure. Regional lymph
node and distant metastasis of SCC of the gingiva is rare, while metastasis of tonsillar
and sublingual SCC is common. In general, SCC of the rostral part of the oral cavity is
associated with the best prognosis, not only because of its biologic behavior but also
because it is technically easier to obtain tumor-free surgical margins. The response of
SCC to radiation therapy is good in the dog and poor in the cat.
126
128, 129: Questions
128
128 i. What lesion of equine teeth is evident here (128)?
i. At what stage would this lesion become clinically evident, and what would be the
presenting signs?
129
129 i. Name these three types of commonly used manual endodontic instruments (129).
ii. Describe the purpose of each, how they are fabricated and used, and their relative
strength.
127
128, I29: Answers
128 i. Cemental necrosis is the equine equivalent of caries and arises by dissolution of
hypoplastic cementum and the enamel which encircle the two infundibular lakes in each
maxillary cheek tooth. There are no infundibula in the mandibular teeth and therefore
this condition is confined to the maxilla. Although the disorder can be seen in 80% of
horses aged 15 years and over, only a tiny minority of these animals will show clinical
signs. In order of frequency, lesions are seen in cheek teeth {CT) 4, 5, 1, 2, 3, and 6
i. It is only when the necrosis reaches the pulp chamber that the tooth becomes devital-
ized, and even then the infection may be contained in some instances. Extension of infec-
pathologic fractures of the teeth along a line of weakness between the infundibular lakes
accelerate this process. The suppuration in tissues adjacent to the tooth roots is respon-
sible for some cases of secondary empyema of the maxillary sinuses.
Horses with maxillary periapical dental abscessation, regardless of mode of origin, are
likely to present with a facial swelling, possibly with discharging tracts when CT 1-3 are
diseased and secondary maxillary sinusitis with a putrid nasal discharge when CT 46
are involved. In clinical practice, almost all facial swellings which arise rostral to the
rostral limit of the facial crest are caused by dental abscessation, and yet very few swell-
ings caudal to this line (i.e. over the maxillary sinuses) themselves arise through peri-
apical suppuration. Only those patients where displaced fragments of tooth irritate the
oral mucosa are likely to show evidence of dysphagia.
129 i. The instruments pictured are, from top to bottom, a reamer, a Hedstrom file, and
a Kerr file or K-file.
i. Endodontic reamers and files help to remove pulp from the root canal, but they are
primarily used to debride the contaminated dentin lining the root canal and to shape it
for convenient filling; they are available in different styles, lengths, and diameters.
Reamers are an early edition of the file, but are still preferred by some practitioners.
They are twisted, square metal rods with fewer flutes or twists per millimeter than a file.
Reamers are designed to be used in a twisting, auger-like motion that carries filings from
the depth of the canal to the access site.
The two most common styles of files are the Kerr file (K-file) and the Hedstrom file.
The shape of a Hedstrom file is that of inner-stacked cones. Its carrier effect is produced
by a straight pull of the file. Hedstrom files produce a clean, but not cylindrical or
smooth, wall. They are best used to cleanse and shape the coronal portion of the canal.
The K-file is similar in design to a reamer, but has a tighter twist and is operated either
in a push-and-pull motion or by being rotated clockwise 90° and pulled coronally. It will
break easily if lodged tightly in the canal, and also if twisted counterclockwise in an
effort to dislodge an embedded file. K-files produce a clean, smooth, cylindrical canal
wall and, because of their design, are best used to cleanse and shape the apical portion of
the canal.
K-files are stiffer and stronger, size for size, than the Hedstrom files because of their
style of manufacture. To create K-files, a square, rhomboid or triangular rod is twisted,
creating cutting flutes. A Hedstrom file is created when a spiral groove is machined into
the rod. It is weaker than a K-file because its central core has been reduced in diameter.
128
130-132: Questions
130 RC-PrepTM (Premier Dental Products
130
Co., Norristown, PA) is a viscous liquid
compound consisting of 15% ethylene-
diamine tetra-acetic acid {EDTA)and
10% urea-peroxide in a water-soluble
base (130)
i. How is RC-PrepIM supplied, and what is
its purpose?
ii. How is this product used?
10733-152713
Dremler
rc-prep
18gm.
131 You are looking at an
131
intraoral radiograph of an
eight-year-old Basenji (131).
The marker dot is elevated on
the film as you view it.
i. What is the designation of the
three-rooted tooth indicated by
the arrow, according to the
modified Triadan system?
ii. What are the advantages of
using the Triadan system?
i. What are the disadvantages
of using the Triadan system?
and polishing. The owners report that the cat is healthy and the dental disease does not
appear to bother the cat; he has an excellent appetite. The cat has periodontal disease, is
thin and tachycardic (>200 beats per minute), and a systolic murmur is heard over the
left apex. In reviewing the medical records, the cat weighed 5.9 kg three years ago and
presently weighs 4.5 kg.
i. What would you specifically evaluate on your physical examination?
ii. What diagnostic tests are indicated?
129
130-132: Answers
130 i. Either in 15 ml curved-tip syringes or in 18 g or 227 g bulk jars, which are less
expensive. It is a chelating and lubricating material that will soften inorganic debris and
lubricate the endodontic file. It is used during the initial root canal preparation.
i. RC-PrepTM is either deposited through the access site into the pulp chamber with the
curved-tip syringe or delivered to the root canal on the tip of an endodontic file during
root canal preparation in standard root canal therapy. If a bulk jar is used, a small
amount is first transferred from the bulk jar to a clean sponge or a gauze pad. It is then
deposited onto the file tip. RC-PrepiM is used either by itself or it may be used
alternating, during root canal preparation, with irrigation solutions such as 2.6-5.25%
sodium hypochlorite, physiologic saline solution or REDTA@ (Roth International Ltd,
Chicago,IL).
131 i. Number 207. It is the left maxillary third premolar that happens to have three
roots. The second premolar is absent. The Triadan system utilizes a three-digit number
to designate each tooth. Quadrants are designated by the first digit and rotate from right
maxilla → left maxilla → left mandible → right mandible; the rotation is designated with
numbers 1 through 4. The quadrant numbering continues with numbers 5 through 8 for
primary teeth. Each individual tooth has a two-digit designation, beginning with 01 for
the first incisor {the one closest to the midline) and continuing in ascending order to the
distal end of the arch in each quadrant. In the dog, the last maxillary tooth is normally
number 10 and the last mandibular tooth is normally number 11.
The *Rule of Four and Nine? is used to provide consistency among varying species.
The number 04 always designates a canine and the number 09 always designates a first
molar. The number normally used for a tooth that is not included in the dental formula
of a given species is not used on its chart. For example, in the cat, which normally does
not have the maxillary first premolar, the numbers 105 and 205 are not used. This
system works for dogs, cats, rodents, pigs, horses, cattle, sheep, etc.
i. (1) The Triadan system is adaptable to computer use. (2) Each tooth has a unique
number; there is no confusion when referring to left, right, maxillary, or mandibular
  ss j  e   n    si  a ih 
with a reduced dentition. (4) It is convenient to use in conjunction with anatomic charts.
mi. {1) The Triadan system is difficult to remember if not used on a regular basis. (2)
Tooth function and anatomic connotation are not identified by the number.
132 i. Palpation for the presence of a thyroid nodule.
i. The patient should have a minimum database (CBC, biochemical profile, urinalysis)
before general anesthesia. The signalment and history are compatible with
hyperthyroidism; a serum T4 should be measured regardless of whether a thyroid nodule
is present or not. Anesthesia for an elective procedure should be delayed until the cat is
treated for the hyperthyroidism, if present. If the cat is not hyperthyroid, an alternative
explanation for the weight loss, tachycardia, and cardiac murmur should be identified
130
133. 134: Questions
133a
133b
133 What is the anatomic-zoologic im-
133c
portance of the small teeth shown
(133a-c)?
134a
134 i. What radiographic technique is being used here (134a) for taking a radiograph of
the mandibular first molar in a dog?
ii. Where in the oral cavity can it be used?
ii. Describe this technique.
131
I33, I34: Answers
133 The most mesial maxillary premolar in the cat is the second premolar. The normal
dental formula of the cat is identical with that of virtually all other members of the
Family Felidae, Subfamily Felinae, namely:
13:C1:P3:M1=30
3
2
The maxillary second premolar (P2max) has received considerable attention from
zoologists, its absence being interpreted as indicating a tendency towards reduced
dentition in the cat, as compared with the original carnivore dentition. The P2max was
found to be absent in 3.428.4% of cat populations worldwide, and it was postulated
that the tendency towards absence of P2max increased from North to South. The tooth
is also frequently absent in the cheetah {Acinoryx jubatus), caracal {Felis caracal),
manul (Otocolobus manul), leopard cat (Felis bengalensis), and lynx (Lynx lynx and L.
rufus). The tooth varies considerably in size and position. The P2max is generally
described as a single-rooted tooth, although two (often fused) roots occur. In one study,
20% of P2max present had a dichotomous or partly fused double root, while 2% had
two fully formed roots. This is of clinical importance if extraction of this tooth is
indicated.
Illustrated are three cat skulls with {133a) unilateral absence of P2maxL and a
normally shaped P2maxR; (133b) bilaterally present P2max with dichotomous roots;
and (133c) bilaterally present P2max with fully formed double roots.
134 i. The parallel technique, which is
134b
one of the two basic intraoral radio-
Dental X-ray unit
graphic techniques (134b).
ii. The parallel technique is a very
accurate technique but it can only be used
if the dental film can be placed parallel to
the tooth, which may be difficult due to
the shape of the oral cavity. Using intra-
X-ray beam
orally placed dental films, the only teeth
Long
in the dog or cat that allow film place-
axis of
tooth
ment parallel to their roots are the man-
dibular premolars and molars. The paral-
Mandibular
lel technique is also used for the extra-
1st molar
oral view of the maxillary premolars and
molar in the cat.
. The intraoral film packet is placed parallel to the tooth being radiographed. The
plane of the film should be parallel to the plane of the tooth. The central X-ray beam is
directed perpendicular to the structure being radiographed and the film. If you notice
that a slight angle is formed by the tooth and the film, a satisfactory film will be
produced by directing the central X-ray beam perpendicular to the tooth. If the angle is
greater than 15°, then a bisecting angle technique should be used (see 94). The
radiographic image will be elongated if the bisecting angle technique is not used.
132
135, 136: Questions
135 This is a low-magnifica-
135
tion,cross-sectional view of a
dog's tooth root (135)
i. What cell layers are visible in
the pulp?
ii. What nerve fibers are present
in the pulp, and what is their
clinical significance?
136 This dog had a history of a
136
shifting limb lameness. In addi-
tion to findings noted in the
oral cavity (136), the clinical
and laboratory examination re-
vealed lethargy, mild peripheral
lymphadenopathy, mild fever,
and confirmed proteinuria with
no other abnormalities on a
complete urinalysis. The results
of a complete blood count and
biochemical profile were within
normal limits.
i. This patient should be evalu-
ated for which autoimmune
disease?
i. Which diagnostic tests are
indicated to evaluate for auto-
immune disease?
133
135, 136: Answers
135 i. The most peripheral layer consists of the odontoblasts, which are closely asso-
ciated with the predentin and dentin {see 3, 70, and 109). The odontoblasts are
columnar in the pulp chamber and more cuboidal in the root canal. Under the
odontoblasts is the cell-free zone {of Weil), which typically is fairly wide in the dog. The
next layer is the cell-rich zone, which contains fibroblasts and undifferentiated
mesenchymal cells. Intertwined with this zone is the parietal nerve plexus layer {or
subodontoblastic plexus of Raschkow). The fibroblasts form the pulp matrix, while the
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells may become involved in the production of tertiary
dentin. The pulp proper or pulp core consists of loose connective tissue and contains the
large blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves.
i. The dental pulp is richly innervated and contains sensory and postganglionic sym-
pathetic fibers, which can be divided as relatively large-diameter, myelinated A-β and A-
  fibers, and small-diameter, unmyelinated C-fibers. The terminal nerve fibers lose their
myelin sheath and arborize to form the plexus of Raschkow, with a few A-& axons con-
tinuing between the odontoblasts and accompanying the odontoblastic processes in the
dentinal tubules. This partially explains why dentin is sensitive. Stimulation of the A-8
fibers is responsible for momentary, sharp, provoked, and localizable pain. This is indi-
cative of a vital pulp with an intact pulpodentinal complex. As pulpitis progresses and
the pulp degenerates, C-fiber pain predominates; this is characterized by a more con-
Stant, diffuse, throbbing pain.
136 i. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease that affects multi-
ple organ systems. Polyarthritis and/or polymyositis are common in SLE and may result
in a stiff gait or a shifting limb lameness. Cutaneous lesions are common and include
lesions affecting the body, limbs, head, mucocutaneous junctions, and oral cavity.
Major signs of SLE include non-erosive polyarthritis, polymyositis, bullous dermatitis,
proteinuria, and immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and/or thrombocytopenia and/or
leukopenia. Minor signs include oral ulceration, pleuritis, myocarditis, pericarditis, peri-
pheral lymphadenopathy, fever of unknown origin, dementia, and seizures.
i. The diagnosis of SLE is based on a combination of clinical signs and laboratory tests.
The extent of the diagnostic evaluation is determined by the clinical signs and initial
laboratory database. Serologic tests used to support a diagnosis of SLE include an in-
direct fluorescent antinuclear antibody test (ANA test) and lupus erythematosus cell test
(LE cell test). The diagnosis of SLE is usually made when two major signs are present
with a positive serologic test. A probable diagnosis is made when one major sign and a
 positive serologic test are present or two major signs with negative serologic tests. When
evaluating the results of ANA and LE cell test results the laboratory should be consulted
to determine the significance of the ANA titers and the possibilities for false-positive
and false-negativeresults.
134
137, 138: Questions
137
137 An eight-year-old horse has sustained a traumatic injury to the left mandible and,
apart from an acute swelling in the region, there is an open wound at the ventral aspect
of the jaw. A lateral radiograph confirms a fracture which appears to involve the roots
of the third cheek tooth (137). Suggest how this case should be managed.
138 i.What are the two instruments
138
shown (138)?
ii. What is the difference between them?
ii. How are they each used?
13.5
137, 138: Answers
137 Fracture of the body of the mandible should always be considered in cases of acute
swelling of the jaw. External palpation, intraoral examination, and a careful radio-
graphic investigation are used for diagnosis. The principles which relate to the treatment
of facial trauma are no different to those which apply to other wounds: control of
hemorrhage and preservation of vital functions such as respiration in the acute phase;
anatomic restoration and restoration of normal dental occlusion; removal of devitalized
tissue; and control of secondary infection. It is rare for facial wounds to be so severe
wounds over the sinuses may necessitate removal of loose bone fragments and debride-
ment of gross contamination. An implanted irrigation catheter can be a useful measure
to flush away blood and debris and should always be used when the sinus wall has sus-
tained a full-thickness penetration. The provision of broad-spectrum antibiotic cover
during the immediate post-traumatic period should be routine. Most bone fragments
retain periosteal or endosteal attachments and heal uneventfully, but occasionally
devitalization leads to sequestration with a discharge to the nose or skin surface. These
should be dealt with by surgical removal as and when they arise. Grossly deforming
depression fractures should be treated by elevation as soon as possible after the trauma,
otherwise a fibrous union will form in a matter of days. Many fractures of the mandible
show little displacement of the bone fragments and surgical fixation is often not neces-
sary. However, teeth may be devitalized either by infection through the fracture line or
on radiographic findings, but this should be delayed at least until a firm fibrous union
of the fracture site is present. Attempts to extract before this time may exacerbate any
displacement of the mandibular fragments.
138 i. The instrument on the left is an endodontic plugger and the instrument on the
right is an endodontic spreader. These instruments can come on long handles such as
these, as double-ended instruments, or as finger instruments with a short working tip
and a finger grip for use in small teeth. They come in various widths and lengths of the
workingtip.
i. The plugger has a blunt end to the working tip and the spreader has the pointed tip.
. The plugger is designed to push gutta-percha towards the apex during root canal
obturation. With its blunt tip it presses against the gutta-percha and condenses it ver-
tically. It can be used with heated gutta-percha placed into the canal and then con-
densed vertically, seating a single gutta-percha point apically or in true vertical conden-
sation techniques where sized pluggers are used to condense sections of sized gutta-
percha into the root canal.
The spreader is designed to compress gutta-percha laterally during obturation. The
working tip can be warmed or used cold and is slid down alongside the gutta-percha to
condense it laterally against the canal wall. Additional gutta-percha is placed either with
warm gutta-percha techniques or using additional gutta-percha points that is again con-
densed laterally with the spreader. This process is repeated until the canal is completely
filled. Using either or both instruments during root canal obturation creates a denser fill
and can optimize filling irregularities in the canal.
136
139-I4l: Questions
139 This is an example of a
139
porcelain-veneer bridge used for
the replacement of a traumati
cally lost maxillary second in-
cisor in a dog (139). How
would you classify this type of
bridge, and name its compo-
nents?
140 Changes affecting one section of the dentition can affect other areas. This is more
important in species with aradicular hypsodont teeth than those with brachyodont teeth
sion).
i. What effects may incisor overgrowth have on the aradicular hypsodont cheek teeth
(premolars and molars) of rabbits and chinchillas?
i. What effect will intraoral overgrowth of the cheek teeth of the above-mentioned
species have on their incisor occlusion? What is different in the case of a guinea pig?
. What force is required to arrest the eruption of aradicular hypsodont rabbit and
rodent teeth?
iv. What happens to continuously growing teeth if eruption is arrested?
141 During the examination of a horse on
141
behalf of a prospective purchaser, an oral
inspection was performed to assess age
and oral conformation. What significance
should be attached to the pattern of wear
found on the incisor teeth (141)?
137
139-141: Answers
139 A three-unit, fixed-fixed bridge: it is a one-piece bridge with the retainers fixed at
either end of the pontic, consisting of three dental units. The portion of the bridge
replacing the missing second incisor is known as the pontic. The pontic is suspended by
two retainers, in this case jacket crowns, placed on the abutment teeth, the first and
third incisors. The connecting porcelain (known as joints) between the retainers and
pontic are stained to create the illusion of interdental spaces.
140 i. The main two effects are: (1) Overgrown incisor teeth tend to interfere with the
action of the jaw, preventing normal chewing movements fprincipally side-to-side in
rabbits, rostral to caudal in rodents); this can result in abnormal wear of the cheek
teeth. (2) The mouth is prevented from closing fully; this interferes with cheek tooth
function reducing wear of these teeth and permitting intraoral overgrowth of the cheek
teeth.
i. It prevents a return to normal occlusion once the incisor problem is alleviated unless
the whole dentition is assessed and treated appropriately. Primary cheek tooth
Overgrowth, as occurs when an insufficiently abrasive diet is fed to the true herbivores
being discussed, prevents full closure of the mouth. As a result there is secondary
overgrowth of the incisors which may no longer function normally. The occlusal planes
of rabbit and chinchilla cheek teeth are almost horizontal, so overgrowth of these teeth
simply forces the mouth open. In the guinea pig the occlusal planes are at an angle of
about 30°. This angulation, combined with the rostrocaudal divergence of the dental
arcades, creates a rostral force on the mandible as the mouth is forced open by the
overgrown teeth. As the temporomandibular articulation of rodents permits a wide
range of rostral displacement, the mandible is forced into a prognathic alignment so the
incisor teeth no longer occlude at a normal angle.
to the intrusion of the teeth back into their sockets.
iv. The aradicular hypsodont teeth of rabbits, guinea pigs, and chinchillas continue
growing even when eruption is arrested. This results in root elongation. As the peri-
apical germinal tissues penetrate deeper into their supporting structure, influences from
their new, abnormal, environment tend to influence the growing teeth, leading to root
deformity. If the cause persists, the root apices of these teeth will eventually penetrate all
the way through their supporting bone. At this stage the animals usually show evidence
of pain and there is palpable swelling on the ventral surface of the mandible
141 The pattern of wear on the first incisors arose by abrasion and is highly suggestive
that the horse is a crib-biter and/or wind-sucker. In many countries it is the legal res-
ponsibility of a vendor to declare whether or not a horse is free from stable vices
(stereotypic behavior). However, in the face of the findings shown, the examining
veterinarian should observe the resting horse carefully for any tendency to display these
stereotypes, and in any event the client should be advised of the possible significance of
the dental changes.
138
142, 143: Questions
142 The clinical appearance of
142
dental caries in a dog is shown
(142).
i. Define dental caries, and
 comment on the etiology.
ii. Describe the clinical aspects
of dental caries in the dog and
cat.
143 This is an intraoperative view of a
143
partial maxillectomy in a dog (143). The
tumor in question was diagnosed as a
squamous cell carcinoma, and mandibular
lymph node palpation and thoracic radio-
graphs showed no obvious signs of meta-
stasis. This surgical procedure is designed
to effect a 'surgical cure'. How do you
decide what to remove, and how do you
go about removing sufficient tissue?
139
I42, I43: Answers
142 i. In a broad sense, dental caries is defined as a microbial disease of the calcified
tissues of the tooth, characterized by demineralization of the inorganic portion and
destruction of the organic substance of the tooth. The etiology is complex and there is
bacteria, and the role of chelation.
i. In dogs, the most common type and site of dental caries is occlusal caries (G.V. Black
type I) affecting the mandibular and maxillary molars. The fissured areas of the occlusal
surfaces of these teeth provide an ideal harbor for the microorganisms causing caries.
Once the dentinoenamel junction is reached, the caries lesion spreads into the dentin,
undermining the enamel, while at the same time moving towards the pulp. The under-
mined enamel may fracture. Inflamed or exposed pulp is associated with pain.
In dogs, the typical early chalky-white, soft lesions are often overlooked. Dental
caries is generally diagnosed in an advanced stage: multiple, highly pigmented yellow or
brown lesions affecting several (pre)molars with a hard, leathery, or sclerosed surface.
As soon as a clinically detectable dental caries lesion has occurred, the choice of treat-
ment is restorative dentistry or extraction, depending on the extent of the lesion.
Cervical dental caries occurs on either buccal, lingual, or interproximal surfaces. In
dogs with gingival recession or severe periodontal disease the dental caries process may
readily commence in the exposed cementum or dentin (root caries).
True caries in cats is rare; feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions are a different dental
disease.
143 The tissue must be removed “en-bloc', because there are no simple surgical limits in
the maxilla to follow. For a squamous cell carcinoma, a 10-mm margin of grossly
normal tissue beyond the lesion is recommended as the minimal amount to resect.
Standard radiographs do not reveal sufficient detail to define three-dimensional ab-
normalities, especially in a complicated structure like the maxilla and nasal cavity. CT
scans are more useful in this respect, though the grossly palpable and visible limits are
usually the only help at hand. Once the extent of the resection is decided, incisions
through soft tissue and bone are made with scalpel (for soft tissue) and dental bur or
Osteotome (for bone) to isolate the tissue. This often requires transecting major vessels
and risking extensive hemorrhage. Knowing where the major vessels (infraorbital artery,
palatine artery, sphenopalatine artery, facial artery) run is essential. If the hemorrhage
cannot be stopped by pressure or identification and clamping of a specific vessel, ligate
the carotid artery on that side through an incision in the neck rather than risk injury to
deeper tissues {especially nerves) by chasing the source of hemorrhage directly. The
closure of the oronasal defect created during a maxillectomy is surprisingly simple in
most cases, provided that the mucosa of the cheek is not involved. The buccal mucosa is
dissected so as to form a tension-free flap that is sutured to the palatal incised edge. If
the buccal mucosa is not available to form a flap to cover the defect, it is necessary to be
more creative. In some cases, tissue from the lower lip can be used.
140
I44, I45: Questions
144
144 What are the treatment options for the malocclusion in this one-year-old dog
(144)?
145
145 A ten-year-old, male castrated Welsh Corgi is presented for depression and loss of
appetite. Physical examination reveals the presence of severe periodontitis (severe gin-
gival inflammation and recession, grossly mobile teeth, severe halitosis) and associated
buccal mucosal inflammation (145). The patient appears slightly depressed and painful
 On oral examination. No other significant abnormalities are found on physical examina-
tion.
i. What is your initial assessment of and plan for this patient?
ii. When is anesthesia and management of this patient's oral disease an appropriate plan
of action?
141
I44, 145: Answers
144 The treatment options for linguoversion of the mandibular canines and other
malocclusion syndromes causing palatal trauma (see 33) include: {1) orthodontic treat-
ment; (2) crown-height reduction; and {3) extraction. The therapeutic decision-making
is based on the dental expertise available, predictability of results, required follow-up
examination, desire to maintain normal structure, and expense.
Various methods for orthodontic correction of linguoversion of mandibular canines
have been described and are being used. An acrylic inclined-plane bite plate is one of the
more commonly used techniques. The acrylic appliance, which can be made by a dental
laboratory based on impressions and stone models, or directly made in the oral cavity,
is placed on the maxilla, which allows the palate to heal. Metal inclined planes and
various types of expansion devices are also used. The disadvantage of orthodontic cor-
rection include the expense, multiple anesthesias, and plaque accumulation underneath
the appliance. However, the main advantage is that the canine teeth are moved atrau-
matically and predictably into the correct or into a non-traumatic position.
Surgical crown-height reduction of the mandibular canines to a level which takes
them out of palatal occlusion, followed by a capping the vital pulp is another option.
This procedure may fail if pulp necrosis occurs. It is controversial how common this
complication is, which makes follow-up examination imperative, even though it neces-
sitates another anesthesia and adds to the cost.
A third option is extraction of the mandibular canines. The mandibular canines occu-
py a major part of the rostral aspect of the mandibles, and extraction weakens the struc-
ture considerably. In addition, the tongue may hang out if the mandibular canines are
absent.
Note that all orthodontic problems must be considered hereditary except in cases of
malocclusion following known injury during development. Genetic counseling is there-
fore generally indicated and neutering may be recommended.
145 i. The history and clinical signs are non-specific findings. Depression and loss of
appetite may result from numerous problems including painful, inflamed, or infectious
oral diseases. A minimum database should be collected in this patient to evaluate for
specific problems (e.g. uremia) or evidence of a systemic disease. A complete blood
count, biochemical profile {renal parameters, hepatic enzymes, electrolytes, albumin,
globulins, glucose, phosphorus, calcium), and urinalysis should be evaluated.
i. If the minimum database is unremarkable, management of the severe periodontal
disease should be considered. The presenting problems of depression and appetite loss
may or may not be a result of the severe periodontal disease. Management of the perio-
dontal disease and evaluation of the patient's response to treatment will assist with the
evaluation of the presenting concern. Following treatment of severe periodontal disease
the patient may return to normal activities and appetite. If the patient does not respond,
additional diagnostic tests should be recommended.
142
146, 147: Questions
146
146 This tooth fractured eight hours ago when the dog tried to catch a rock (146))
i. List two endodontic treatment options for this tooth.
i. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each?
147
147 i. Describe the radiologic findings shown (147).
i. Is there any pathology present in this cat? If so, describe the abnormality and suggest
the cause.
ii. How would you determine if the described lesion(s) is/are associated with disease?
143
146, I47: Answers
146 i. (1) Elective total pulpectomy and root canal therapy. (2) A partial coronal
pulpectomy (pulpotomy) and vital pulp treatment.
i. The advantage of elective total pulpectomy and root canal therapy is its high long.
term success rate. One disadvantage of this treatment is that the procedure takes longer,
resulting in higher initial costs and longer anesthesia. Also, a non-vital, endodontically
treated tooth may be more prone to subsequent fracture. This effect is due mostly to the
tooth structure removed during access and canal preparation and also to the tooth
becoming more brittle due to the loss of the organic component. Another disadvantage
of pulpectomy of an immature tooth is that further maturation and dentin production is
arrested.
fore less costly. If successful, the pulp remains vital. For an immature tooth, this allows
the tooth to become stronger as secondary dentin is formed. A partial coronal pulpec-
tomy involves the atraumatic removal of the coronal 2-8 mm of pulp (depending on the
size of the tooth), both to eliminate contaminated tissue and to provide space for a
base such as a hard-setting Ca{OH),-material. Then a final leakage-free restoration is
placed.
Calcium hydroxide is generally accepted as the standard material for pulp capping.
Its very high pH causes superficial necrosis of the underlying pulp, but dentinal bridging
occurs underneath. Concern has recently been raised that CafOH), is not ideal, not only
because of its caustic effect but also because it interferes with the bond strength of the
overlying restoration. Alternative techniques and materials, e.g. mineral trioxide aggre-
gate, are under investigation. One disadvantage of vital procedures, whether performing
a partial coronal pulpectomy or merely a pulp ca pping, is their higher failure rate. If the
pulp were contaminated or suffering a traumatic, irreversible pulpitis, the tooth would
require full root canal therapy in the future. Vitally treated teeth should be monitored
for five or six years, as failures can occur long after treatment. Pulp vitality testing in
animals under clinical circumstances is difficult, and radiography remains the most
practical means of follow-up examination.
147 i. An immature tooth. The pulp chamber and root canal are wide and there is only
a thin layer of dentin present. Tooth root development is incomplete. Tooth root length
i. In this instance there is no obvious pathology. The tooth is healthy on clinical exam-
ination and the extent of tooth root development is as expected in a young cat. The in-
complete root development with an open apex is often mistaken for a pathologic lesion.
If this radiograph had been of a canine tooth in an adult cat, it would have represented
pathology. A vital pulp is required for continued tooth root development. Conse-
quently, injury resulting in pulpal necrosis would have stopped tooth root development
mature/adult animal.
m. If one suspects pulpal pathology, a contralateral radiograph would be indicated to
determine if both teeth were at the same stage of development.
144
148, 149: Questions
148
148 The illustration (148) shows a seven-year-old dog with a right suborbital draining
sinus tract.
i. What are the possible dental and non-dental causes of this syndrome?
ii. What is the recommended treatment for each of the listed dental ca uses?
149 This is a three-year-old,
149
Quarter Horse filly. What den-
tal procedure is indicated from
this picture (149)?
14.5
148, I49: Answers
148 i. Dental causes: (1) Periapical abscess of the distal, mesiobuccal, or palatal root (or
the mesial root of the right maxillary first molar. (4) Periapical abscess of the distal root
of the right maxillary third premolar. {S) Combined periodontal-endodontic lesion of
any or all of the above three teeth.
Non-dental causes: (1) Soft-tissue fight wound abscess. (2) Foreign-body abscess, such
as a gunshot wound or wood impaction. (3) Maxillary fracture and bone sequestration.
(4) Nasal or maxillary neoplasia.
i. Causes 1-3. Standard endodontic treatment of teeth affected with peria pical abscess is
indicated, if the teeth are solid and tooth root(s) are not fractured. This procedure may
need to be performed in conjunction with surgical endodontic treatment in one or two
stages, depending on the severity and chronicity of the infection. If the tooth or teeth are
not salvageable, extraction is indicated along with appropriate debridement, irrigation,
and closure of the socket. If only standard root canal therapy is performed, the draining
wound should also be treated and the client advised that subsequent surgical root canal
therapy may be required. If the sinus tract is secondary to failed standard root canal
therapy, either the tooth should be reinstrumented or surgical endodontics performed, or
both. An alternative is extraction of the tooth, debridement of the socket and the sinus
tract, and closure of the extraction site.
In small animal dentistry, surgical endodontic treatment is necessary in a very small
percent of endodontic cases and is most commonly needed in patients with recurrent
  o   r ss    
            
canal treatments on dogs, only 1.5% required surgical endodontic treatment. Indications
for surgical root canal therapy include failure of standard root canal therapy to resolve
periapical abscessation and intraoperative complications of standard root canal therapy.
Cause 4. If a periodontal-endodontic lesion exists, the tooth or teeth must be treated for
both periodontal and endodontic disease in order to achieve a successful, stable condi-
tion. The prognosis is much worse if the tooth is mobile, in which case extraction should
be considered.
149 The left maxillary first incisor is a persistent deciduous tooth and should be ex-
tracted. A persistent deciduous incisor should be extracted if any of the following condi-
tions are present: (1) The contralateral incisor is permanent and in wear. (2) The oppos-
ing incisor is permanent and in wear. {3) The permanent incisor has erupted behind the
deciduous incisor.
In this case, all three conditions are present. The deciduous tooth can be extracted by
elevation or luxation. The mesial aspect of the second incisor should be rasped off,
creating an opening so the permanent incisor can move facially, creating good occlusion.
It is also common for a fragment of an unexfoliated deciduous crown or root to
remain in place. The fragment may be removed by making an incision over it, elevating
the gingiva off the fragment, and then elevating under the fragment. Frayed gingival
edges should be trimmed.
146
150, 151: Questions
150 How are impression materials classified? Give a concise, systematic classification of
the various materials.
151a
151b
151 i. Seen here are two examples of what condition in the dog (151a, b)?
ii. Where else in the oral cavity may lesions of similar origin be found?
i. What is the recommended treatment?
147
150, 151: Answers
150 There are several ways by which impression materials can be classified. One way is
to classify them according to whether the hardening process is reversible or irreversible,
or chemically or temperature-induced, and whether the resulting product is elastic or
inelastic. The inelastic materials are rarely used as impression materials in veterinary
dentistry, except for bite registration.
Rigid(inelastic)Elastic
Set by chemical reaction
Plaster
[rreversible hydrocolloids (alginates)
{irreversible)
Zinc oxide
Non-aqueous elastomers
 Set by temperature change
Wax
Reversible hydrocolloids
(reversible)
The elastic impression materials include the irreversible hydrocolloids, better known as
the alginates, which are commonly used in veterinary dentistry. The reversible hydro
colloids are commonly briefly referred to as hydrocolloids. They are rarely used in
veterinary dentistry. The non-aqueous elastomers are rubber-like materials. They are
further classified as follows:
Types of non-aqueous
Comments
elastomers
Polyether
e.g. Impregum-F@ (Espe America)
Polys ulfide
Also known as rubber-based materials
Condensation polymerizing silicone
 Largely replaced by the addition polymerizing
silicones
Addition polymerizing silicone
Better known as vinyl polysiloxane,
e.g. ExpressTM(3MTM), President
(Coltene/Whaledent), Reprosil@ (Caulk)
Light-cured elastomers
Single-component light-activated, used with
transparent trays
Vinyl polysiloxane materials are commonly used in veterinary dentistry. They are gener-
ally available in three viscosities: heavy body or putty; regular body or medium vis-
cosity; and light body, low viscosity or ^wash'.
151 i. These are examples of labial and buccal mucosal hyperplasia of self-inflicted,
traumatic origin, commonly known as *gum-chewing lesions'. Originally described in
small, excessively barking dog breeds, it may be found in other breeds, as well as in cats.
i. Excessive loose mucosal folds and indurated hyperplastic mucosa may also be found
sublingually.
i. Surgical excision is indicated in selected cases. Resected tissue should be submitted
for histopathologic exa mination to confirm the diagnosis and exclude neoplasia.
148
152, I53: Questions
152 A prosthetic crown is a
152
restoration which replaces a
part of the natural crown. What
are the indications to perform a
crown prosthesis in the dog?
153
153 i. What technical errors caused by incorrect positioning can be seen on this radio-
graph (153)?
i. Explain how the tooth length can appear incorrect on the radiograph.
i. Describe a technique for obtaining a better image of the two mesial roots of the
maxillary fourth premolar.
149
152, 153: Answers
152 The main general indications for prosthetic crowns are fractured teeth, extensively
decayed teeth, or teeth that cannot withstand normal attrition. The dentition of domes-
tic dogs {and cats) maintains its function even if parts of the dentition are missing or not
functional. A crown fracture with pulp exposure requires endodontic treatment but
prosthodontic build-up of the crown is optional. The role of a prosthetic crown in the
restoration of the normal gingival contour was discussed in 43.
Fractured teeth should be restored if they are important to the normal function of a
working dog. In working dogs, reduced crown height often leads to a diminished biting
ability and to a functional handicap. A canine tooth that is shorter than normal, how-
ever, does not always cause problems in a working dog. If the remaining coronal por-
tion of the tooth is healthy and long enough, and the dog is functioning well during
training, crowning is not essential. However, there will always be a risk of repeated
fracture of that canine tooth or fracture of one of the other canine teeth because the
normal balance of the biting grip with four canine teeth has been lost. Furthermore, the
exposed dentin will easily and more rapidly wear down.
Another indication for a prosthetic crown is to prevent further breakdown of the
remaining tooth structure to prevent coronal fracture, for example: {1) in cage-biting
dogs with worn canine teeth on the distal aspect (cage-biter syndrome); (2) in dogs with
severely abraded teeth caused by destructive behavior like chewing on rocks or fences;
and {3) in dogs with very extensive caries, severe pitting, or hypoplasia of the dental
hard tissue.
Show dogs with a missing tooth do not need a prosthetic device for dental function.
However, applying a prosthetic crown creates a normal esthetic appearance.
153 i. The main error seen here is elongation. In addition, superimposition of the two
mesial roots of the maxillary fourth premolar is evident, which is the normal result of
the standard lateral view of the maxillary fourth premolar. Some cone-cutting has
occurred on the mesial aspect of the film, because the X-ray cone was not centered on
thefilm.
i. Foreshortening or elongation occurs if the X-ray beam is not perpendicular to the
bisecting angle plane. Foreshortening of the film image may result if the X-ray beam is
directed too steep, or more perpendicular to the plane of the film, similar to the shadow
effect of midday sun on a tree. Elongation of the film image results if the X-ray beam is
directed too low, or more perpendicular to the long axis of the tooth, creating the
shadow effect of early morning or late afternoon sun on a tree.
m. The standard lateral view of the ma xillary fourth premolar results in an image with
the two mesial roots superimposed. In order to separate these two roots, an additional,
slightly oblique view is indicated. "SLOB' is an acronym for Same/Lingual -
Opposite/Buccal and refers to the direction of the incoming X-ray beam as an aid in
identification of roots of multirooted teeth. The root on the radiograph closest to the
incoming X-ray beam is the more lingual (palatal) root. When the radiograph is taken
with the X-ray beam directed slightly from caudally, the mesiopalatal root will be pro-
jected distally to the mesiobuccal root.
1.50
154, 155: Questions
154 i. Why is an impression
154
tray used (154)?
ii. What are the important
characteristics of impression
trays?
155a
155 Diagnosis of dental problems in rabbits and rodents is difficult due to the behavior
of the patient, and size and anatomy of the region of interest making examination
difficult.
i. Radiography is especially useful for investigation of suspected and known dental
disease in rabbits and rodents. Which radiographic views are most useful?
ii. What type of radiogra phic film should be used, and why?
i. What obvious lesions are shown on this lateral radiograph of a rabbit with dental
disease (155a)?
151
154, I55: Answers
154 i. An impression tray is used to prevent distortion while taking the impression and
when pouring the stone model.
i. The most important characteristic of an impression tray is that the tray must be tri-
dimensionally stable. If the tray is not rigid enough, the hydraulic pressure will displace
the tray; when the impression is removed, the memory of the tray will rebound to its
original dimension, making the impression smaller than the actual teeth. A proper fit
should be ensured. The tray should have sufficient depth to allow impressions of the full
length of the canine teeth, and large enough to perform full-mouth impressions without
the tray contacting the teeth. A perforated tray is used for alginate while a solid tray
155 i. In the majority of cases a
155b
combination of lateral, dorsoven-
tral, and rostrocaudal radiographic
views of the head are most useful.
 In some cases, intraoral and oblique
views are also helpful.
i. Non-screen or dental film is most
appropriate for radiography of the
dentition as very high definition is
required to show the necessary fine
detail. Cassette film with high-
definition screens may give reason-
able results when examining large
rabbits but does not give high enough definition to make out the finest detail.
l. (1) This lateral radiograph shows that the rabbit has relative mandibular prognathism
resulting in malocclusion and abnormal wear of the incisor teeth. (2) Abnormal
functional forces are affecting the mandibular incisors tipping them ventrally, opening
the periodontal space on the dorsal aspect of their roots. (3) The same forces are
interfering with the eruption of the maxillary first incisors so their roots are elongating
with the periapical tissues starting to perforate the palatal cortex of the incisive bones. {4)
There is significant thinning of the cortical bone and distortion of the ventral mandibular
border where the elongated premolar and first molar tooth roots are elongating. This
was palpable in the conscious animal. (S) There is increased radiolucency around the
imperfectly superimposed root apices of the mandibular second molar teeth. (6) The
cheek tooth occlusal line is very irregular with obviously overgrown crowns on the
mandibular premolars with reduction of the crown height of the opposing teeth. (7) At
least one of the roots of the third maxillary premolar teeth has perforated its supporting
bony alveolar bulla.
Compare the radiographic features with those seen on the prepared skull from this
rabbit (155b). A piece of blue nylon thread has been placed in the lacrimal canal to show
its position. The roots of the first two maxillary premolars are perforating through the
maxillary zygomatic process. Also the roots of the next three teeth have all penetrated
through the alveolar bulla in the orbit.
1.52
156-158: Questions
156 This is a late two-year-old
156
horse (156). What corrective
dental procedures are indi-
cated?
157 How does dietary texture
157
affect the development of perio-
dontal disease in the dog and
cat (157)?
158 i. This is an example of a traumatic
158
condition, commonly seen in the cat
(158). What is it, and what syndrome can
it be part of?
i. What are the other possible maxillo-
facial components of this syndrome?
i. What are the treatment options for this
specific injury?
153
156-158: Answers
156 A second premolar cap (persistent deciduous second premolar) is present, as well as
a wolf tooth (first premolar). The cap should be extracted as there is a clean demar-
 e m pa si d ai aan sud  sop a uaig un
forceps and rolled lingually. If any root speckles are broken off, they will be on the
lingual side where the horse might work them out with its tongue. A good guideline for
eruption of the premolars is: Second premolars: 2 years, 8 months. Third premolars: 2
years, 10 months. Fourth premolars: 3 years, 8 months.
The wolf tooth should be extracted as some wolf teeth do cause problems with a bit,
and the second premolar cannot be properly beveled back, rounded, and smoothed (bit
seat) with the wolf tooth present.
157 A number of studies have provided evidence of an interaction between dietary
texture and oral hygiene in dogs and cats. The evidence in dogs suggests that soft foods
generally result in greater plaque and calculus accumulation than hard diets. However,
even on hard diets, periodontal disease is evident. In cats, there is some contradiction
between studies. In one study, cats developed little, if any, gingivitis or calculus if
started at an early age on dry foods. In contrast, another study, feeding a dry food com-
examined, but was associated with lower gingival inflammation for only one tooth. A
12-month study showed that the rate of calculus accumulation was greatest during the
first three months, irrespective of whether a dry or a wet food was fed. However, by 12
months the overall accumulation of calculus was higher for wet foods. Further research
is required to evaluate the effect of dietary texture on the development and progression
of periodontal disease.
158 i. A traumatic cleft of the hard palate, which can be part of the so-called high-rise
syndrome. This syndrome describes the injuries sustained, mainly by cats, falling at least
A cat usually falls in a splayed-leg position and lands on all four limbs; the head then
bounces against the landing surface.
i. (1) Soft tissue facial abrasions; avulsion of the lower lip. (2) Dental fractures. (3)
Mandibular fractures, in particular mandibular symphysis separation. (4) Temporo-
mandibular joint luxation and fracture of the condyloid process (see 83).
mi. Traumatic cleft of the hard palate in the cat can easily and effectively be managed by
approximating the displaced bony structures by gentle digital pressure, followed by
suturing of the torn palatal soft tissues in a simple interrupted pattern. Flushing and suc-
tioning the nasal cavity is indicated if large blood clots are present, which may have a
marked beneficial effect on the habitus and appetite of the patient. The benefit of this
initial management outweighs the risk inherent in leaving this injury to heal by second
intention, although this has been shown to be sufficient in most cases. However, occa-
sionally this healing does not take place and a persistent oronasal fistula results; the
latter condition is far more difficult to manage.
1.54
159-161: Questions
159
ii. What are the indications for periodontal flap surgery?
160 The radiograph shows a
160
fractured maxillary second in-
cisor in a horse {160). What is
the treatment of choice?
161 i. What is the purpose of dental charting?
ii. What are two general methods of demonstrating dental and soft tissue changes?
15.5
159-161: Answers
159 i. This is a periodontal flap.
ii. The primary indication is the presence of advanced periodontitis with deep infrabony
As d lad e ps e a aiss ae nu ae y sa
improves the access to deep pockets and allows better visualization and therefore a
greater cleanliness of the root surfaces. Secondarily, flap surgery is used as an approach
for bone grafting and guided-tissue regeneration. Flaps are also indicated for the
elimination of pockets through recontouring or removal of soft or hard tissue - often
called “resective therapy'. Flap surgery can also be used to reposition attached gingiva
and correct mucogingival defects. Root coverage, increasing the amount of keratinized
mucosa, and ridge augmentation fall under this category. Revision of tissue contour for
better hygiene is possible with flap surgery. These techniques can be used to improve the
environment for restorative or prosthetic treatment - such as in crown lengthening.
Gingival or periodontal abscesses can be drained or definitively treated with flaps. Flaps
may also be indicated to access a biopsy site.
160 The recommended treatment includes removal of the coronal fragment, endodontic
therapy, smoothing of the sharp edges, and filling with a suitable restorative. The treat-
ment objective is to keep the root remnant in place for a long enough period so that it
will slowly grow out of the socket, but prevent lateral drifting and tilting of the adjacent
teeth, providing an acceptable incisor occlusion requiring little aftercare. An apico-
ectomy is not necessary, since the “osteolytic process’ visible is not a pathologic phe-
nomenon but the projection of the incisive canal, a normal anatomic structure.
161 i. Dental charting is done to create a written record of the condition of the animal's
mouth. If a thorough charting is done each time the animal is presented for dental treat-
ment, progression or improvement of periodontal health status can be evaluated along
with tooth position, hard tissue changes such as caries, resorptive lesions, crown frac-
'  a s    s s o   '
inflammation or ulceration, are also noted on the chart. Dental treatments such as
extractions, endodontic treatment, restorations, root planing, or periodontal surgery
can also be noted on the chart for quick reference. Using an anatomic dental chart gives
a readily visible summary of what is happening in the mouth without having to read
through a mass of written record notations. Various printed stick-on anatomic dental
charts are availa ble.
i. Anatomic dental charts can be recorded using symbols or letter codes to note tooth
abnormalities and periodontal status including pocket depth, calculus deposits, degree
of gingivitis, recession or hyperplasia, mobility, and furcation involvement. Therapeutic
procedures can also be noted with either method. A key for symbols or letter abbre-
viations should be available for easy interpretation. Care must be taken to record the
a po apis aroe a oi uuodsao huo a po apis pa aun uo s
animal's mouth. Most anatomic dental charts portray the left side of the mouth on the
right side of the chart and the right side of the animal's mouth on the let. With con-
sistent use of these charts and symbols or letter codes, oral charting can be done accur
ately and efficiently.
156
162, 163: Questions
162
162 Shown here are various sizes of gutta-percha points (162).
i. What is gutta-percha?
i. For what purpose is it used in veterinary dentistry, and what are its main advantages?
ii. Are there other dental uses for gutta-percha?
163 This photograph shows an instru-
163
ment being used with the light-cure unit
(163).
i. Name this device, and describe its func-
tion.
ii. Why is this important?
i. Briefly describe the photo-initiated
polymerization process.
1.57
162, I63: Answers
162 i. Gutta-percha is an inert, flexible material harvested from the maser wood tree
and is more commonly used in the softened b-form, which is more flexible and less
brittle than the natural a-form. Distributed to the clinician in the b-form, the material
transforms to the less flexible and more brittle a-form as its shelf-life expires. Today,
most gutta-percha used is actually gutta-bullata, which is harvested from a different
species of tree. It has better properties and is more readily available. Gutta-percha
points, as either product are commonly called, are only 15-22% gutta-percha. Gutta
percha points consist of 56-79% zinc oxide, the remainder of the material comprising
metal sulfides, wax, and resins. Standardized (ISO) gutta-percha points, like absorbent
points, are supplied in sizes 15 to 80, and in lengths of 30 mm and 55 mm to
corres pond to standardized file sizes.
i. Gutta-percha is the most popular endodontic core-filling material used. It is non-irri-
tating to the periapical tissues. Gutta-percha is highly compactable and adapts well to
the shape of the prepared root canal by lateral and vertical condensation. It is physico-
chemically stable and does not shrink.
m. Gutta-percha is radiopaque and can be used as a marker in draining tracts. It also
serves conveniently to help clinicians to identify visually the root canal during apico-
ectomy procedures.
163 i. The device is a radiometer. It measures the output in mW of light in the active
range between 400 and 500 nm.
i. A minimum power output of >300 mW cm-2 is recommended for activating light-
cured composites. Many of the modern curing units emit 500-1000 mW cm-2 power
of cure of some composites. In a poorly polymerized light-cure restoration, the resin in
contact with the dentin contains a higher proportion of unreacted monomer. A number
of factors can act to decrease the curing light output, including: {1) degradation of the
light filter (which selects out light in the infrared and visible wavelengths above 500 nm
and UV light with wavelengths shorter than 400 nm); (2) weakening of the light bulb
output over time {bulb degradation); (3) fractured fibers in units using flexible fiber-
optic bundles; and (4) contamination of the light wand tip with composite resin or other
debris. When choosing a light-cure gun, it is recommended to check the output power in
the active range. Fiber-optic lines allow a lighter activating wand but may attenuate the
light slightly, and fibers can fracture with rough handling. Liquid light transfer lines
alleviate the problem with fiber bundles but can be costly.
m. Free radicals are produced when an initiator molecule, after absorbing energy from
the visible-light source (predominantly at 470 nm), reacts with an amine activator. The
free radicals initiate the polymerization reaction, which begins at the surface towards
the curing unit and progresses to the deeper regions.
158
164, 165: Questions
164
164 Dental plaque (164) is made of bacteria.
i. What is the sequence of events leading to the formation of dental plaque?
ii. Is dental plaque unique?
ii. What is the bacterial composition of plaque, and how does it change with disease?
165 This nine-year-old dog was referred
165
for treatment of suspected chronic stoma-
titis and an oronasal fistula (165). Multi-
ple courses of antibiotic treatment, oral
rinses, and corticosteroids had not been
successful in resolving the problem. What
course of action is indicated?
1.59
164, 165: Answers
164 i. The oral cavity is colonized by bacteria soon after birth. After tooth eruption, the
tooth surface and the dentogingival sulcus constitute new ecological niches. The tooth
surface is covered by an acellular organic film of salivary origin, the dental pellicle.
Salivary proteins are adsorbed onto the hydroxyapatite of the tooth surface. Initial
plaque formation begins with fixation of bacteria on the pellicle. Not all bacteria are able
to attach to the tooth surface. Initial colonization is due to specific bacteria {Strepto-
coccus sanguis, Actinomryces sp.) that can both attach to the tooth surface and provide
attachment to other bacteria. Multiplication of attached bacteria and fixation of new
bacteria provide initial growth. Co-aggregation reactions between initial bacteria and
other bacteria (that are unable to attach to tooth surfaces) provide further growth of the
 dental plaque. Such a co-aggregation reaction between a filamentous bacteria and cocci is
termed corn-cob' because of its appearance.
 i. There is not one dental plaque but different dental plaques that differ according to
their ecological niche (smooth surface, pits and fissures, gingival sulcus, etc.). Hence,
Streptococcus mutans, which is responsible for caries and represents only 1% of the
salivary flora, is not a predominant bacteria in supra- or subgingival plaque, but repre-
sents 2s% of the flora in an occlusal fissure. Physicochemical conditions on the tooth
surface and in the gingival sulcus or in the periodontal pocket are not the same; sub-
sequently, supragingival plaque and subgingival plaque differ.
mi. Dental plaque is composed of aerobic, facultative, and anaerobic species. With the
development and worsening of periodontal disease, subgingival plaque composition
changes from aerobic, Gram-positive, non-motile species to anaerobic, motile, Gram-
negative species. With periodontitis, anaerobes represent 80-90% of subgingival plaque.
Most commonly recognized periodontopathogens in dogs and cats include Por-
165 A complete physical examination should be performed and a minimal data base
established. An examination under general anesthesia can then be performed. Careful
probing and intraoral radiographs are indicated to determine the extent of the bony
defect underlying the oronasal fistula and to establish whether any nasal pathology is
 present. Other advanced diagnostic imaging techniques (e.g. CT) may be useful if avail-
able. The most important diagnostic procedure includes taking one or more incisional
biopsies of representative areas of the ulcerated tissue. Palpation and fine-needle aspirate
of the regional lymph nodes (the mandibular lymph node in particular) is also indicated.
Exfoliative cytology may be useful, but probably not bacteriologic examination, though
this can be performed for the sake of academic completeness.
Multiple biopsies of this case were diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma with ulcera-
tion and deep infiltration. Given the extent and the diffuse nature of the disease,
euthanasia was advised. This case illustrates the wide spectrum of clinical presentation of
oral squamous cell carcinoma (see 127). Both in the dog and cat, chronic ulcerative
lesions should always be biopsied to exclude the possibility of squamous cell carcinoma.
However, care should be taken in reading out biopsies of chronic stomatitis as epithelial
hyperplasia and metaplasia associated with the latter condition may be over-interpreted
and confused with neoplasia.
160
166, 167:Questions
166 This ten-year old, spayed female
166
Collie (166) has a serum urea nitrogen of
70.3 mmol l-1 (99 mg dl-1) and creatinine
of 885 mmol l-1 (10 mg dl-1).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What factors are responsible for the
oral changes in this patient?
iii. What treatment would be beneficial
for this patient?
167 Following root canal treatment on
167
this incisor (167), which restorative ma-
terial would you choose to restore the
access site, and why? What are the impor-
tant characteristics of this material?
161
166, 167: Answers
166 i. Uremic stomatitis. The uremic patient also has signs of systemic disease. Clinical
signs associated with uremia may include depression, lethargy, halitosis (uremic breath'),
loss of appetite, weight loss, vomiting, diarrhea, and oral ulceration. Diagnostic
evaluation of the uremic patient will indicate significant elevation of the serum creatinine.
urea nitrogen, and phosphorus. Uremia may be secondary to postrenal disorders or renal
failure (acute or chronic) with chronic renal failure the most common cause of ‘uremic
stomatitis'.
i. Irritation of soft tissues from ammonia produced by degradation of urea by urease-
producing oral bacteria; uremic vasculitis and thrombosis resulting in necrosis and
sloughing of the rostral tongue; alterations of the immune response secondary to uremia.
ii. Treatment of the primary renal or postrenal problem causing the uremia should be
the major focus. Decreasing the blood urea nitrogen level will decrease the urea in saliva
and gingival crevicular fluid available for ammonia production. Topical or systemic
treatment to decrease oral urease-producing bacteria will decrease ammonia production.
caine gel or a sucralfate paste may help to alleviate the oral pain.
167 A composite restoration would provide the best esthetics with the least amount of
 e          
cure), visible-light activated (light-cure), or dual activated {dual-cure). Advantages of
chemically activated composites include: {1) no need for a curing light; (2) polymer-
restoration to pull away from the bonded surface; and {3) polymerization is slower, thus
decreasing the forces placed on the bonded surface. Advantages of the light-activated
composites include: {1) longer working time, with polymerization initiated when the
 operator is ready; and (2) faster cure for immediate finishing.
The word ^composite' describes a material which has two constituents which are
insoluble in each with a definite interface between them. Composites contain an organic
resin matrix, an inorganic filler, and a coupling agent that bonds the two together. Com-
d   d    r s   s
Traditional or macrofilled composites have filler particles of 8-100 mm and a filler
loading of 60-70% by volume. Microfilled composites have smaller particles
(0.02-0.04 mm) with a load of 20-55% by volume. The lower fill load gives the
composite less strength, but it can be polished to the smoothest surface. Small-particle
composites were developed with a particle size of 1-5 mm and a 65-77% fill in an
chemical properties. The newest category of composites is the hybrids, with 60-65%
filler load of a broad range of particle size (0.06-1.0 mm average size). This gives the
hybrids a surface which rivals the polishability and smoothness of the microfilled
composites, and physical properties almost as good as the small particle composites. One
might choose a small particle or hybrid composite for this lesion. An even more
polishable surface could be achieved by using a microfilled composite for the final surface
layer.
162
168, 169: Questions
168
168 This lateral-oblique radiograph of the ma xillary cheek teeth and paranasal sinuses
was made from a five-year-old Thoroughbred mare presented with a persistent putrid
umilateral nasal discharge (168). Identify five dental abnormalities shown on the
radiograph.
169
R
169 List and describe the handpieces and types of burs pictured here from left to right
(169).
163
168, 169: Answers
168 (1) A supernumerary third cheek tooth (CT3) which is slightly displaced mesially.
(2) A grossly deformed CT4. There is a marked bony proliferation between this tooth
and CT3 which is so severe that it could represent a developmental anomaly rather than
an inflammatory reaction. (3) A diastema between CT4 and CTS which has led to the
passage of food into the maxillary sinuses. This latter is seen as a granular density in the
floor of the sinus airspace. (4) An overgrown CTs. (5) An impacted CT6. This tooth
should have erupted and be in wear in a mare of this age, but the roots show the
characteristic buckling associated with an obstructed eruption pathway.
The management of such an array of dental disease represents a major challenge.
Treatment would necessitate a facial flap for extraction of the deformed CT4 as well as
the supernumerary CT3. This would create a large oronasal fistula which might well be
slow to heal once the sinus suppuration had been eliminated. The overgrown CT5
should be reduced into line with the other teeth in the arcade and it would be hoped
that the forward drift of this tooth would allow CT6 to erupt. Supernumerary cheek
teeth are not infrequently bilateral in horses so that the contralateral dental arcade
should be assessed. The more common location for supernumerary cheek teeth in horses
is distal to the maxillary third molar (CT6) (117).
slower speed, acquired through the use of a gear-reduction turbine, provides higher
torque than the high-speed handpiece. Most low-speed handpieces in veterinary
dentistry do not have water flush for cooling, and it is important to remember that any
cutting of dentin on a vital tooth at speeds over 3,000 r.p.m. requires water coolant to
avoid pulp injury. The low-speed handpiece is used to drive prophylaxis angles for
polishing teeth, finishing devices for restorative work, burs, filling spirals, drills,
reamers, and cutting disks. Slow-speed handpieces also accept contra-angle attachments
and HP burs. (B) HP bur (or HandPiece? bur) with a large shaft which fits directly into
('prophy') angle with attached rubber polishing cup. (D) The contra-angle changes the
working angle by 75° by starting with a 15° back angle before its 90° working angle,
and holds latch burs and polishing mandrels for use with polishing disks. (E) RA (Right
Angle) bur with a latch-type shaft, used in the contra-angle attachment. (F) Mandrel
with restorative disks. (G) The gear-reduction contra-angle slows the rotation by a set
ratio, i.e. 4:1 or 10:1 for use with Lentulo@ paste carriers, Gates-Glidden burs,
piece turbine which rotates at 300,000-400,000 r.p.m. when not under a load. Its speed
q au siou y nq a 'asn p pe si anssd y oot f! ls aia
in the head of the handpiece. Some handpieces use a chuck key, while others have a
push button feature to allow quick bur changes. Some have fiber-optic lights to add
illumination directly to the bur's working site. (K) FG (Friction Grip) burs are available
in regular, short shank, long shank, or surgical length (very long shank).
164
170, 17l: Questions
170 A young adult dog is presented for treatment of a fractured canine with pulp ex-
posure; the fracture occurred while the dog was boarding at a local kennel. The owners
are concerned that the tooth is painful. The dog has had a poor appetite and has been
lethargic since they brought her home the previous evening. She vomited a yellow liquid
this morning; this is not unusual for her after she has been boarded at a kennel. Physical
examination was unremarkable except for the fractured tooth and dehydration
estimated at S%. Preanesthesia blood work findings included:
BUN 63.9 mmol/l (urea 90 mg/dl) (normal 4.3-21.3 mmol/l; urea 6-30 mg/dl)
Creatinine 265 mmol/l (3.0 mg/dl) (normal 62-115 mmol/l; 0.7-1.3 mg/dl)
Sodium 132 mmol/l (normal 145-155 mmol/l)
Chloride 98 mmol/l (normal 104-117 mmol/l)
Potassium 7.0 mmol/l (normal 4.0-5.4 mmol/)
Total calcium 13.0 mg/dl (normal 9.8-12.8 mg/dl)
Albumin 35 g/l (normal 26-36 g/l)
Urine specific gra vity 1.020
i. What is your assessment of these laboratory data?
ii. What other laboratory tests are indicated?
171
171 This dog was presented for treatment of periodontal disease {171). The owner's
primary complaint is halitosis.
i. What is the problem in this patient?
i. Which breeds are predisposed to developing this problem?
ii. What dental disease may be associated with this problem?
iv. What are the treatment recommendations for this problem?
16.5
170, I7l: Answers
170 i. The extent of blood testing before anesthesia is dependent upon physical examina-
tion findings, historical information, preventive health care provided {e.g. heartworm
signs which may result from oral disease and pain or many other diseases. Patients that
have systemic signs of disease, as does this patient, should have a minimum laboratory
database to include a complete blood count (CBC), renal function tests, electrolytes, liver
enzymes, and urinalysis. Anesthesia and treatment of the fractured tooth should be
delayed until the patient has been managed medically and is stable for anesthesia.
The abnormalities identified in this patient include azotemia, hyponatremia, hypo-
chloridemia, hyperkalemia, and hypercalcemia. Based on the history and laboratory
results, hypoa drenocorticism should be high on the differential diagnosis list. Differential
diagnoses for azotemia are prerenal, renal, and/or postrenal in origin. Postrenal azotemia
may be ruled out based on history and physical examination. The urine specific gravity
may be helpful in differentiating renal from prerenal causes of azotemia. The urine
specific gravity indicates abnormal concentrating ability in this patient; however, the
ability to concentrate urine is altered in patients with hypoadrenocorticism. Hypo-
adrenocorticism may cause decreased renal medullary sodium concentration and
therefore a decreased ability to concentrate urine. Prerenal azotemia is commonly asso-
ciated with hypoadrenocorticism and should resolve with appropriate fluid therapy.
Patients in which the azotemia does not resolve with appropriate fluid therapy may have
concurrent acute or chronic renal damage.
i. A CBC was performed in this patient and the lack of a stress response was consistent
confirm a diagnosis of hypoa drenocorticism.
171 i. Lip fold dermatitis (pyoderma). Malodor from the mouth may be the result of
halitosis secondary to oral disease or associated with skin or lip disease around the
mouth.
i. Dogs with excessive mandibular labial tissue are commonly affected and there is a
Lip fold or skin fold dermatitis may also occur following partial mandibulectomy or
maxillectomy if skin or lip folds are created during wound closure.
im. Increased plaque accumulation on teeth adjacent to the lip/skin folds may enhance the
development of more severe gingivitis/periodontitis.
iv. Medical treatment involves twice-daily cleaning, for 10-14 days, of the area with a
benzoyl peroxide shampoo, followed by drying the area (manually or with a mild astrin-
gent), and topical application of a benzoyl peroxide gel. Cases with severe inflammation
may benefit from an initial few days of topical antibiotic/steroid cream or systemic anti-
inflammatory/antibiotic administration. Unless surgically corrected, the dermatitis tends
to become chronic. Benzoyl peroxide gel is applied as needed for prevention and is aimed
at controlling the inflammation and preventing recurrences. Lip fold excision
{cheiloplasty) should be considered in severe cases.
166
172, 173: Questions
172
172 This is the buccal view of a dog presented because of discomfort during eating
(172). The owner also reports that blood is sometimes seen mixed with drooled saliva.
What next steps are indicated in order to obtain a diagnosis for this dog?
173
173 These are four instruments used for placing an amalgam restoration (173).
i.Identify each instrument.
ii. What function is each instrument used for when doing an amalgam restoration?
167
172, I73: Answers
172 The affected areas seen are those associated with “ulcerative stomatitis'. These
lesions are often referred to as ^contact ulcers’ or ^kissing ulcers', and are seen on areas
of the oral mucosa or lateral edge of the tongue where the tissues are in contact with the
plaque-laden surfaces of teeth. A thorough oral and physical examination and history
immune diseases {mucocutaneous junction lesions, or lesions generalized in the mouth.
lips, and tips of the tail or ears); epidermal necrolysis secondary to administration of
medications; access to toxins; abnormal chewing habits. Breed can be important:
Maltese dogs are the classic ulcerative stomatitis breed, and King Charles Spaniels
develop eosinophilic pharyngeal ulcers. Another lesion that has similar microscopic
features but that occurs in a different area of the mouth is acute necrotizing ulcerative
gingivitis {ANUG). In the classic ANUG case, the lesions develop along the gingival
margin and affect the interdental papillae. Ulcerative stomatitis and ANUG are
generally thought of as indicating a local immunopathy; unfortunately, there are no
specific tests currently available that confirm the abnormality, and the dog usually is
systemically healthy. Bacterial culture will yield a rich harvest, but is a waste of time as
there will always be bacterial contamination of these lesions. Biopsy may be helpful, but
usually is non-specific for ulcerative stomatitis - it will help to rule out autoimmune
conditions. You are very unlikely to get a ^confirmed’ diagnosis - ulcerative stomatitis is
a diagnosis made by elimination and response to treatment.
173 i. These instruments are (top to bottom): amalgam carrier; amalgam condenser;
amalgam carver; amalgam burnisher.
i. An amalgam carrier is used to transport the amalgam from the amalgam well to the
restorative site.
An amalgam condenser is used to compress the soft amalgam firmly into the restora-
tion and compact it. Additional amalgam can be placed in larger restorations and con-
densed again until a slight overfill is created. During proper condensation the amalgam
becomes very silver in color as the liquid mercury is brought to the surface during the
restoration.
excess amalgam so it is flush with the walls of the restoration. This is done immediately
after the amalgam is condensed.
The amalgam burnisher is used to smooth the surface of the amalgam restoration just
before hardening and makes the restoration more corrosion-resistant. Rubbing the sur-
face of the amalgam creates a satiny appearance that will have some shine to it. For
many amalgam products, polishing of the amalgam surface cannot be done before 24
hours, so creating a smooth surface with the burnishing is important to reduce plaque
accumulation.
168
174, 175: Questions
174
174 i. What is the most likely ca use of the discoloration of the teeth in this two-year-old
dog (174)?
ii. Describe the development of this condition.
imi. How can the color vary in this condition?
iv. How can this condition be prevented?
175
175 A cat presents with a Grade-2 odontoclastic resorption lesion (175) for which, even
given the poor long-term prognosis, the owner requests restoration.
i. Which restorative material would you choose, and why?
i. Name another common use for this material when restoring endodontic access
openings.
169
I74, I75: Answers
174 i. Tetracycline staining.
ii. Tetracycline reacts with calcium to form a tetracycline-calcium orthophosphate com-
plex. In the period of mineralization during the development of teeth, tetracycline
administration can cause permanent discoloration of the hard dental tissue in the
deciduous and permanent dentitions. The location of the pigmentation in the crown co-
incides with the part of the tooth developing at the time of administration of tetracycline.
The longer the administration the wider the area affected: the discoloration may vary
from diffuse bands of varying widths at different levels, to totally discolored crowns.
Enamel defects have been mentioned in human literature.
i. The color may vary from lemon-yellow (tetracycline, demeclocycline) to yellow-gray
and/or brownish (chlor- and oxytetracycline). Minocycline causes a blue-grayish pigmen-
tation. Oxytetracycline gives the least discoloration and doxycycline appears to cause
very little dental discoloration. The color can change to a darker shade due to the ex-
posure to light.
iv. Tetracyclines can cross the placenta and are excreted with the mother's milk. To pre-
vent discoloration of the dental hard tissues the administration of tetracyclines should be
avoided during pregnancy and the development of the deciduous and permanent den-
titions.
175 i. A restorative glass-ionomer, or possibly a resin-modified glass-ionomer. Restoring
these small teeth requires the least amount of additional tooth loss as possible. Preparing
a retentive preparation for an amalgam restorative would require losing more tooth
structure and would therefore be a poor choice of material. For a cervical lesion, the
apical extent often lies on dentin rather than enamel. A composite may not be the ideal
material either. When a composite restoration polymerizes, the micromechanical bond to
etched enamel at the coronal, mesial, and distal margins is stronger than the
physicochemical bond of the dentinal bonding agent at the gingival margin. Polymeri-
zation shrinkage in an axial direction then pulls restoration from the gingival margin,
opening the margin and allowing leakage. Conventional glass-ionomer materials have
been well accepted in the repair of cervical lesions in humans because of their prolonged
fluoride release and their ability to form a chemical bond to tooth structure. They can be
placed without tooth preparation other than a conditioning agent (often an acrylic acid),
thereby conserving dentin. Then the tooth is rinsed and slightly dried but not desiccated.
The glass-ionomer must be mixed using precise proportions, or by using premeasured
capsules. It is immediately placed into the defect before it loses its shiny appearance.
Glass-ionomer is sensitive both to desiccation and to water absorption while setting.
Applying a coat of varnish protects it from both of these dangers.
ii. As an intermediate restorative material. Eugenol interferes with the polymerization
reaction of composite materials; any root filling procedure which uses eugenol must
therefore be covered with an intermediate restorative material to protect the final com-
posite restoration. Since glass-ionomer bonds to the dentin inside the tooth, it also adds
to the leak-proof seal of the restoration. When using amalgam, a glass-ionomer inter-
mediate layer provides a firm base for condensation of the amalgam.
170
176, 177: Questions
176
176 i. What anatomic variation is evident on this radiograph (176)?
ii. On which other teeth in the dog and cat is the same anomaly occasionally seen?
ii. What is the clinical importance of this condition?
177 Metal crowns (with or
177
without using posts or post-
and-core techniques) should be
cemented with a strong cement
to obtain an optimal retention.
Conventional cements {like zinc
phosphate) have low values for
tensile strength, which casts
doubts on their suitability in
working dogs.
i. Which cements have more
strength and should be used for
cementing metal crowns on the
teeth of working dogs?
i. One step in the cementation
technique of metal crowns is
shown (177). Describe the com-
plete procedure.
171
176, I77: Answers
176 i. The mandibular first molar has a supernumerary root in the furcation area.
Supernumerary roots generally present as a small third root in teeth that normally have
only two roots. The most commonly affected tooth is the maxillary third premolar {see
131).
i. Other teeth, e.g. the mandibular fourth premolar, first molar, or second molar, are
rarely affected. The mandibular third molar occasionally has two roots instead of one;
this is more a double formation rather than a true supernumerary root. Supernumerary
roots also occur in the cat, also mainly on the maxillary third premolar. In one study, this
condition was noted in 10.3% of maxillary third premolars; the size of the extra root in
these teeth varied from near normal to slender. The maxillary first molar in the cat may
have one or two roots.
ii. A supernumerary root may be regarded as an incidental finding in the absence of
other pathology. Occasionally, the supernumerary root distorts the normal gingival con-
tour, giving rising to periodontitis. A supernumerary root is clinically important when
endodontic treatment or extraction of the tooth involved is indicated. A supernumerary
root, even a small one, has a root canal which forms part of the tooth's endodontic sys-
tem. Failure to recognize this anomaly when endodontic treatment is indicated, and sub-
sequently leaving this root untreated, may result in failure of the endodontic treatment.
The presence of a supernumerary root complicates an extraction procedure and the tooth
needs to be sectioned accordingly. This is one reason why pre-extraction radiographs are
required (see also 195).
177 i. Retention of conventional prosthetic crowns is largely dependent on the prepara-
tion design (see 218). The space between the tooth surface and the metal crown should
be filled with a thin layer of cement. Adhesive bonding techniques and electrolytically
etching or sandblasting of the inside of the metal crown can be used to obtain the best
retention. The choice of cements used to fix metal crowns on the teeth of working dogs is
of importance. Composite resin cements have recently been developed and combine a
structure. The resin PanaviaTM-cement, a composite of low viscosity, was found to be
effective and provided a long-term success and adequate retention of metal crowns on
canine teeth in working dogs. Panavia-cement shows good biocompatibility, no detri-
mental effect on the pulp, and no microleakage of the crown.
i. Before cementation the tooth should be polished, cleaned with water, and air-dried.
The inside of the metal crown should be rinsed with alcohol to remove any traces of oil.
After air-drying, the tooth can be etched with a 37% phosphoric acid etching gel or
liquid for 30 seconds, thoroughly rinsed with water, and air-dried. The manufacturer
recommends that only uncut enamel is etched. The Panavia-cerment is mixed following
the manufacturer's instructions. A thin layer of the cement is applied on the internal sur-
face of the metal crown. The metal crown is seated and the excess Panavia-cement is re-
moved. An oxygen inhibitor is applied to the margin of the metal crown to achieve isola-
s a a l ao ias on o a aa oi s e e  uo
time the crown is kept under finger pressure for approximately six to seven minutes.
172
178, 179: Questions
178
178 i. What is abnormal about this dog's maxillary third premolar (178), and what is
the clinical significance of this condition?
ii. How does this differ from deviation?
179 i. What is this piece of equipment
179
(179)?
i. What is the goal of periodontal dé-
bridement?
m. How does this unit work more effec-
tively to accomplish new ideas in perio-
dontal debridement?
173
178, I79: Answers
178 i. This tooth is rotated. Rotation refers to the movement of the tooth about its
longitudinal axis. This is commonly seen in the upper third premolars as a result of the
overcrowding occurring in maxillary brachygnathia. In cases of malocclusion where the
question arises whether the mandible is too long or the maxilla too short, this may be
an indication of the latter. Rotation and crowding may also result in a distortion of the
gingival contour, predisposing to plaque accumulation and periodontal disease.
ii. Deviation (or -version) refers to the tilting of a tooth about its transverse axis. Per-
sistent deciduous canines may cause a lingual deviation (or linguoversion) of the man-
dibular permanent canines, and a facial deviation (or mesioversion) of the maxillary
permanent canines.
179 i. An ultrasonic scaler (Odontoson-MIm, A/S L. Goof, Copenhagen, Denmark) that
has a probe-like tip that is attached to a ferromagnetic rod inside a lightweight hand-
piece. The handpiece is attached to tubing from a beaker that delivers water or an
antimicrobial solution to the handpiece via a one-way peristaltic pump that is directed
at the working tip.
ii. Periodontal debridement is becoming the new term for scaling and root planing, with
the emphasis on plaque and plaque by-product elimination. The goal of periodontal
debridement is to establish a healthy periodontium. This is done through supragingival
debridement, subgingival debridement and treatment of the gingival sulcus or
periodontal pocket to remove plaque, plaque by-products, and plaque-retentive
calculus. This can be done through the use of hand instrumentation and/or power
scaling and irrigation.
mi. New theories in periodontal debridement are that it is more important to remove al
plaque and bacterial endotoxins from the coronal surface and subgingivally. Absolute
complete calculus removal may not be the most important step in periodontal treatment
as periodontal tissues have been found to heal in the presence of residual calculus as
long as the plaque and bacterial by-products that cause periodontal inflammation are
eliminated. Cementum removal is felt to be unnecessary and undesirable.
This unit with its probe-like working tips can be effective deep down in periodontal
pockets up to 12 mm. The tips are equally active on all surfaces and will eliminate
plaque and bacterial by-products when any portion of the tip contacts the surface to be
treated. It is excellent for closed access to narrow pockets and furcation areas. The
beaker can be filled with antimicrobial solutions that will not damage the equipment to
provide additional elimination of bacteria and bacterial by-products from the anti-
bacterial effect, lavage, and the cavitation activity that occurs from the ultrasonic vibra
tion to lyse bacterial cell walls. The peristaltic pump action maintains a one-way flow of
the irrigation solution so there is no back flow from the handpiece into the container or
tubing. With this unit there is simultaneous removal of plaque, calculus and bacterial
 d   s s   p ue   'o-
the periodontium to a healthy status.
174
180, 181: Questions
180
180 Root canal therapy of teeth with long and narrow root canals, as seen on this
radiograph (180), can be difficult, but the key to success lies in the careful cleaning and
shaping of the root canal system. Explain the technical principles of this aspect of root
canal therapy.
181a
181b
181 An 11-year-old pony gelding is
presented with a putrid nasal dis-
charge. Could dental disease be respon-
sible for the changes seen on the radio-
 graph (181a) and the endoscopic view
(181b) of the nasal meati?
175
180, 181: Answers
180 The steps of a routine root canal therapy include: (1) Access to the pulp chamber
and root canal. (2) Pulpectomy or removal of the contents of the pulp chamber and the
root canal space. (3) Cleaning and shaping of the canal. (4) Obturation of the canal
space. (S) Restoration of the crown.
During cleaning and shaping, a number of techniques, e.g. the “step-back' or the
"crown-down procedure', may be used to clean the walls of the canal while giving the
canal a conical shape. The tips of standard {ISO) root canal files, whether K-files or
Hedstrom files, generally increase in size through the series by 0.05 mm from 0.05 mm
through 0.6 mm, then by 0.1 mm from 0.6 mm through 1.3 mm. The file width
increases from the working tip by 0.02 mm per mm of file length. Other systems are
available: for example, one with width sizes increasing by a constant percent (small
increases for small files, larger increases for larger files) for a more gradual flare at the
apex and a more rapid flare at the coronal canal, and there is a non-ISO set of files
which increases the file width by 0.04 mm per 1 mm (ProFile@ 0.04 taper1m Series 29@,
Tulsa Dental Products, Tulsa, OK, USA) for a more rapid flare.
The goal is to shape the canal so the apex approximates the shape of standardized
gutta-percha cones. The widening of the canal toward the coronal access allows the
introduction of instruments to soften and condense {vertically and laterally) the gutta-
percha to make room for placement of additional cones. The shape should allow a plug-
ger or spreader to reach within a few millimeters of the apex to allow good condensa-
tion of the filling material at the apex. In a long and narrow canal, pluggers or spreaders
filing and shaping, flushing solutions (usually HzO2 or various dilutions of sodium
hypochlorite) are used to flush debris and dentin filings from the canal. The tip of the
endodontic flushing needle should reach within 1-2 mm of the apex, since effective
flushing only occurs coronally to the needle tip. Also, the canal must be wide enough to
prevent binding, since a lodged needle causes the canal to become an extension of the
needle, resulting in direct tissue injection of the flushing solution into the periapical
tissues.
181 Yes. The changes illustrated are specific to those which arise through the extension
of an infectious process from a devitalized tooth into the nasal tissues. The radiograph
(181b) shows the change which is known as turbinate coral formation or metaplastic
conchal mineralization. This is invariably the result of long-term dental suppuration
involving the first or second cheek teeth {second or third premolar) with extension of
infection through the thin underlying bone plate into the cartilage of the dorsal and
ventral conchae. Older texts refer to a condition of horses which they describe as
turbinate necrosis’ and it seems likely that this is the disorder to which they were refer-
ring. It is not possible to identify which tooth is degenerate on the basis of the radio-
graph presented here, but a lateral oblique projection confirmed a periapical reaction
around the second cheek tooth. Treatment of this disorder would necessitate extraction
of the diseased tooth and turbinectomy to eliminate all of the necrotic cartilage.
176
182, 183: Questions
182 This is a file in the access
182
site for a standard root canal
procedure of a right maxillary
canine in a four-year-old
domestic shorthair cat (182).
i. Is it appropriate, in a case
like this, where the crown of
the maxillary canine is frac-
tured off at a point one-third
from its cusp, to use the frac-
ture site as the access site for
standard root canal procedure?
ii. Would you expect an easier
and better access to the apex if
the treatment access site were
closer to the gingiva and on the
mesial surface of this tooth?
   a      s   a a 
during dental extraction. By raising a gingival or a full-thickness mucogingival flap,
access to the tooth roots is improved and it becomes possible to remove some of the
supporting alveolar bone to reduce mechanical root retention, easing extraction.
i. For which teeth might an °envelope' flap prove helpful during extraction?
i. Describe a triangular mucogingival flap commonly used during extraction.
177
182, I83: Answers
182 i. In cats, the maxillary canine tooth is fairly straight. If the crown is fractured,
access can be obtained at the fracture site. If the crown is intact, access can be made on
margin to the cusp. The more curved mandibular canine teeth of the cat should be
'pauooudde aie sop jo yaai auueo renqipueu aul se kem aues aui ul pauoeoidde
with access made 1-2 mm from the gingival margin on the mesial surface to the tooth.
ii. The access would be more difficult if the site was closer to the gingiva in this case, as it
would have to be more oblique. An obliquely directed access would result also in remov-
ing more tooth structure than desirable and in weakening this small tooth inappro-
priately.
183 i. An envelope flap is made by incising
183
through the gingival sulcus, dentogingival
fibers, and interproximal gingiva of
adjacent teeth, then raising the attached
gingiva from the underlying alveolar bone
to create a flap that does not extend be-
yond the mucogingival line. These flaps do
not have additional releasing incisions as
used in triangular and pedicle flaps. An
envelope flap can be used to improve
access to and visualization of the tooth
root and periodontal space of most teeth,
thus assisting with instrument placement
(luxators and/or elevators) during extrac-
tion, or periodontal therapy (curettes). It
also exposes the furcation of multirooted
teeth, thereby facilitating sectioning.
i. A triangular access flap is commonly used for the extraction of maxillary canine teeth.
The releasing incision in this case will start in the diastema between the third incisor and
canine, the incision being made down onto the underlying crestal alveolar bone. The
incision extends around the gingival sulcus of the canine tooth, continuing
interproximally to, and around, the first premolar, then the full length of the second
premolar following the gingival sulcus of each tooth. A second incision is made
perpendicular to the first, extending from the distal aspect of the second premolar
through the gingiva and oral mucosa to just above the level of the canine tooth root
apex. The gingiva and periosteum are then elevated along the length of the flap so that it
can be folded back to expose the bone overlaying the canine tooth root. In some cases a
second, smaller perpendicular releasing incision is required at the mesial end of the flap
to further improve access (183).
178
184- 186: Questions
184 With regard to 183, are pedicle flaps useful during extraction of teeth?
185 This nine-year-old Quarter
185
horse mare was presented with
progressive weight loss (185).
i. What dental problem is visi-
ble?
i. Name the commonly used
techniques for correcting this
problem.
186 When repairing mandibular and maxillary fractures in the dog and cat, how can an
adequate airway for anesthesia, good surgical exposure, and the opportunity to check
the occlusion intraoperatively be achieved?
179
184-186: Answers
184 The flap shown in 183 showing access to the canine tooth root, is a pedicle flap
with sides of uneven length. Pedicle flaps can be created to accommodate almost any
tooth or group of teeth by making releasing incisions at either end of an envelope flap,
then extending the gingival and periosteal elevation, usually creating a mucogingival
flap. The periosteum on the under surface of full-thickness mucogingival flaps is in-
elastic. By incising through the periosteum without damaging the under-surface of the
mucosa, it is possible to produce a much more mobile tissue flap which can be advanced
over tissue defects such as oronasal fistulas. The most important aspect of flap closure is
first, to avoid any tension on the closure, and second, to avoid having unsupported
suture lines. Whenever possible the suture line should be over healthy bone or soft
tissue, not over a void.
gingiva and is rubbing on the mandible. The left maxillary second premolar has a
similar hook. The mandibular third molars should always be examined for the presence
of hooks or ramps, especially when the mesial portion of the maxillary second
premolars are not in occlusion, as the distal portion of the mandibular third molars may
not be in occlusion, also resulting in hook or ramp formation. This horse was only nine
years old but had four places where tall/long parts of teeth were traumatizing the
gingiva and rubbing on bone.
i. There are many techniques for removing tall/long hooks. Molar cutters, DremelIM.
type instruments with burrs, chisels, and floats may be used to reduce the tall areas.
186 Passing the endotracheal
186
tube through a pharyngotomy
incision satisfies all require-
ments (186). The importance of
checking the occlusion during
surgical repair of mandibular
and maxillary fractures cannot
be overemphasized. The pre-
sence of an oral endotracheal
tube makes this impossible.
However, intubation with a
cuffed endotracheal tube to
prevent aspiration is highly
recommended during any oral surgery. Care should be taken to use a wire-reinforced
endotracheal tube, to prevent collapse of the tube when bent. An additional advantage
of a pharyngotomy is that the same opening may be used postoperatively for a gastro-
esophageal tube for nutritional support. Contrary to tracheotomy, pharyngotomy is a
safe and easy procedure.
180
187-189: Questions
187 This patient is a working
187
dog that requires the use of its
canine teeth, with as much
coronal height as possible
(187). What technique would
be indicated?
188 In a rabbit presenting with malocclusion, the appropriate treatment plan can only
be formulated once a thorough investigation has been undertaken (see 140 and 210). It
is inappropriate to treat an obvious incisor malocclusion without checking the rest of
the dentition. Even in cases with known traumatic causation {e.g. fracture of an incisor
tooth) there can be unrelated jaw length or cheek tooth abnorma lities.
i. What is the appropriate treatment for a supragingival fracture of an incisor tooth in
an otherwise healthy ra bbit?
ii. What is the most appropriate method of incisor crown-length reduction in rabbits?
189 This six-month-old dog has
189
changed his deciduous dentition
in time and the permanent den-
tition is in place. Only the tip of
the crown of the maxillary third
incisor is visible through the
gingiva (189, arrow). What is
your diagnosis, and what is the
recommended treatment?
181
187-189: Answers
187 Due to the depth of the fracture and the size of the remaining crown, a crown-
lengthening procedure must be performed. After performing conventional endodontic
treatment, an incision along the sulcus is made from the borders of adjacent teeth.
Releasing incisions are made at adjacent teeth. The gingiva is reflected away from the
bone and tooth with a periosteal elevator, exposing the bone. Coronal alveolar bone is
removed to increase the coronal length. A conventional crown preparation is
performed. Impressions are taken. Additional surface area may be gained by ordering a
custom post. At this point, the gingiva is sutured to its new apically relocated position.
An alternative to crown-lengthening would be orthodontic extrusion of the tooth. The
188 i. If the periapical tissues are not seriously damaged, a fractured tooth will usually
regrow and return to occlusion providing the opposing tooth/teeth are not allowed to
overgrow in the meantime. The fractured surface of the damaged tooth should be
smoothed to prevent soft tissue irritation. If pulp exposure has occurred, the tooth
should be cleaned and disinfected before performing a partial pulpectomy and pulp
capping (dressing) procedure under aseptic conditions. The most practical material for
both pulp capping and sealing the pulp chamber is a setting calcium hydroxide cement.
This will generally survive long enough to allow healing of the pulp, it is non-toxic, and
it will wear away once the tooth returns to function. It is necessary to perform crown
height reduction of the opposing teeth at frequent intervals until the damaged tooth
returns to function.
i. Use of a cutting bur in a high-speed dental handpiece. Rabbits which are accustomed
to handling will frequently accept tooth shortening by this method without any restraint
other than having their lips held to the side. It is a good idea to place a wooden tongue
depressor across behind the teeth while they are trimmed to prevent accidental damage
to the animal's tongue. The use of forceps, nail clippers, or wire cutters for the trimming
of teeth is both painful to the patient and traumatic to the periodontal tissues. These
instruments tend to shatter the tooth, risking longitudinal fracture and pulp exposure.
and periapical trauma, risking permanent damage.
189 The third incisor is retained and embedded. Radiographs are indicated to visualize
the position and morphology of this tooth. Extraction is the treatment of choice for two
reasons. First, embedded teeth are prone to develop dentigerous cysts in time (see 48))
Secondly, most of the crown is located under the gingiva. The gingiva does not attach to
the enamel surface, except at the epithelial attachment at the most apical part of the
crown. The result is a deep gingival pocket, which will trap bacteria, food, and debris.
Extraction should be performed as soon as possible. Orthodontic treatment of this
condition is impractical and not in the interest of the patient. This displaced tooth has
to be extruded and possibly moved and tipped. Although this is possible and is standard
treatment in human orthodontics, the treatment would require a very difficult series of
different appliances and a long treatment period.
182
190, 191: Questions
190a
190b
190 Shown here are a radiograph and a photograph of a young horse with “three-
year-old bumps? (190a, b). What are these swellings?
191 This is a luting cement (191). Would
191
this be the best choice for cementing a
restoration to vital dentin within 1-2 mm
of the pulp? Discuss components of non-
composite luting agents and their relative
ability to irritate the pulp.
183
190, 191: Answers
190 Eruption cysts. They arise in young horses when the ventral mandibular cortex
becomes distorted by the expansion of the underlying dental sacs before eruption of the
permanent dentition. These sacs contain the primordial tissues from which the permanent
premolar teeth will differentiate. In Thoroughbreds, eruption cysts are far more common
in the mandible than in the maxilla. Ponies are usually involved when the cysts arise in the
maxilla. In general terms, eruption cysts are self-limiting and of cosmetic importance only.
The precise mechanisms of dental eruption are not known but the process should be
correctly aligned with the eruption pathway clear of obstructions. Some believe that
eruption cysts are the result of impaction, but it is difficult to explain how the eruption
pathway of all three premolar teeth can become obstructed at the same time, as it is com-
      o  n    on s   
when a permanent neighboring tooth lies across the path of the eruption, or when the
space between the teeth on either side is too narrow. The fourth premolar, being the last
permanent tooth to erupt, is the most vulnerable. The result of impaction is that the crown
cannot advance into the mouth and therefore the root structures build up aborally. True
impaction is more common in the mandible and causes a large, discrete ventral swelling
191 No. This is a glass-ionomer, and would be a poor choice of material for using on
dentin which is <1 mm in thickness over vital pulp. The liquid component of glass-ion-
omer luting agents is polyacrylic acid along with a number of other acids. Until the glass-
ionomer completely sets, unreacted acid can be quite irritating to a poorly protected
pulp.
Zinc phosphate cement has the longest track record of currently used luting agents.
The powder is mostly zinc oxide powder with a small amount of magnesium oxide. The
liquid is phosphoric acid and water. Small amounts of buffering salts are added to con-
trol the reaction, during which the acid reacts with some of the zinc oxide to form zinc
phosphate. The acid in this material makes it irritating to the pulp in a similar manner to
the polyacrylic acid in the glass-ionomer. Zinc silicophoshate cement adds silicate glass to
the zinc oxide powder, and also uses a phosphoric acid-containing liquid. This acid can
irritate an unprotected pulp.
Zinc oxide-eugenol (ZOE) cement is much less irritating to the pulp. The eugenol
helps deaden any sensation of discomfort, which makes it often described as being
'soothing to the pulp'. A major disadvantage for luting permanent restorations is its solu-
bility in oral fluids. Even the improved ZOE cements, which contain added polymers and
inorganic compounds to the powder, and ortho-ethoxybenzoic acid {EBA) to the liquid,
are still less stable than other cements.
Carboxylate cements (also called polycarboxylate, polyacrylate) also use zinc oxide for
the powder, but use polyacrylic acid for the liquid. Although the pH of the liquid is only
1.7, it neutralizes quickly during setting (compared with glass-ionomer's slow setting
reaction) and is therefore considered relatively non-irritating to the pulp.
In summary, with the exception of glass-ionomer, these agents all use zinc oxide in the
powder phase. With the exception of zinc oxide-eugenol, they all use either phosphoric
acid or polyacrylic acid in the liquid phase.
184
192, 193: Questions
192
HUBBARD
OLDMOTHERH
HIDE
hiae
ADEABEERa
GRA
MUNCHIES
192 Chew toys are beneficial in maintaining periodontal health (192).
i. What benefits can be expected from chew toys?
ii. Describe the proposed mechanisms of action.
mi. How effective is the regular chewing of toys in maintaining periodontal health?
193
193 This brown lesion on the occlusal surface of this dog's maxillary first molar tooth is
  o  mo a n a  a a  uo  A
lesion? Which restorative material would be the material of choice, and why?
18.5
192, 193: Answers
192 i. Depending on the type of toy, regular chewing may reduce the accumulation of
dental deposits (plaque and calculus) on the tooth surfaces. A reduced plaque burden
may reduce gingivitis.
ii. Chewing devices exert their effect by maximizing the self-cleansing associated with
function and by the physiologic stimulation of sa livation.
mi. In the absence of other oral hygiene measures there will still be a substantial
accumulation of dental deposits and consequent gingivitis. While it is known that
without plaque there is no disease, we do not know what amount of plaque is com-
patible with maintenance of periodontal health. We do not at our present level of
knowledge understand what triggers the progression from gingivitis to periodontitis.
The regular use of chew toys should be viewed as an adjunctive to other more effective
means of plaque removal, preferably frequent and meticulous tooth brushing.
193 Treatment of dental caries involves removal of the diseased tooth material, creating
an appropriate preparation for the restorative material, and then restoring the lost
dental structure. For G.V. Black-Class I lesions {occlusal surface of molars or pre-
molars), amalgam still provides excellent properties for restoration. The occlusal table
surfaces of these teeth sustain huge compressive forces and no other restorative material
matches the strength of amalgam under compressive loads. Typical compressive
strength of amalgam (seven days after placement) ranges from 350-500 MPa
(50,000-70,000 p.s.i.). Also, amalgam is easy to use and is less technique-sensitive than
many other materials. It does require removal of slightly more tooth structure to create
an undercut for mechanical retention. This retentive undercut may be small, made with
a small round or pear-shaped bur. A round or pear-shaped bur undercut avoids a sharp
line-angle between the cavity wall and cavity floor, which would introduce a stress
point and a space which is difficult to fill. There is a trend towards bonding amalgam
restorations to decrease marginal leakage and sensitivity (98). If a bonding agent is not
used, the cavity preparation should be lined with a cavity varnish. The amalgam is
triturated to mix the mercury with the other metals (i.e. silver, tin, copper, and possibly
zinc or palladium). The amalgam is immediately placed into the defect and condensed.
Condensation removes voids and bonds the amalgam into a homogenous mass with
minimal porosity and residual mercury. Removing excess mercury strengthens the final
amalgam by helping to reduce the Y2-phase (the tin-mercury component which is the
weakest). Amalgams with zinc must be protected from moisture contamination by
saliva or contaminated instruments. Any water present will react with the zinc,
  xa     s g   
week after insertion. This is one reason that zinc-containing amalgams should not be
used for retrograde filling following apicoectomy. Once the amalgam is placed, it is
carved to the desired shape and the surface and margins are smoothed by burnishing
with a ball burnisher. Final polishing should be delayed at least 24 hours.
186
194, 195: Questions
194a
194 What is the importance of the position of the gingival incision and the thickness of
a periodontal flap (194a)?
195a
195 This radiograph (195a) illustrates the need for pre-extraction ra diographs.
i. Give three examples of changes associated with a tooth where a pre-extraction
radiograph is valuable.
ii. What other valua ble information can be gained from a pre-extraction radiograph of
very mobile teeth?
187
I94, I95: Answers
194 Flaps begin with a gingival incision
194b
that follows a scalloped design. The
widest part of the incision is at the mid-
point of the tooth, whereas the narrowest
part is pointed interdentally. The further
apically one wants the flap to fall, the
further one makes the incision from the
tooth (194b). Incisions which are used to
elevate flaps may be intracrevicular,
crestal, or subcrestal depending on their
proximity to the tooth. Intracrevicular
incisions preserve the most soft tissue and
are useful in open curettage, bone grafting, and guided-tissue regeneration surgery. With
bone grafting and guided-tissue regeneration surgery, one usually attempts to preserve
most of the gingiva because it is required for coverage of the site for better healing.
Crestal and subcrestal incisions allow the flap to fall to greater degrees of apical posi-
made with an inverse bevel to thin the gingival margin. Pocket elimination and osseous
resection for architectural revision usually remove more gingiva by making wider and
more apical incisions which end subcrestally. Flaps are classified by thickness {full and
partial) depending on whether epithelial covering and periosteum are included. Most
surgeons prefer full-thickness flaps as split-thickness flaps interfere with the blood
supply and are technically challenging. Full-thickness flaps have the advantage of better
vitality because vascularity is less compromised.
195 i. This tooth has an abnormal
195b
root structure which will make ex-
traction difficult. The tooth with a
normal-appearing crown may have
evidence of pathologic root resorp-
tion. In cases of persistent deciduous
teeth (195b), it is important to know
whether and to what extent phy-
siologic root resorption has taken
place. A fractured crown of a man-
dibular tooth may show evidence of
periapical pathology in close prox-
imity with the cortical bone which
- no n s na n   a , e  hs 
ditions that would influence the extraction technique include: supernumerary roots,
fused roots, root dilaceration, and root fracture.
i. Tooth mobility leading to extraction of the tooth may be secondary to neoplastic
processes or metabolic bone diseases such as hyperparathyroidism. Extensive osteolysis
of bone and fractures of the mandible or maxilla may also result in mobility of teeth.
188
196, I97: Questions
196
196 Calculus (196) is mineralized plaque.
i. How does it form?
ii. What is its composition?
ii. Is calculus pathogenic?
197 An 18-month-old Labrador Retriever
197
has fractured an incisor tooth playing
with another dog (197). What treatment
would you recommend for this patient?
189
196, 197: Answers
196 i. Dental plaque serves as an organic matrix for subsequent mineralization.
Precipitation of mineral salts usually begins within two weeks after plaque formation.
The mineral source for calculus is saliva for supragingival plaque and gingival fluid for
subgingival plaque. Crystals form initially in the intercellular matrix and on bacterial sur-
faces and finally within the bacteria for some specific species. Calculus is formed in layers
 often separated by a thin cuticle that becomes embedded in it as calcification progresses.
Food debris and hair are often found incorporated in calculus in dogs. The structure is
heterogenous with a variable thickness and density. The surface is irregular and rough.
i. In humans, supragingival calculus consists of 70-90% inorganic material, mainly
calcium phosphate; other salts are calcium carbonate and magnesium phosphate. The
crystals formed vary according to the age and location of calculus, brushite being more
common in supragingival calculus and magnesium whitlockite in the subgingival cal-
culus. The organic component consists of protein-polysaccharide complexes,
desquamated epithelial cells, leukocytes, and various types of bacteria. Subgingival cal-
culus has less brushite and more whitlockite as well as a higher ratio of calcium to phos-
phate. There are few studies on calculus composition in the dog and the results vary: one
author found predominantly calcium phosphate, as in humans, whereas another study
found calcium carbonate to be the principal salt.
imi. Calculus itself is no longer considered a pathogenic agent. Roughness per se does not
cause gingivitis and calculus without bacteria may permit an epithelial attachment to
form. Calculus acts as a retentive area of plaque.
197 Extraction. This tooth has a vertical root fracture which extends all the way to the
apex. Obturation would be impossible at this point, and treatment to stimulate healing
and fusion would be problematic and would carry a poor prognosis. Small vertical root
fractures can be difficult to diagnose; in one study, only 30% of vertical root fractures
were evident on radiographs. They may be ca used by trauma, as in this case, or by exces-
sive force used during lateral condensation of root filling materials during endodontic
treatment. These result in failure of the endodontic treatment. An endodon-
tic-periodontal lesion will develop. Left untreated, a large halo of bone loss develops
around the affected root. This can be misinterpreted as a periodontal or extended peri-
apical abscess. On endodontically treated teeth, a thin ribbon of gutta-percha or other
radiolucent filling material may be seen extruding from the otherwise conical material in
the treated root canal. Transillumination of the root while looking down the canal with
magnification may help identify a small vertical root fracture. If a root fractures iatro-
followed by the canal accepting additional obturating material with less resistance. Long-
term retention of this root would not be likely, and the endodontic procedure will
eventually fail. In a multirooted tooth, the affected root can be amputated if the remain-
ing roots are periodontally healthy and provide sufficient support for the tooth. The only
other alternative, even with small, unapparent vertical root fractures, is to extract the
tooth.
190
198-200: Questions
198a
198 Identify this instrument {198a), and compare its design with that of periodontal
curettes.
199 Tooth brushing is the single most
199
effective means of removing plaque (199).
i. What frequency of tooth brushing is
required to maintain clinically healthy
gingiva?
ii. What frequency of tooth brushing is
required to restore inflamed gingiva to
clinically healthy gingiva?
200
200 A mandibular canine in an extraoral position when the mouth is closed, is a rela
tively common orthodontic problem in pure-bred cats (200). What other malocclusion
often occurs in conjunction with this condition?
191
198-200: Answers
198b
198 A Towner-Jacquette scaler, which is a double-ended instrument combining a curved
and a straight sickle scaler. There are two basic types of sickle scalers: the straigbt sickle
scaler (198b (A)) and the curved sickle scaler (198b (B)). The straight sickle scaler has
ose si suausu sun huod deus e ui spua ieu apea uaies e uo sapa uno oi
known as a Jacquette scaler. The curved sickle scaler has two cutting edges on a curved
blade. The back of a straight sickle scaler is slightly flattened, in contrast to a curved
sickle scaler, which has a pointed back. Sickle scalers are designed for the removal of
supragingival calculus. These instruments are used with a blade angulation of 45-90°
and with a pull stroke. They are primarily used for the removal of gross supragingival
calculus, e.g. before using the ultrasonic scaler, and for removal of calculus from develop-
mental fissures, e.g. the maxillary fourth premolar in the dog.
Periodontal curettes have a rounded toe and back. They can be used for supragingival
calculus removal near the gingival margin, but are primarily used for subgingival scaling,
root planing, and curettage of diseased pocket epithelium. There are two basic types: the
wniversal curette (198b (C)) and the Gracey curette (198b (D)). The face of the universal
n s  oi   s pn a o rdd si a
curettes can be used on both mesial and distal tooth surfaces. The face of the blade of
Gracey curettes has an angulation of 70° and has only one active cutting edge. Gracey
curettes are area-specific, i.e. they are designed for specific teeth and surfaces. A wide
variety of universal and Gracey curettes are available, with variations in the shape and
length of the shank and blade
199 i. One study has shown that brushing every other day is sufficient to maintain clini-
cally healthy gingiva in the dog. Another study failed to duplicate these results. In the
first study, trained dental technicians performed the tooth brushing, while in the second
study the tooth brushing was performed by animal health technicians. It seems likely that
the technique and effectiveness of the animal health technicians is more on a par with
that of a motivated dog owner. Consequently, it is suggested that the recommendation to
dog owners should be brushing more frequently than three times a week.
i. Several studies have demonstrated that daily tooth brushing will restore clinically
healthy gingiva in individuals with gingivitis. Most dogs and cats that have not received
any form of oral hygiene will have gingivitis. Consequently, the recommendation should
be daily tooth brushing if the animal will allow it.
200 The development of brachycephalic feline breeds has resulted in a wry malocclusion
and craniofacial asymmetry often associated with one mandibular canine in an extraoral
position when the mouth is closed.
192
201-203: Questions
201 With regard to wry malocclusion and craniofacial asymmetry in brachycephalic
feline breeds (200):
i. What are the treatment options and expected results?
ii. What are the dental show standards for cats?
202 What are the radiologic findings asso-
202
ciated with this 15-mm diameter, exo-
phytic tumor on the gingival margin of the
mandibular first incisors in a dog (202)?
In general, how does one systematically
evaluate radiographs of suspected oral
tumors?
203 In this seven-month-old
203
dog, the deciduous canine tooth
is still in place and not mobile
(203). It is fractured and a sinus
tract is visible overlying the
root tip. What is the treatment
of choice, and why?
193
201-203: Answers
201 i. Restoration of the dentition to a normal occlusion is extremely difficult. This con-
dition is usually not amenable to orthodontic correction.If orthodontic correction is at-
tempted, fixed dental attachments {i.e. hooks, buttons) are placed on the deviated canine
and on one or more anchor teeth. The maxillary fourth premolar and the mandibular
first molar are often used as anchor teeth. Elastic traction {i.e. power chain, rubber
bands) creates constant force on the canine. Leaving this untreated can result in
continued soft tissue trauma to the upper lip, masticatory impairment, and periodontal
complications. Crown amputation, partial coronal pulpectomy (pulpotomy), and home
care is another option to relieve upper lip trauma and improve masticatory function.
fi. Feline show standards are rather loose. They usually state that no teeth are to be visible
when the mouth is closed. This simple standard does not address the occlusion nor the
disqualification for correction. The AVMA ethical guidelines are discussed in 112.
202 The radiologic descriptors of oral tumors systematically focus on the appearance of
the lesion, surrounding bone, and teeth. In evaluating the lesion, one should note the size,
border, density, and number of the lesion(s). In this particular example, there is a single,
15-mm diameter, peripheral, soft tissue density with ill-defined margins on the bony
interface. There is no evidence of mineralization in the tumor. The surrounding bone can
show evidence of expansion, perforation, erosion, and remodeling. Ill-defined margins
and destruction of the bone cortex are suggestive of a malignancy, while expansion of the
cortex is more indicative of a benign lesion {see 22). With a benign lesion, a layer of
smooth reactive bone may be found on the outside. Bone resorption can be focal {or
dominantly moth-eaten pattern of bone resorption between the roots of the first incisors
and deeper down the left mandible. The rostral mental foramen on that side is markedly
displaced, or partially resorbed. Displaced teeth, as in this example, are more commonly
found in relatively benign tumors, while aggressive, malignant tumors tend to leave the
teeth “floating? in their original position.
This radiograph (202) was taken of a peripheral or canine acanthomatous amelo-
blastoma, previously known as an acanthomatous epulis. The radiologic findings asso-
ciated with odontogenic and non-odontogenic tumors are generally non-specific. How.
ever, radiographs form an important part of the clinical staging in determining the extent
of the tumor and in establishing whether bone involvement is present. Apparently
normal radiographs do not rule out bone infiltration, as about 40% of the bone must be
resorbed before this becomes visible using conventional ra diography.
203 Extraction should be performed immediately. Resorption of deciduous teeth is
dependent on the presence of living cells (odontoclasts). In this case, these cells were des-
troyed due to the pulp necrosis resulting from the complicated fracture and associated
periapical pathology (sinus tract). Any resorptive activity ceased, causing the deciduous
canine to stay in place. If the fractured deciduous tooth remains in place for a long period
of time, the infection can easily spread further and cause a local osteomyelitis with the
danger of affecting the permanent canine.
194
204. 205: Questions
204 Conventional endodontic therapy concentrates on the cleaning, shaping, and
sealing of the root canal system.
i. Why is shaping important?
ii. What instruments are generally used to shape the apical stop?
i. How do 60 mm veterinary-length root canal instruments differ from ISO-instru-
ments?
205a
205b
205 i. What is the dental formula and characteristic dental features of the domestic
rabbit (205a, b)?
ii. How does the dentition of lagomorphs differ from that of rodents?
19.5
204,205:Answers
204
canal it is necessary to shape the access cavity and the coronal
portion of the root canal to accommodate the diameter of instru-
mentation required for apical preparation. It must also be possi-
ble to place the appropriate size master gutta-percha point
through the access route. The apical extent of the root canal is
shaped so that it conforms closely with shape of the standard
with a root canal sealing paste, to seal the apical extent of the
root canal. An apical *stop' is produced in teeth with an apical
foramen so that a suitable gutta-percha point can be seated
firmly without extruding through the tooth apex.
ii. The apical extent of the root canal is sha ped using hand instru-
ments such as K-files, Hedstrom files, or K-reamers. ISO-
standard files and reamers have a diameter of {1/100 x ISO-
number) mm at their tip, increasing in diameter by 0.32 mm along the 16 mm working
end. Standardized paper and gutta-percha points are produced with the same ta per.
. Veterinary-length (60 mm) root canal files and reamers have a working end which is
prepare the apical root canal for placement of standard sized gutta-percha points it is
necessary to use a °step-back technique’ when using 60 mm files. This involves preparing
larger size files which are worked to within 1 or 2 mm of the depth reached by the pre-
viously used file. During this procedure it is important to flush the canal thoroughly and
keep recapitulating to full working depth using the master file so that dentinal filings are
not packed into the apical portion of the canal. The diagram (204) illustrates the poor fit
of an ISO-standard gutta-percha point in a root canal prepared with a long taper file.
 205 i. The dental formula of lagomorphs is: 12 :C  :P 3 :M 2 = 28
Rabbits have a heterodont, diphyodont dentition with all teeth being elodont (aradicular
hypsodont): elodont teeth grow throughout life and never develop anatomic roots.
Although diphyodont, the deciduous teeth are not functional and are exfoliated shortly
before or after birth. The incisors are separated from the premolars and molars by a
broad diastema, without canines. There is a pair of small maxillary incisors, the ‘peg
teeth', behind the large first incisors. All incisor teeth have a complete jacket of enamel.
i. The main taxonomic difference is the presence of the maxillary second incisors in lago-
morphs, while rodents have only a single pair. Another difference is that lagomorphs are
diphyodont while rodents are considered monophyodont. Rabbits have unpigmented
enamel while most rodents have yellow-orange incisor enamel. Rabbits have a full
elodont dentition while in most rodents only the incisors are continuously growing. The
relative widths of the mandible and maxilla, and the range of movement of the temporo-
mandibular joint, also form important differences.
196
206, 207: Questions
206 i. What are the components of the
206
periodontium?
il. List the periodontal structures depicted
by the arrows marked A-H in 206.
m. What are the ultrastructural charac-
teristics of the junctional epithelium?
专：
0
207a
207 This horse is being ridden as a hunter-jumper (207a). What corrective dental proce-
dures should be performed?
197
206, 207: Answers
206 i. Gingiva, periodontal ligament, cementum, and alveolar bone.
ii. (A) Dentin. (B) Cementum. (C) Periodontal ligament. (D) Alveolar bone. (E) Gingival
Connective tissue. (F) Junctional epithelium. (G) Sulcular epithelium. (H) Attached
gingiva.
m. Cells of the junctional epithelium (JE) migrate in the direction of their long axis
towards the bottom of the sulcus where they are shed. The cells approaching the sulcus
contain lysosomes and can phagocytose microorganisms. At the bottom of the sulcus, all
JE cells exfoliate and neutrophils can also be seen migrating through the JE. The
replacement rate of the JE is about five days, which is twice as high as that of the oral
 ns   o i a   s  a
Other stratified squamous epithelium of the oral cavity, the JE is only composed of two
layers, the active basal layer and an inactive suprabasal layer. The cells all have basically
the same structure; they do not undergo a differentiation process like the cells of a
keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. The attachment between the JE and the
tooth surface is called the epithelial attachment. This attachment is provided by
hemidesmosomes between the tooth surface (covered by acellular afibrillar cementum or
by the dental cuticle) and the internal basal lamina developing on the surface of the JE
cells in contact with this non-epithelial substrate.
207 The sharp enamel points
207b
(207b) should be floated off
and the mesial aspect of the
second premolars beveled back,
rounded, and smoothed. This is
frequently referred to as form-
ing a “bit seat". The maxillary
premolars are beveled back in
the shape of a thumb in profile.
There is some disagreement as
to the degree of beveling back
that should be done on the
mandibular second premolars.
In general, if the horse is
working with its nose out (head horizontal), only a small amount of beveling is done. If
the horse works with its nose down (head vertical), more beveling back is done. It has
been suggested that the bit being used dictates final shape. If a snafle bit is used, the
tooth should be rounded one-third its length, starting at the level of the gingiva on the
mesial aspect. Start the rounding half-way up on the second premolar and extend distally
if a curb bit is used. All the mesial surfaces should be rounded and smoothed no matter
how much beveling is done. Most of the *bit seats' are shaped by hand, but power tools
are being used more frequently.
198
208, 209: Questions
208 i. This is the nozzle of a piece of
208
equipment used during routine perio-
dontal treatment {208). What is it, and
how does it work?
ii. What are the advantages of this tech-
nique?
i. How should it be used, and what pre-
cautions should be taken?
209 A large swelling of the left
209a
mandible was evident in this
five-year-old riding horse (209a).
Oral examination revealed a
defect between the second and
fourth premolars. Also shown
here is a 30° lateral-oblique
radiograph (209b).
i. What is the radiologic diag-
nosis?
i. How may the condition be
treated?
209b
199
208, 209: Answers
208 i. An air-polishing unit used for polishing. It uses medical-grade sodium bicar-
bonate crystals and water in a jet of compressed air to 'sandblast' the surface smooth. A
well-known example of this equipment is the Prophy-Jet@ (Dentsply Ltd.).
 ii. Air-polishing has many advantages, especially for veterinary use. It is a very effective
means of polishing. Air-polishing involves no physical contact with the tooth and
thermal injury is of no concern, contrary to cup-and-pumice polishing. Air-polishing is
ideally suited for polishing teeth separated by wide diastemata and with a considerable
variation in shape and size. Areas that are very difficult or even impossible to reach with
the rubber cup can easily be polished using the air-polisher. It is also believed that air-
polishing may be complementary to periodontal debridement in removing subgingival
plaque and toxins.
. The nozzle through which the slurry is propelled should be held 3-5 mm from the
tooth and centered on the middle third of the tooth. The manufacturer's recommenda-
however, care should be taken not to direct the spray directly into the sulcus. Non-
keratinized mucosal surfaces (e.g. the sublingual mucosa) behind the teeth to be
polished should be shielded, either by the operator's finger or by gauze. Prolonged use
on dentin, cementum, and restorative materials {e.g. composite materials) should be
avoided. There is some concern in human dentistry that absorption of the sodium bicar
bonate may result in electrolyte disturbances. Air-polishing generates an aerosol of
microorganisms and powder over a wide area around the patient. Personal protection
(mask, eye-wear) is, therefore, very important and work surfaces require thorough
cleaning and disinfection after the procedure.
209 i. The radiograph (209b) shows a bizarre pattern of radiodense tissues in the loca-
tion of the third premolar, suggestive of an odontoma. An odontoma is an example of
an inductive odontogenic tumor: during tumor formation, an inductive effect between
the epithelial and mesenchymal tissues takes place, similar to that occurring during
odontogenesis, and the various dental tissues are formed. If tooth-like particles are
identifiable, the term compound odontoma is used. In this case, where the aggregation
of dental tissues is disorganized, this tumor is known as a complex odontoma. Although
odontogenic tumors are rare in horses, the possibility of an odontogenic tumor should
be considered whenever an animal develops a localized swelling of either jaw, and parti-
cular suspicion should be raised when the patient is young, coinciding with the time of
 greatest activity of the primordial dental tissues. Although the radiologic signs of odon-
i. An odontoma may be amenable to surgical removal. Removing the tumor by intra-
capsular excision (piecemeal withdrawal of the tumor) following a bone flap approach
may be sufficient, but postoperative radiographs are advisable to establish that all
dental tissue has been removed. Some odontomas are not amenable to surgical removal
by virtue of their size.
200
210, 21l: Questions
210 This rabbit was approxi-
210a
mately one year old. It had been
fed on a concentrate ration
(pellets and grain) without ac-
cess to fresh herbage or hay
since weaning.
i.What abnormality/abnor-
malities can be seen on these
photographs (210a, b)?
ii. What is/are the likely
cause(s)?
. How significant is this in a
six-month-old rabbit compared
with the same problem in an
eight-year old rabbit?
210b
211 What are the possible immediate and long-term complications of dental repulsion
in the horse?
201
2l0, 21 l: Answers
210 i. Oblique wear of the incisor teeth (210b). The mandible is also displaced to the left.
As the abnormal wear pattern is slanting in the same direction it is likely that the man-
dibular position is significant, particularly as the rabbit was conscious when the photo-
graph was taken. Rabbits have a normal wide range of lateral mandibular movement, so
this positioning could have been caused by the method of restraint.
i. The abnormal wear pattern suggests a functional problem associated with lateral
chewing movements. This could be due to skeletal, neurologic, muscular, or temporo-
mandibular joint problems, or intraoral pathology. Abnormal wear of the cheek teeth
can lead to physical restriction in the range of jaw movement. Conscious alteration of
chewing pattern is probably the most common cause of subtle abnormalities such as this.
 In this particular case, the diet was easily chewed, little grinding being required before
the food was swallowed. When fed such a diet there is a tendency for rabbits to make
reduced lateral chewing moverments, resulting in insufficient wear to the lingual surfaces
of the mandibular and buccal surfaces of the maxillary cheek teeth. In the case illustrated
here the rabbit had developed sharp spikes only on the lingual surface of the mandibular
cheek teeth on the right-hand side of its mouth. Occlusal equilibration to return the teeth
to their normal contour, followed by introduction of a more abrasive (normal) diet of
hay and fresh grass, which required considerable chewing effort, prevented recurrence
over a five-year follow-up period.
im. The significance of dental problems in animals with continuously growing teeth
generally declines with age. If a minor abnormality has taken eight years to develop it is
not likely to progress rapidly, making successful long-term control much more likely. In a
young animal such problems are frequently an indication that ongoing control measures
will be required.
211 The extraction of an equine molar or premolar tooth is a formidable undertaking
with many potential complications in the intraoperative and postoperative periods, not
to mention the long-term sequelae for the animal's oral conformation.
      n     s 
include: {1) Traumatic fracture of the mandible. (2) Iatrogenic damage to neighboring
teeth. (3) Inadvertent disruption of adjacent structures: nasolacrimal duct; parotid
salivary duct; branches of the linguofacial artery and vein; palatine artery; ventral and
dorsal buccal branches of the facial nerve; infraorbital nerve. (4) Failure to remove the
entire tooth - dental sequestration. (5) Sequestration of bone fragments from the lining of
the alveolus. (6) Loss of the alveolar plug with contamination of the alveolus by ingesta.
(7) Oronasal fistula formation.
In the months and years which follow dental extractions the teeth on either side will
tend to drift across the vacant space to narrow the defect in the arcade. The occluding
tooth in the opposite jaw will continue to erupt without attritional wear and, as the space
vacated by the extracted tooth narrows, the resultant overgrowth will become more
pointed. Clearly, there are major long-term implications for the oral conformation of the
patient and regular rasping, i.e. at three-month intervals, is indicated to prevent second-
ary complications.
202
212, 213: Questions
212
212 i. Chronic gingivostomatitis in the cat is also known as lymphocytic-plasmacytic
gingivostomatitis. What does the term lymphocytic-plasmacytic refer to (212)?
ii. Is it of clinical value to biopsy these lesions?
213
213 This is a two-year-old cat with a history of chronic sneezing (213).
i. What is the midline palatal structure, and what is the cleft?
ii. What are possible treatment options?
203
212, 213: Answers
212 i. Some pathologists emphasize the types of inflammatory cells that accumulate in
oral mucosal lesions. This has created the impression among clinicians that lympho-
cytic-plasmacytic gingivostomatitis is a specific disease entity in the cat.
Acute lesions are mainly associated with polymorphonuclear neutrophilic infiltrates.
whereas increasing numbers and proportions of lymphocytes and plasma cells indicate
hypersensitivity) reactions. Secondary microbial infection is common in oral lesions and
results in a mixed inflammatory response. Acute inflammation will have a predomi-
nance of neutrophils, whereas chronic inflammation will be characterized by the
presence of macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells.
i. Although the histopathologic findings may be suggestive of a specific disease process,
like an eosinophilic granuloma, the inflammatory responses of oral tissues are often
non-specific. Any condition that breeches the oral defense mechanisms may allow nor-
mal oral flora to invade the deeper tissues and to elicit inflammation. To complicate
matters, the lesion may actually result from the host's attempt to contain immunologi-
cally or eliminate foci of microbial persistence, e.g. chronic, ulcerating, hyperplastic
faucitis associated with chronic oral carriage of feline calicivirus. A biopsy of the latter
lesion would demonstrate a severe and diffuse plasmacytic-lymphocytic infiltrate in
deeper tissues and a more ulcerative and suppurative process superficially. With ulcera-
tive lesions in the oral cavity of the cat there is always the possibility of neoplasia which
warrants taking a biopsy.
213 i. The round structure on the midline is the incisive papilla; buccal {lateral) are the
orifices of the incisive ducts. The incisive ducts communicate with the paired vomero-
nasal organs and then caudodorsally through the palatine fissures with the nasal cavity.
The vomeronasal organs consist of olfactory membrane located at the rostral base of
the nasal septum. Lip curling and the “Flehmen response’ as a result of sniffing is
thought to be a response to open the incisive papilla to allow more molecules to enter
-ns ai w sasndu ueao jesuaa au suul anss au ot pasodxa aq pu
tion of this olfactory membrane eventually travel to areas of the hypothalamus asso-
ciated with sexual and feeding behavior, and possible social interactions. Clients will
often ask about the incisive papilla, thinking that this is a tumor in formation. In this
case, there are clefts resulting from abnormally wide openings of the incisive ducts.
These clefts allow food and other debris to be trapped.
i. Treatment options include increased home hygiene, surgery and an obturator.
Increased home hygiene could include the use of instruments to remove the foreign
material, or water irrigation either via a curved-tip syringe or water pic. This would
require dedication on the part of the client. Surgical options include the use of a sliding
s a  s aand s jo y a d e  n d  
could make the condition worse. The third alternative is to manufacture an obturator
with a rubber-based material. The obturator can be placed in the clefts to prevent the
introduction of food when the patient is eating; it can be removed for cleaning.
204
214, 215: Questions
214 These are two intraoral
214a
radiographs depicting the use of
intraosseous wiring for the
repair of a bilateral mandibular
fracture in a dog (214a, b).
i.What is the most important
 principle in the management of
jaw fractures? List several ad-
ditional principles that should
be utilized in the management
of these fractures.
ii. What is the proper technique
for tightening wires during the
fixation of jaw fractures?
214b
215 Why are extraction forceps
215
less suitable for use in dogs and
cats than in humans (215)?
20.5
214, 215: Answers
214 i. Restoration of occlusion and anatomic reduction of the fracture. The inter
digitation of the teeth is precise and the tolerance for error is narrow. Proper dental
occlusion results from anatomic reduction of fracture fragments. However, proper
occlusion may be difficult to achieve when there has been bone loss or loss of teeth, or
when the fracture is highly comminuted. In these cases it is important to rely on occlu
sion of the remaining teeth as a guide and accept less-than-perfect bone reduction if
necessary. In cases in which there has been bone loss or loss of teeth, an alternative
tional guidelines for the application of intraosseous wiring in the treatment of jaw
fractures include the following: (1) A ventral surgical approach is recommended. (2)
Tension band principles should be utilized. (3) Soft alveolar bone, reactive bone, or
infected bone should be avoided during wire placement. (4) Wires should be placed
somewhere between perpendicular to the fracture line and parallel to the long axis of the
mandibular body, and if two wires are used, they should be placed at an angle to each
other. (5) All orthopedic wires should be fastened securely. (6) Additional support should
line. {8) Excessive soft tissue dissection and the incorporation of soft tissue beneath wires
should be avoided.
In the case illustrated, complications can be expected because: (1) There are teeth
present in the fracture lines. (2) The wires placed in the left mandible are parallel, allow-
ing a swivel action. (3) Multiple fractures are present, exceeding the limits of what can
reasonably be expected of intraosseous wiring.
il. Wires should be preplaced before tightening. While the wire is being tightened, tension
should be applied to the wire to ensure that a tight fit of the wire is achieved. Proper wire
tightening allows the wire to twist around itself rather than one wire twisting around the
other. Following wire placement, occlusive alignment should be re-evaluated.
215 Human teeth are relatively robust structures, normally varying only a little in size be-
tween patients. Unless they are grossly decayed, human teeth can withstand application
of the considerable forces used during forceps extraction. It is necessary for extraction
forceps to closely fit the teeth they are applied to so there are different designs for each
size, shape, and position of tooth in the human mouth. Carnivore teeth are relatively
thinner, with proportionately longer roots, so are prone to fracture when lateral or
crushing forces are applied to them. The teeth also vary considerably in size and form,
making it impractical to have an adequate set of forceps for all situations. If forceps are
used during extraction of carnivore teeth, the tooth should first be loosened as much as
possible using other methods. The instrument jaws are applied as far apically as possible
and must fit the tooth well. Pressure is then applied and held repeatedly in an apical then
coronal direction, intruding and extruding the tooth into the alveolus to tear periodontal
fibers. With single-rooted (reasonably straight) tooth segments, gentle rotational forces
can also be applied and held in alternate directions, again tearing periodontal fibers. Use
of excessive force is likely to result in tooth or jaw fracture.
206
216, 217: Questions
216 Pictured are three different
216
types of power scaling tips
(216).
i. What are the different power
sources for these instruments?
ii. How does the tip action vary
between these instruments, and
what is their operating fre-
quency?
. What are the major similar-
ities and differences of these
power scalers?
217
217 This photograph illustrates the traditional method used to extract the cheek teeth
of horses by repulsion (217).
i. What are the surgical principles of this procedure?
ii. What are the indications for the extraction of cheek teeth in horses?
207
216, 217: Answers
216 i. The scalers on the left and right are classified as ultrasonic scalers and are
powered by electricity. The one on the left is a magnetostrictive unit. The electricity
creates a magnetic field in a ferromagnetic rod or metal stack. This magnetic field
creates vibrations which are transmitted to the working tip. The scaler on the right is
classified as a piezoelectric unit. Electrical current is passed through a crystal in the
handpiece that changes shape, thus creating the vibrations in the handpiece tip. The
center scaler is a sonic scaler which is powered by compressed air and is attached to a
dental handpiece. Vibrations at the scaler tip are created when air passes through a hole
in a shaft inside the handpiece, spinning a ring which encircles the scaler.
ii. The sonic scaler tip moves in an elliptical fashion, much like a figure-of-eight pattern.
They operate at 2,000-6,000 Hz. The edges of the diamond-shaped tip are the most
active and the power is concentrated in the last 3-5 mm of the tip. The ultrasonic tip on
the left is equally active on all sides of the working end and moves in a rotary fashion.
Pot-stack ultrasonic scaler tips have a more elliptical action or may have surfaces that
are more active than others, namely the upper and under surfaces of the tip greater than
the lateral surfaces. Ultrasonic scalers operate at frequencies of 20,000-40,000 Hz.
Piezoelectric scalers have two active surfaces, usually the 3 o'clock and 9 o'clock sides.
The tip motion is linear in a back-and-forth action. Piezoelectric scalers operate at
25,000-45,000 Hz. Knowledge of tip action and active sides of the instrument is impor-
tant to allow for more efficient scaling and proper use of the instrument.
mi. All these instruments are used for gross supragingival calculus removal from teeth.
They all use a water spray for lavage and/or cooling and will create an aerosol. Dif-
ferent tip sizes and configurations are available for all of them for heavy calculus
removal and fine calculus removal. The ultrasonic units will develop heat in the instru-
ment tip, while the sonic scaler produces little heat. The ultrasonic magnetostrictive
units with long and very thin tips with directed water spray are designed for subgingival
use to perform periodontal debridement.
217 The technique necessitates an apical approach to the diseased tooth which is then
driven out into the mouth with a hammer and punch. In order for extraction proce-
dures to be successful it is essential to accurately identify which tooth, if any, is diseased
and then to remove the right tooth, the whole tooth and to damage nothing but the
tooth. The objectives of the aftercare, which can be prolonged, are to eliminate second-
ary infection from the adjacent tissues and to prevent contamination of the alveolus
during the healing stages.
ii. Indications include idiopathic apical abscessation, pathologic and iatrogenic fracture,
impaction, maleruption with secondary periodontitis, and malformations including
developmental tumors. For the maxillary arcade the indications are similar but with the
addition of periapical abscessation secondary to infundibular necrosis. Evidence that a
tooth requires extraction is obtained from the external signs, detailed oral examination,
and radiography. Unless the evidence is convincing it is irresponsible to proceed with
the extraction surgery.
208
218, 219: Questions
218a
218 In designing a crown for this fractured tooth (218a):
i. Where should the margins be placed?
i. What type of margins could be used, and what are the advantages and disadvantages
of each?
iii. What precautions must be taken?
219 i. What is the cause of the
219
artifact seen on this radiograph
(219)?
ii. What other processing errors
can occur that can make a den-
tal film difficult, if not impossi-
ble, to evaluate?
209
218,219:Answers
218b
218c
3
39
A
B
C
D
218 i. Ideally, crown margins are best placed supragingivally.
Restoration margins cannot be perfectly adapted to the tooth,
and as a result there will always be microscopic defects in
       
subgingivally, there is a greater chance of creating an area that
allows plaque retention. If the crown margin must be placed
subgingivally, the chances of doing harm are decreased by
 Creating a well-a dapted margin.
ii. There are three general types of margins: (1) A feathered (or
knife-edge) margin is where the margin is created by gently sloping the margin coronally
(218b (A)). Often, the actual end point of the margin is not obvious and must be
indicated to the laboratory. This margin has the advantages of minimal tooth loss and
ease of preparation. (2) A shoulder margin (218b (B) is where a definite ledge is created
in the prepared tooth. The disadvantage of this margin is the increased amount of tooth
loss. It is required for a porcelain crown. A variation of this technique is to add a bevel
to the shoulder (218b (C). This is indicated for preparations with extremely short walls
and can also be used for porcelain-fused-to-metal crowns. (3) A chamfer (218b (D)) is a
hybrid between the feathered margin at one extreme and a shoulder margin at the other.
The tooth is cut so that tooth is removed coronally, and at the same time the margin
tapers to a shoulder at the margin. This is generally regarded as the finish line of choice
for metal crowns.
道. Whatever margin is used, caution should be used not to cut away too much tooth,
but at the same time allow room for the crown in the occlusion with other teeth. In
addition, the crown form should be created so that there are no overhangs and an
optimal 6° taper {an inclination of 3° on each surface) exists to allow the prosthetic
crown to fit properly and have optimal retention (218c).
219 i. A light leak probably occurred during processing.
developer, or too warm a developing solution. A film that is too light is related to a
developing solution that is old or too cold, not enough developing time, or not enough
exposure time. A foggy film or “washed-out? background is related to old developer,
which also causes loss of detail. Brown spots on the film result from fixer that is too
old, film not fixed long enough, or film not rinsed well (fixer oxidizes). A film will not
develop properly if paper is left attached to the film.
210
220, 221: Questions
 220 The most important aspect of atra umatic extraction technique is the severing of the
periodontal ligament, which is most frequently performed using dental luxators and
elevators.
i. What are the main differences between dental elevators and luxators?
ii. Why are elevators and luxators produced in different sizes and tip curvatures?
221 These pictures show the
221a
transcoronal access to the roots
of the maxillary fourth pre-
molar in a six-year-old Afghan
Hound (221a, b). Describe why
this approach is so often used
by veterinary dentists.
221b
211
220, 22 I: Answers
220 i. Dental elevators are fashioned
220
with a cutting edge in chisel form
while luxators are more knife-like.
Elevators are made from hardened
metal and are robust instruments
A
which can withstand heavy hand-
ling. They are sharpened in the form
of a chisel and often also go under
that name. Luxators are produced
from softer metal which can be
readily sharpened. The thin, highly-
tapered tip of a luxator (220 (B))
penetrates the narrow periodontal
space far more readily than the
B
"chunky' tip of an elevator {220
(A)). When used appropriately,
mechanical advantage reduces the
effort required to do the work of ex-
traction. Luxators have a thin,
tapered blade which can be used as an efficient gradient wedge.
i. The width and curvature of the instrument tips need to conform to the roots of the
teeth on which they are used, so a wide variety of sizes are required. For veterinary use
the most common sizes are 2, 3, 4, and 5 mm, the larger three sizes being standard sizes
used by human dentists. Various manufacturers interpret the designs differently, so by
shopping around it is possible obtain a set of 30-40 instruments to suit all small animal
dental needs.
221 The technique removes relatively little tooth substance so that ma ximum strength
is preserved. The technique also provides straight-line access and good exposure to all
three roots of the ma xillary carnassial tooth, and can be performed in dogs of all sizes
and breeds. The palatal root canal of the maxillary fourth premolar is particularly
difficult to thoroughly debride and shape for four reasons. First, this canal is often very
small and, especially in older dogs, can be partially calcified. Second, the canal's exit
from the pulp chamber is not in the same relative location in every tooth. Third, the
palatal root varies in its relative orientation to the other roots. Sometimes it runs fairly
parallel to the mesiobuccal root and sometimes it diverges from the mesiobuccal root.
These last two factors make it difficult to locate the entrance to the canal from near the
central cusp or from a site near the buccal groove. The fourth problem is encountered
when trying to access the canal directly through the cusp of the palatal root. The cusp is
small, and in many large dogs it is awkward or impossible to place the head of a
standard high-speed handpiece close enough to drill a hole in the palatal cusp directly
over the pulp chamber of this root. The transcoronal approach, which usually requires
two new access sites, provides straight-line access to the apex of all three root canals
being treated so that each canal can be adequately prepared.
212
222, 223: Questions
222 With regard to the transcoronal access in 221:
i. Is making additional access sites preferable to accessing all three root canals via the
fracture exposure site that is revealed when a large buccal slab fracture or central cusp
fracture has exposed the pulp?
ii. Is it important to preserve the palatal root when performing standard root canal
therapy?
223a
223b
223 This is a congenital cleft hard palate with an associated midline soft palatal defect
in a four-month-old Shetland Collie presented because of chronic, bilateral nasal dis-
ment of congenital cleft hard and soft palatal defects. What are these guidelines and
what surgical technique can be utilized in the successful management of congenital cleft
hard and soft palatal defects?
213
222, 223: Answers
222 i. Although it is often possible to access all three root canals through the fracture
exposure site, complications are more prevalent due to increased pulp chamber per-
forations {over-instrumentation) of both the mesiobuccal and the palatal roots, metal
fatigue leading to separated files if files are prebent, stripping the canal with the file's
concave side and leaving contamination on the convex side of the prepared root canal,
and the resultant ledging and filling voids (incomplete fills).
i. Yes. When palatal root canal complications occur, usually as a result of either over-
instrumentation or inability to access the canal, clinicians may advocate amputating the
palatal root to avoid subsequent periapical or periodontal disease. The palatal root,
however, provides an important buttress effect against the powerful shearing forces
exerted on the maxillary fourth premolar and should be treated and preserved if at all
possible. In a retrospective study, 20% of the maxillary fourth premolars that had
palatal roots amputated experienced crown fracture within 12 months of the procedure.
Postoperatively, most dogs will continue to abuse this tooth by chewing on bones and
other hard objects. With the transcoronal approach, fewer complications arise than
with other techniques, and maximal strength and structure can be maintained in this
largeand important tooth.
223 The following guidelines have been recommended in the surgical management of
  e  ae e     a a ii  
(2) The vascular supply to the flap should be preserved. (3) Suture lines should be
arranged whenever possible to lie over connective tissue rather than over the defect. (4)
Tissues should be handled gently and relatively large bites of tissue should be taken to
minimize tension and minimize interference with the blood supply at the edges of the
wound. (5) The use of electrocoagulation for hemorrhage control should be avoided. (6)
Tissues should be sutured to appose edges that do not have an intact epithelial surface.
(7) A two-layer closure should be utilized whenever possible.
The surgical techniques that utilize the guidelines listed above are the overlapping
flap technique for the repair of hard palatal defects and the two-layer closure of the soft
 palatal congenital defect. The overlapping flap technique is preferred by most surgeons
because there is less tension on the suture line, the suture line is not located directly over
the defect, and the area of opposing connective tissue is larger which results in a
steal flaps. One flap is hinged at the end of the palatal defect and is turned beneath the
other flap. Horizontal mattress sutures of synthetic absorbable suture material are
utilized to maintain the connective tissue surfaces of both flaps in apposition. The mid-
line soft palatal defect is corrected by making an incision along the medial margin of the
soft palate on each side and blunt separating the palatal tissue to form a dorsal and
ventral flap on each side with a scissors. The two dorsal flaps are sutured in a simple
interrupted pattern while the two ventral flaps are sutured.
214
224, 225: Questions
224 Dental enamel is the hardest tissue in the body.
i. How does it differ from other body tissues?
ii. What are its principal components {also compared with dentin and cementum)?
225 This dog has had a traumatic injury
225
to its maxillary canine tooth (225),
i. What are the differences between an
avulsed tooth, a luxated tooth, and a sub-
luxated tooth?
i. What would be an appropriate treat-
ment plan to salvage this tooth?
i. When is endodontic therapy appropri-
ate for these teeth?
21.5
224,225:Answers
224 i. Enamel is acellular.
droxyapatite [Ca1o-xNax (PO4)6-, (CO3)2 (OH)2- Fu], aligned as rods or prisms with
traces of the protein matrix laid down during enamel formation enveloping each crystal.
The composition of enamel, compared with dentin and cementum, is as follows:
Ename!
Dentin and cementum
Weight(%)Volume(%)
Weight(%)Volume(%)
Carbonated hydroxyapatite
96
85
70
47
Protein and lipid
1
3
20
33
Water
3
12
10
20
The protein matrix of immature enamel mainly consists of amelogenins, which account
for 90% of all enamel proteins. As the enamel matures, amelogenins are broken down
by proteinases and the main remaining non-amelogenin proteins include the enamelins.
When the teeth of man, primates, and carnivores (where enamel forms the protective
covering to the crown) erupt, the enamel is incompletely mineralized. Throughout life
there is a constant mineral exchange between the moist oral environment (saliva is
normally supersaturated with calcium salts) and enamel, thus allowing the incorpora-
tion of fluoride and other ions into the mineral structure. In the presence of fluoride,
more fluoroapatite [Cao(PO4)F2] is formed, which is less soluble and more acid-resis-
tant than hydroxyapatite. Changes in the oral environment, such as the release of acids
"etchants", can lead to demineralization of enamel. If only the surface layer is affected,
remineralization can occur, but since the cells {ameloblasts) which produce enamel have
degenerated by the time the tooth erupts into the mouth, enamel cannot repair itself or
regenerate when it is otherwise damaged or lost.
225 i. An avulsed (or exarticulated) tooth is one that has become completely separated
from the alveolar socket. These teeth must be reimplanted, ideally within 30 minutes, as
damage to the periodontal ligament attachment occurs from desiccation. The prognosis
is guarded and some tooth resorption is likely.
A luxated tooth is one that has lateral, intrusive or extrusive displacement. The tooth
shown in 225 has significant lateral displacement disrupting the buccal alveolar wall.
There will be significant mobility and these teeth will not remain stable when replaced
in their socket. They have a better prognosis than a completely avulsed tooth.
A subluxated tooth is one that has become mobile from a traumatic injury but has
not become displaced. It may not need to be stabilized to allow repair of the periodontal
ligament.
ii. A treatment plan for a laterally luxated tooth is to obtain an intraoral radiograph to
evaluate the hard tissues, and gently debride the palatal alveolar area and root surface.
The periodontal ligament fibers should be left intact if they appear healthy. The tooth is
replaced into the alveolus and stabilized. Several options are available to stabilize this
tooth depending upon the degree of mobility and presence of anchor teeth. A figure-of-
216
224,225:Answers
eight wire around the two ma xillary canines stabilized with acrylic or composite resin
material is a simple method to stabilize a canine tooth that has instability laterally and a
healthy counterpart. An acrylic or composite resin splint can be placed between several
adjacent teeth in the same arch to obtain good stability also. The splint may be left in
place for four to six weeks. Endodontic treatment is performed as described below and
the tooth is followed radiographically to determine continued treatment success.
m. Endodontic treatment is generally required in avulsed and luxated teeth due to the
disruption of the blood supply to the tooth and subsequent pulp death. Various times
have been recommended for endodontic treatment. Initial root canal therapy should be
done 2-3 weeks after initial treatment to remove pulp tissue, clean the canal, and fill the
canal with calcium hydroxide. A permanent obturation with sealer and gutta-percha
can be completed at the time of splint removal or up to a year later. Avulsed teeth that
are treated endodontica lly at the time of reimplantation may have a worse prognosis.
217
All references are to question numbers
‘Base-narrow’occlusion 38
 Benzyl peroxide 171
Biopsy 2,22,33,60, 91,104, 127, 151,
Abrasion 9,36, 70, 141, 152
Abutment tooth 139
165,172,209,212
‘Acanthomatous epulis' 33, 101, 202
Bisecting angle technique 94
Acid-etch technique 4, 98, 105, 177
"Bite’evaluation 115
Acromegaly 68
Bit seat 156, 207
Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis 172
Bone loss 62
Air-polishing 208
Bone resorption 15, 59, 62
Alginate 10,55,84,122,150,154
Bone sequestrum 44
Alveolar bone 62,97, 206
Bone structure 97
Alveolar mucosa 47
Brachygnathism 21, 38, 64,72, 178
Alveolus 88,96,217
Brachyodont teeth 42, 140
Amalgam bonding 98, 193
Breaks 5
Bridge terminology 139
Amalgam instruments 173
Amalgam restoration 80, 98, 173, 175, 193
Buccitis 91
Ameloblastoma 22,33,48,101
Buccotomy 96
Ameloblast 14,105,110,224
Bullous pemphigoid 104
Amelogenesis imperfecta 36
Burs 169
Amelogenins 224
Button 112, 201
American Kennel Club 112
Cage-biter syndrome 152
American Veterinary Medical Association
112,201
Calcium alginate dressing 88
Amoxicillin 26
Calcium hydroxide 25,45, 146
Ampicillin 26
Calcium hydroxyapatite 3, 63, 97, 224
Analgesia 35
Calcium phosphate 69, 97, 196
Anchorage 112, 201
Calculus 12,36,57,157,161,179,196,
Anelodont teeth 42
216
Anemia 6
Cancellous bone 97
Anesthesia 6, 132, 170, 186
Cancellous bone graft 48, 56
Ankylosis 15, 59, 61
Canine acanthomatous ameloblastoma
Antibiotics 2,26
(epulis) 33,101,202
Antinuclear antibody test 136
Carboxylate cement 191
Antiplaque agent 28
Cardiomyopathy 6
Apexification 45
Caries 70, 98,128,142, 152,164,193
Apex morphology 30, 32,113, 147
Carnassial tooth 1
Apicoectomy 45,49, 80,148
Catgut 39
Atomization 125
Cavity preparation 193
Attached gingiva 47, 159, 206
Cell-free zone of Weil 135
Attachment loss 12,65,87
Cell-rich zone 135
Attrition 36,64,70,152,210
Cells of Malassez 101
Autoimmune disease 104,136, 172
Cells of Serres 101
Azotemia 170
Cemental necrosis 128
Cementoenamel junction 47,62, 65, 87
Bacteremia 26, 29
Cementum 59,179,206,208,224
Barium sulfate 45
Cheiloplasty 171
Barrier 63
Chelating agent 130
Basal lamina 206
Chew toys 192
218
Chlorhexidine 28
Deciduous teeth 21, 27, 38,42, 72, 105,
Classification dental fractures 114
149,156,174,195,203,205
Cleft lip 11
Dens sectorius 1
Cleft palate 11,158,223
Dental charting 12, 89, 161
Client education 29, 192, 199
Dental elevator 52, 220
Clindamycin 26
Dental formula 1, 131, 133, 205
Cobalt-chrome-molybdenum 9
Dental index 126
Cold agglutinin disease 172
Dental interlock 72
Collagen-calcium phosphate 45
Dental lamina 101
Complications (of dentigerous cyst) 48
Dental luxator 52, 220
Complications (of endodontic treatment)
Dental (radiographic) film 81, 102, 155,
25,45,49, 67, 197,222
219
Complications (of extractions) 20,52,72,
Dental repulsion 211, 217
77,88,105,125,137,176,195,211,
Dental sac 190
215,217
Dentigerous cyst 48, 189
Complications (of implants) 53
Dentin 3, 59, 70,109, 163,206, 208, 224
Complications (of jaw fractures) 54, 56, 71,
Dentinal tubules 3, 109, 113
74,83,100,214
Dentin-bonding agent 4, 98, 105, 193
Complications {of
Dentinoenamel junction 51
mandibulectomy/maxillectomy) 50, 171
Dentinogenesis imperfecta 36
Complications (of palate surgery) 86, 111
Dentin-pulp complex 70, 109, 135
Complications (of restorations) 51, 82
Deviation 178
Composite resin cement 82, 177
Diabetes 68, 124
Composite restorative material 4, 82, 167,
Diastema 168, 205
208,225
Dichotomous tooth 19
Computed tomography 50, 68, 143, 165
Dietary texture 157
Conchae 181
Diphyodont dentition 42, 205
Concrescence 19
Discoloration 25, 36,45, 110, 174
Condylectomy 17, 18, 71, 83
Distemper 110
Condyloid process 17, 18, 71, 83, 158
Dowel 82
Congenital heart defect 6
Dysphagia 64, 128
Contact ulcer 172
Cortical bone 97
 Echocardiogram 6
Corticosteroids 2, 41, 67
Elastomers 150
Craniofacial asymmetry 200, 201
Electrocardiogram 6
Crib-biter 141
Electrosurgery 7
Crossbite 21, 40
Elodont teeth 42, 205
Crowding 178
Elongation 153
Crown amputation 108,125,144,201
Embedded tooth 48, 189
Crown fracture 70, 119
Embossed dot 16, 102
Crown-height reduction 106, 144, 188
Embryogenesis 11
Crown-lengthening procedure 187
Enamel14,73,205,224
Crown margin 120, 218
Enamel bonding 4, 98, 177, 193
Crown preparation 82,120,187,218
Enamel hypomineralization 14, 36
Crown restoration 9,43, 82,105,120,152,
Enamel hypoplasia 14,36, 105, 110
177,187,218
Enamel infarction 36
Crown-root fracture 23,43,114,118,159
Enamelins 224
Cup-and-pumice technique 73, 169, 208
Enamel matrix 14
Endodontic access site 78, 167,175, 182,
Debridement 44,45,46, 54,56,137, 148,
221, 221
179,208,216
Endodontic disease 36,45,100,118, 148
219
Endodontic file 78, 121, 129, 130, 180, 204
Formaldehyde 67
Endodontic instrument 129, 138, 204
Free gingiva 47, 65
Endodontic-periodontal lesions 113, 197
Frenectomy 92
Endodontic sealer 67
Frenotomy 92
Endodontic shaping 180, 204
Furcation lesion 12, 62, 87, 89, 113, 161,
Endodontic stop 78
179
Endotracheal tube 186
Fused roots 195
Envelope flap 183, 184
Fusion 19
Eosinophilic granuloma complex 41, 91,
212
Gallop rhythm 6
Eosinophilic pharyngeal ulcer 41, 172
Gastroesophageal tube 186
Epidermal necrolysis 172
Gemination 19
Epithelial attachment 206
Genetic counseling 112, 144
Epithelial hyperplasia 165
Gingiva 47,65,206
Epithelial metaplasia 165
Gingival contour 43, 159,114,178
Epulides 33, 60
Gingival curettage 57
Equine dental instrument 5, 37, 64, 185
Gingival cyst 101
Eruption cyst 190
Gingival flap 20, 57, 183, 194
Essig wiring technique 85
Gingival hyperplasia 7,33,65,161
Ethical considerations 112, 201
Gingival index 126
Ethylene-diamine tetra-acetic acid 130
Gingival margin 65, 87
Eugenol 175,191
Gingival recession 12, 87, 89, 92, 145, 161
Expansion device 21,144
Gingival sulcus 57, 65, 164, 208
External fixation 56,100
Gingivectomy 7,28,60
Extraction {cat) 20,24,35,88,108,125,
Gingivitis 12, 28, 59,74, 91, 104, 126,
183,184,215
157,161, 171,196,199
Extraction (dog)24,56,72,77,88, 99,
Gingivoplasty 7,28
183,184,189,195,197,215
Gingivostomatitis 2, 28, 35, 74, 91, 103,
Extraction (horse) 96, 137, 149, 156, 168,
165,212
211, 217
Glass-ionomer luting cement 82, 191
Extraction instruments 52, 215, 220
Glass-ionomer restorative material 175
Extraction (rabbit) 106
Glossitis 91, 103, 104, 172
Extra-oral near-parallel technique 58, 102
Glossopalatine fold 91
Gold alloy 9
Faucitis 2,91, 103, 212
Gold salts 2
Feline calicivirus 91, 103, 212
Gracey curette 198
 Feline immunodeficiency virus 91
Growth factors 63
Feline inductive odontogenic tumor 66
Growth hormone 68
Feline leukemia virus 91
Guided tissue regeneration 63, 89, 99, 159,
Feline panleukopenia virus 103
194
Feline viral rhinotracheitis 91, 103
"Gum-chewing lesions’ 151
Fibrosarcoma 33, 50
Gunshot wound 100, 148
Film onientation 102, 131
Gutta-percha 49,67,78,121,138,162.
Flehmen response 213
180, 204
Floats 5, 37
Fluoride 224
Halitosis 44, 124, 145, 166, 171
Fluoroapatite 224
Handpiece 73, 169
Fluorosis 36
Hard palate 11, 91, 111, 158, 223
Focal fibrous hyperplasia 33
Heart murmur 6, 132
Foreign body 69, 148
Heated gutta-percha technique 121, 138
Foreshortening 153
Heavy-metal compounds 67
220
Hedstrom file 129, 180, 204
Keratinized epithelium 47,65, 206, 208
Hemidesmosomes 206
Kerr (K-) fle 129, 180, 204
Hemorrhage 88
Kirschner wires 100
Hertwig,s epithelial root sheath 101
Kissing ulcers 172
Heterodont dentition 42, 205
High-rise syndrome 158
Lag screw 75
Hooks 5,64,185,201
Lamina cribriformis 97
Hybrid composite 167
Lamina dura 62, 95,97
Hydrocolloid 10, 84, 150
 Lamina propria 47
Hydrogen sulfide 124
Lance canine' 112
Hypercalcemia 170
Leverage 52
Hyperkalemia 170
Light-cure unit 4, 163
Hyperparathyroidism 95, 195
Light-cured composite 98, 163, 167
Hyperthyroidism 68, 132
Light leak 219
Hypoadrenocorticism 170
Linear granuloma 41
Hypochloridemia 170
Lingual molar salivary gland 8
Hyponatremia 170
Linguoversion (of mandibular canine) 27,
Hypsodont teeth 42, 140
38,144,178
Lip curling 213
Immune-mediated disease 104
Lip fold dermatitis 171
Impaction 168, 190
Lip fold excision 171
Implant 53
Lip laceration 46
Impression material 10, 55, 82, 84, 116,
Lip ulcer 41
122,150,154
Lubricating agent 130
Impression tray 154
Luting cement 191
Incisive duct 213
 Lymphocytic-plasmacytic gingivostomatitis
Incisive papilla 72, 213
212
hcisor malocclusion 37, 106, 140, 149,
155,188,210
Macrofilled composite 167
Inclined-plane bite plate 144
Magnetic resonance imaging 50, 68
Inductive fibroameloblastoma 66
Malocclusion 70
Infective endocarditis 6
Malocclusion (cat) 200, 201
hflammation 2, 212
Malocclusion (dog) 21,38,40, 72,
hfrabony pocket 62, 63, 77, 90, 99, 113,
107,112,144, 178
159
Malocclusion (horse) 13, 37, 117, 141, 149,
hfundibular necrosis 128
156,168,185,207
Instrument separation 49, 80, 123
Malocclusion (rabbit) 106,140,155, 188,
Instrument sharpening 93
210
Interceptive orthiodontic extraction 72
Malocclusion (rodents) 140, 155
Interdental wiring 75, 85
Mandibular fracture 56, 71, 74, 75, 83,
Intermediate restorative material 80, 82,
100,137,158,186,195,211,214
175,193
Mandibular frenulum 92
Internal resorption 34, 36, 59
Mandibular micrognathia 38
Intraoral acrylic splint 54, 74, 85, 225
 Mandibular process 11
Intraosseous wining 214
Mandibular symphysis separation 83, 158
Iodoform 67
Mandibulectomy 22
Irrigation solution 130, 179
Marsupialization 76
Ivy loop wiring technique 85
Maxillary fracture 54, 100, 186
Maxillary process 11
Junctional epithelium 47, 65, 206
Maxillectomy 39, 50, 143
Mental artery 79
221
Mental foramen 79, 202
Opioids 35
Mental nerve 79
Oral bacteria 26, 164
Mental vein 79
Oral mucosa 47
Mercaptan 124
Oral rinse 28
Mesioversion (of maxillary canine) 112,
Oral tumor 33, 60, 202
178
Oral tumor radiology 22, 66, 202, 209
Metabolic bone disease 95, 195
Oronasal fistula 77, 86, 88, 99, 143, 158,
Metaplastic conchal mineralization 181
165,213
Metronidazole 26
Orthodontic correction 21, 112, 144, 201
Microfilled composite 167
Orthodontic evaluation 115
Mineral trioxide aggregate 146
Orthodontic extrusion 187, 189
Mitral valve regurgitation 6
Osteoclast 59
Monophyodont dentition 205
Osteointegration 53
Morbillivirus 110
Osteomyelitis 44, 203
Mucocutaneous junction 104, 172
Osteoplasty 114
Mucogingival flap 35, 77, 96, 183, 184
Osteoporosis 15
Mucogingival junction 47, 118
Mucosal bleeding test 88
Palatal defect 111, 223
Mucosal hyperplasia 151
Palatal development 11
Mummification 67
Palatal mucosa 47
Palatal obturator 86, 111, 213
Nasal discharge 99, 168, 181
Palatal root 148,221, 222
 Nasal process 11
Palatal surgery 77, 86, 111, 143, 213, 223
Nasal septum 11
Palatal U-flap 111
Neoplasia 2, 148, 151, 212
Palatine fissures 213
Neutrophilia 6
Palatine processes 11
Nickel-chrome 9
Palatine rugae 47
Non-keratinized epithelium 47, 65, 206,
Parakeratinization 47
208
Parallel technique 58, 134
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent 35
Paranasal sinuses 96, 168
Non-union 56
Parapulpal pin 51, 82
Nylon 39
Parotid duct 69, 96
Parrot mouth, 64
Obturation 30,32,49,67,78,80,121,
Partial coronal pulpectomy (pulpotomy) 25,
123,138,162, 180,197
144,160,188,201
Obturator 86, 111, 213
Paste filler 49, 123, 169
Occlusal adjustment (horse) 5, 13, 37, 64,
Pedicle flap 183, 184, 213
141,185,207,211
Peeso-reamer 82, 169
Occlusion 115
Peg teeth 205
Odontoblast 3, 70, 109, 135
Pemphigus vulgaris 104
Odontoblastic process 3, 70, 109, 135
Periapical abscess 128, 148, 217
Odontoclast 59, 203
Periapical cyst 101
Odontoclastic resorptive lesion 15, 20, 31,
Periapical pathology 25, 29, 45, 64,67, 78,
34, 59, 61,108, 125, 175
90,100, 105,113,118,119,
Odontodysplasia 36
128,148,155,181,195,203,222
Odontogenesis 209
Periodontal abscess 29, 118
Odontogenic tumor 22, 33, 48, 66, 101,
Periodontal curette 57, 93, 198
202,209
Periodontal cyst 101
Odontologic nomenclature 42
Periodontal debridement 179, 208, 216
Odontoma 209
Periodontal disease 29,77, 87,113, 114,
Odontoplasty 24, 52, 89
118,124, 145, 157,164
222
Periodontal-endodontic lesion 56, 99, 113,
Pulp chamber 78, 221, 222
148
Pulpectomy 78, 119, 180
Periodontal flap surgery 89, 114, 159, 194
Pulp exposure 70, 114, 188
Periodontal ligament 101, 206
Pulp hemorrhage 36
Periodontal pocket 7,43,57,65,87,164,
Pulpitis 25, 36,54, 90, 119, 135, 146
179
Pulp necrosis 15,25,36, 54, 90, 105, 119,
Periodontal trauma 54, 225
203
Periodontitis 62,65,87,89,90,99,113,
Pulpotomy 25, 144, 146, 188
114,118,145,159, 164
Pulp vitality 25, 36, 99, 146
Periodontium 206
Pumice polish 73
Periosteum 184
Putty/wash technique 116
Peripheral ameloblastoma 33, 101, 202
Pyogenic granuloma 33
Peripheral odontogenic fibroma 33
Persistent deciduous tooth 21, 27, 149, 156,
 Radiographic positioning error 16, 153
195,203
Radiographic processing error 219
Pharyngotomy 186
Radiographic technique 58, 94, 102, 134,
Phosphoric acid 191
153,155,219
Phosphoric acid gel 4, 98, 177
Radiologic descriptors 202
Photo-initiated polymerization process 163
Radiologic findings 15, 22, 61, 62, 95, 119,
Paque 28,126,157,164,171,172,178,
147,155,176,195,202,209
179,192,196, 199
Radiometer 163
Plaque index 126
Ramps 5, 185
Poliglecaprone 25 39
Ranula 76
Polishing 73,169,193,208
Rasping 5, 37, 211
Polyacrylic acid 191
Reamer 129, 204
Polydioxanone 39
Releasing incisions 183, 184
Polyether 10, 150
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism 95
Polyglactin 910 39
Resin cement 82, 177
Polyglycolic acid 39
Restorative materials 167,175, 193, 208
Polymenizing silicone 84, 150
Restorative techniques 9, 25, 43, 51, 82,
Polypropylene 39
98,105,108,152, 175
Polysulfide 150
Retained tooth 27, 189
Pontic 139
Retroarticular process 17
Porcelain-veneer bridge 139
Retrograde filling 80
Portals of exit 30
Risdon wiring technique 85
Post-and-core technique 82
Rodent ulcer 41
Posts 9, 82
Root amputation 89
Power chain 112, 201
Root canal therapy 30, 32,45,49, 78, 80,
Predentin 3, 135
114,119,121,130,138,146,148,160,
Pre-extraction radiograph 176, 195
167,180,182,204,221,222,225
Pregnancy 174
Root dilaceration 195
Premolar cap 156
Root elevator 52, 220
Primary dentin 3, 70
Root elongation 140, 155
Probing depth 12, 65, 87
Root fracture 20,23,52,125,195, 197
Prognathism 21, 64, 106, 107, 155
Root luxator 52, 220
Prosthetic crown 9,43, 82, 120, 152,177,
Root planing 12, 57, 179, 198
187,218
Root resorption 59, 61
Pseudopockets 7, 65
Rotation 178
Pulp 3, 70, 109, 135
Rotational leverage 52
Pulp capping25,144,146, 188
Routine periodontal treatment 57, 73, 178,
Pulp cavity 3,32,147
198, 216
223
Salivary duct 69, 76
Tetracycline staining 36, 174
Salivary mucocele 69, 76
Thermal damage 73, 74
Sarcoma 60
Three-year-old bumps² 190
Scaling 57,73, 93, 179, 198, 216
Thyroid nodule 132
Scissor bite 115
Tinidazole 26
Sealers 67, 123
Titanium 9, 53
Secodont teeth 1
Tongue 103, 172
Secondary dentin 3, 70
Tooth avulsion 225
Secondary palate 11
Tooth bnushing 199
Sequestration 44, 148, 211
Tooth exarticulation 225
Sharpey's fibers 97
Tooth fracture 23,43,70,82,105,114,
"Sheer mouth' 117
146,152,158,159,160, 188,197,203
Sialolith 69
Tooth implant 53
Sickle scaler 198
Tooth luxation 225
Sinus tract 118,148,203
Tooth subluxation 225
Skin fold dermatitis 171
Towner-Jacquette scaler 198
Smear layer 4
Tracheotomy 186
Sodium bicarbonate 208
Tniadan system 27, 131
Sodium hypochlorite 130, 180
Triangular flap 183
Soft palate 11, 223
Tricalcium phosphate 45
Sonic scaling 216
Turbinate ^coral’ formation 181
Spiramycin 26
Turbinate necrosis’ 181
Squamous cell carcinoma 33, 91, 127, 143,
165
Ulceration 103,136,165,166,172
Squamous odontogenic tumor 101
Ulcerative stomatitis 172
Stainless steel wire 39, 75, 214
Ultrasonic scaler 179, 198, 216
Steinman pin 100
Universal curette 57, 198
Stomatitis 2,35,91,103,104,108,165,
Urea-peroxide 130
166,172
Uremia 124,145, 166,170
Stomodeum 11
Uremic stomatitis 166
Stone model 55, 122
Stout multiloop wiring technique 85
Vinyl polysiloxane 10, 55, 84, 86, 116, 150
Subgingival scaling 57, 179, 198, 216
Vitamin A 11
Subodontoblastic plexus of Raschkow 135
Vitamin D 95
Sulcular epithelium 47, 65, 206
Volatile sulfur compounds 124
Supernumerary root 131, 133, 176, 195
Vomeronasal organ 213
Supernumerary tooth 19, 117, 168
Supragingival scaling 57,179, 198, 216
"Wave mouth' 13
Surgical extraction 20, 24,35,183,184
Whole-mouth films 102
Suture material 39, 46
Wind-sucker 141
Systemic effects 29, 145
Wolf tooth 156
Systemic lupus erythematosus 136
Wound management 46
Wry malocclusion 21, 38, 107, 200, 201
Temporomandibular joint 17, 18, 106, 140.
205
Zinc-free amalgam 80
Temporomandibular joint ankylosis 71, 83
Zinc oxide 162
Temporomandibular joint luxation 17, 18,
Zinc oxide-eugenol cement 67, 80, 191
158
Zinc phosphate cement 177, 191
Teratogenic effect 11
Zinc silicophosphate cement 191
Tertiary (reparative) dentin 3, 70
Zygomatic arch 58
224