Colour Reviewof
Self-Assessment
LEARN·REVISE·REINFORCE
Feline
Medicine
AndrewSparkes
SarahCaney
Clinicalcases
Problembased
Fullcolour
MANSON
PUBLISHING
Self-Assessment Colour Review of
Feline Medicine
Thispage intentionally left blank
Self-Assessment Colour Review of
Feline
Medicine
Andrew Sparkes
BVetMed PhD DipECVIM MRCVS
RCVS Specialist in Feline Medicine
Head of the Feline Unit
Animal Health Trust, Newmarket, UK
Sarah Caney
BVSc PhD DSAM(Feline) MRCVS
RCVS Specialist in Feline Medicine
The Feline Clinic, Downland Veterinary Group
Emsworth, UK
MANSON PUBLISHING/THE VETERINARY PRESS
Acknowledgements
Both authors would like to thank the following organizations and individuals for
their help in providing some of the pictures used in this book:
The Feline Advisory Bureau, colleagues at the University of Bristol and the Animal
Health Trust, Dr Kostas Papasouliotis, Prof Timothy Gruffydd-Jones, Prof Sheila
Crispin, Dr Severine Tasker, and Prof Stefano Romagnoli.
Copyright @ 2005 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN 1-84076-047-8
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means without the written perrmission of the copyright holder
or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright Act 1956 {as amended), or under the terms
of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred
Place, London WC1E 7DP, UK.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to criminal
prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL, UK.
Tel: +44(0)20 8905 5150
Fax: +44(0)20 8201 9233
 Email: manson@mansonpublishing.com
Website: www.manson-publishing.co.uk
Commissioning editor: Jill Northcott
 Project management: Paul Bennett
Page layout: Initial Typesetting Services
Colour reproduction: Tenon & Polert Colour Scanning Ltd, Hong Kong
 Printed in China by New Era Printing Company Ltd
Preface
The smallest feline is a masterpiece.' Leonardo da Vinci
It is often said that there is nothing so certain as change, and that is undoubtedly true in
the field of veterinary science. The plethora of veterinary textbooks now devoted to
feline medicine illustrates the importance that cats have assumed as domestic pets. The
quantity and depth of knowledge of feline diseases is constantly developing, and there is 
no doubt that by the time you read this, some of the information in this book will
already be out of date - for that we apologize! Nevertheless, we have attempted to draw
together questions and answers on a very broad range of feline disorders that we hope
will be stimulating, interesting, and informative.
We hope this book will be of value to students, practitioners, and those studying for
postgraduate clinical qualifications. By its nature, it cannot be a comprehensive
handbook of feline medicine, yet we have tried to give sufficient breadth of coverage to
make it of real practical benefit. Questions are arranged randomly fwith an index of
topics to allow specific types of questions to be located), and each is followed by its
answer. Each question is independent of any others, thus the book can be dipped into as
desired. Individuals or groups of clinicians can work through the questions, and a
problem-solving approach has been encouraged throughout. The questions contain
illustrations of the patient, radiographs, cytology, and so on, which we hope will add to
the value of the text as well as make it more interesting to read. We have endeavoured
to maintain accuracy throughout this book, but recognize that in many cases there may
O1 yoeodde umo ino siuasaidau auojauaui siut pue dramsue yoauoo aauyap e aq iou
diagnosis and management of medical cases. For convenience, we have included both
conventional {American) and Sl units for laboratory data in the text, and reference
 ranges are given, where appropriate, to allow interpretation of the data.
Most of all, we hope this will be a book that you enjoy dipping into and find
stimulating - for any aelurophile, feline medicine is a fascinating and exciting subject
and we hope that the information in this book will encourage enquiring minds to
want to know more!
Enjoy!
Andy Sparkes and Sarah Caney
"Again I must remind you that a dog's a dog - a cat's a cat.' Ts Eliot
Dedication
Sarah and Andy would like to dedicate this book to their immediate families: Sarah's
parents, Elizabeth and Stephen Caney; Andy's wife, Debbie, and children, Ben and
Catherine, and Andy's parents, Doris and Douglas Sparkes. Without their love and
support this book would never have been possible. We would also like to acknowledge
our own very special feline friends fpictured clockwise from top left, page 1): Hobi,
Tigger, Kita, Holly, Penny, and Cookie!
Author biographies
Andrew Sparkes BVetMed PhD DipECVIM-CA MRCVS
Andrew Sparkes graduated from the Royal Veterinary College {University of London)
in 1983, and after a period of 4 years in general practice undertook an intern/residency
position in feline medicine at the University of Bristol from 1987-1990. Following
this, Andrew undertook a 3-year research programme, which led to the successful
completion of a PhD. Andrew was then appointed as a lecturer in Feline Medicine at
the University of Bristol, a position funded by the Feline Advisory Bureau fa UK-
based charity dedicated to promoting the health and welfare of cats). In 1999 he was
promoted to senior lecturer and in 2000 he moved to the Animal Health Trust, to
take up a position as Head of the Feline Unit, with responsibilities for clinical referral
work and clinical research. He has published widely in the field of feline medicine, is
a diplomate of the European College of Veterinary Internal Medicine and an RCVS
recognized specialist in feline medicine. He is a member of the executive committe of
the European Society of Feline Medicine and is the founding and current co-editor of
the Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery, the official journal of both the ESFM and
the AAFP. Andrew is also the current chairman of the Feline Advisory Bureau.
Sarah Caney BVSc PhD DSAM(Feline) MRCVS
Sarah graduated from the University of Bristol in 1993. She spent 1 year as a small
animal intern at the Royal Veterinary College before returning to Bristol for a 3-year
residency in feline medicine. She subsequently undertook a PhD studying feline
immunodeficiency virus infection. Sarah has her RCVS Diploma in Small Animal
Medicine (Feline), is an RCVS Specialist in Feline Medicine and was the Feliné
Advisory Bureau Lecturer in Feline Medicine at the University of Bristol from January
2001 to July 2004. In October 2004, Sarah moved to Downland Veterinary Group in
Emsworth where she established a first opinion and referral feline clinic. Sarah is the
secretary of the European Society of Feline Medicine and loves cooking, opera and
her cat Hobi!
Abbreviations
AA
amyloid A
HCT
haematocrit
ACD
acid citrate dextrose
hpf
high power field
ACE
angiotensin converting enzyme
IFA
immunofluorescent antibody
ACTH
 adrenocorticotrophic hormone
IGF
insulin-like growth factor
ADH
anti-diuretic hormone
IGR
insect growth regulator
ALP
 alkaline phosphatase
IM
intramuscularly
ALT
alanine aminotransferase
TV
intravenously
AML
 anterior mediastinal lymphoma
IVS
interventricular septum
ANA
antinuclear antibody
kg
kilogram
APTT
activated partial thromboplastin time
LDH
Jactate dehydrogenase
ARF
acute renal failure
LMN
 Jower motor neurone
AST
aspartate aminotransferase
LUTD
lower urinary tract disease
ATP
adenosine triphosphate
LV
left ventricle
AZT
azathioprine
MCV
mean cell volume
BID
twice daily
MIJ
 metered dose inhaler
BIPS
barium-impregnated polyethylene
MHC
major histocompatibility complex
spheres
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
BW
body weight
NAC
N-acetylcysteine
cfu
colony-forming units
PAS
 periodic acid schiff
CK
creatine kinase
PCR
polymerase chain reaction
CNS
central nervous system
PCV
 packed cell volume
COP
cyclophosphamide, vincristine
PEG
 percutaneous endoscopic
{Oncovin), prednisolone
gastrostomy
COX-2
Cyclo-oxygenase-2
PIVKA
proteins induced by vitamin K
CRF
chronic renal failure
absence
CSF
 cerebrospinal fluid
PKI
polycystic kidney disease
LD
computed tomography
PLN
 protein-losing nephropathy
CVP
central venous pressure
PLR
pupillary light reflex
DDAVP desmopressin
PPDH
 peritoneopericardiodiaphragmatic
DIC
disseminated intravascular
hernia
coagulation
PT
prothrombin time
DD
 degenerative joint disease
RBC
red blood cell
DNA
 deoxyribonucleic acid
RER
 resting energy requirement
DSH
domestic shorthaired
RNA
ribonucleic acid
DV
dorsoventral
SAMe
s-adenosy] methionine
ECG
electrocardiogram
SBP
systolic blood pressure
EDTA
ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid
SC
subcutaneously
EGC
eosinophilic granuloma complex
SG
 specific gravity
ELISA
 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
T3
tri-iodothyronine
EPI
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
thyroxine
FCV
feline calicivirus
DDL
transitional cell carcinoma
FeLV
feline leukaemia virus
TRH
thy rotrophin releasing hormone
fg
French gauge
TSH
thyroid stimulating hormone
FHV
feline herpesvirus
U
units
FA
feline infectious anaemia
UCCR
urinary cortisol to creatinine ratio
FIP
feline infectious peritonitis
UDCA
 ursodeoxycholic acid
FV
feline immunodeficiency virus
UMN
 upper motor neurone
FORL
feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion
UPC
urine protein:creatinine ratio
fTLJ
feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity
USG
urine specific gravity
GHLO
gastric Heticobacter-like organism
VD
ventrodorsal
GnRH
 gonadotrophin releasing hormone
VLDL
HAC
hy peradrenocorticism
WBC
white blood cell
hCG
human chorionic gonadotrophin
ZN
Ziehl-Nielsen {acid fast stain)
Broad classification of cases
Some cases appear under more than one category
Musculoskeletal
1, 14, 33, 34, 39, 132, 185, 192
Endocrinological
11, 17,19,21, 30, 49, 51,60, 74, 89, 102, 114, 116,
143, 147, 168, 181, 193,213,225
Dermatological
3,16, 48, 58,65, 74, 79, 121, 131, 137, 169, 170,
171,175,184,200,221
Haematopoietic
4,7,9,44, 57,63, 86, 101, 106,112, 148, 154, 163,
179, 190, 218, 222,223
Upper respiratory
5,27,40, 54, 57,78, 91, 111, 145, 157, 167, 195,
201,214
Ocular
2,6,13, 24, 28,30,43, 219
Infectious
2,6, 10, 13, 32,40,47, 52, 56, 58,61, 62, 76, 78,
96, 97, 104, 109, 110, 115, 117,122, 126, 131,
138,149, 160, 169, 172, 175, 180, 195, 198, 202,
218
Ga strointestinal
8,10, 18,25,31, 50, 62,84,90,98, 103, 107,117,
127,128, 160, 180, 198, 203,207,217
Urological
4,12,23,26,29,60, 67,69, 72,73, 80, 81,92, 95,
100, 134, 141,142, 149, 153, 159, 161, 162, 174,
176, 185, 187, 188, 190, 191, 196, 204, 209, 213
Cardiova scular
15,20,28,30, 37, 57, 82, 83, 87, 108, 120, 129,
132, 152, 197,216
Meta bolic
12, 33, 34, 51, 60, 63,70, 80, 94, 130, 190, 206,
225
Oral diseases
16, 38,41,42, 56, 156, 179
Neurological
24, 35,46, 53, 59, 105, 125, 132, 135, 136, 139,
192,208,211,220
Reproduction/developmental
22, 37,55,70, 72, 85,93, 109, 133, 138, 144, 155,
212
Liver/pancreas
25, 31,44, 61, 68, 94, 118, 130, 164, 177, 182, 206,
213,215
Oncological
27, 29,40, 49, 65, 71, 75,79, 84, 95, 111, 123, 124,
151,168, 171,204, 205, 207,221
Lower respiratory/pleural
32, 36,47, 52, 66, 77, 88,91, 115, 119, 123, 124,
146, 150, 158, 166, 173, 178, 183,214
Nutritional
45, 64,99, 165, 186, 189, 194, 199, 224
Therapeutics/toxicity
44, 75, 113, 142, 177,178, 188, 191,205, 210, 223
8
I, 2: Questions
1 A 10-month-old neutered
male cat (1) presents with a
slow onset, 3-4-week history
of fluctuating signs, charac-
terized by reluctance to walk
and a stiff, stilted gait. There is
poorly localizable pain on pal-
pation of the spine and limbs
{muscles, bones, and joints)
and on manipulation of joints.
What are the major differential
diagnoses for this cat and how
should initial investigations be
approached?
2 The diagnostic laboratory has isolated Chlamydopbila felis from a conjunctival
swab collected from an 18-month-old cat (2). The owner of the cat is a breeder and
there are currently three adult cats, one of which is pregnant, and one 6-month-old
kitten in the household.
i. How should this infection be ma naged?
i道. What management strategies can be followed in order to prevent future problems?
I, 2: Answers
1 The cat is exhibiting signs of musculoskeletal pain, but from the history and clinical
signs this could be either muscle pain, joint pain, or skeletal pain.
Common causes of generalized muscle pain include inflammatory myopathies
(e.g. toxoplasmosis, immune-mediated myositis), metabolic myopathy (hypo-
kalaemic polymyopathy), or degenerative myopathy (myositis ossificans).
Causes of joint pain include infections fbacterial polyarthritis, mycoplasma poly-
arthritis, FCV-associated polyarthritis, endocarditis), immune-mediated poly-
arthritis iproliferative, erosive and idiopathic polyarthritis; systemic lupus
erythematosus), haemarthrosis (as a result of a bleeding disorder), and degener-
ati ve joint disease.
Causes of skeletal pain in this cat could include developmental abnormalities (e.g.
Osteogenesis imperfecta with secondary pathological fractures), nutritional causes
(e.g. nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism with osteopenia and possible
pathological fractures, vitamin-D deficient rickets, hypervitaminosis A - classi-
cally associated with a liver-rich diet).
Consideration may also need to be given to the possibility of severe pain with, for
example, a spinal disorder (e.g. discospondylitis).
Priorities for further investigation and a minimum database for adequate assess-
ment would include a neurological assessment, a dietary history, blood/urine analyses,
and radiography. A blood panel should include assessment of muscle inflammation/
damage {elevations in CK, AST, and possibly ALT), and electrolyte evaluation
{especially potassium, calcium, and phosphate). Radiography is a high priority for
evaluation of joints and bones, and, if joint disease is suspected on clinical or
radiographic grounds, cytology of multiple joint taps is indicated.
Other investigations would depend on the findings from the initial investigations.
2 i. All of the cats in the house should be treated for at least 4 weeks, and for at least
 2 weeks beyond the time at which the cats appear clinically normal. The treatment of
choice for adult cats is oral doxycycline at 10 mg/kg once daily. Pregnant queens and
kittens whose teeth are still developing (<9 months of age) can be safely treated orally
with amoxicillin-clavulanate at 12.5 mg/kg twice daily although a longer period of
treatment may be required and future recrudescence of infection is more commonly
seen following treatment with this drug. Azithromycin is sometimes recommended as
a treatment for Chlamydopbila but clinical trials have not supported its use.
i. Once all of the cats have been treated, strategies can be followed to prevent future 
outbreaks. Any new cats purchased should be screened for Chlamydopbila (by
serology or conjunctival swab) prior to entry to the household. Vaccination of all cats
is also an option although, as with any vaccine, this does not completely eliminate the
risk of infection occurring in the household.
10
3, 4: Questions
3 A 4-year-old neutered female
3
DSH cat {3) presented with severe
pruritus, miliary dermatitis and
peripheral lymphadenopathy.
Fleas and flea dirt were evident on
examination and an intradermal
skin test showed a strong positive
reaction to flea extract. Using
knowledge of flea biology, how
should this cat be treated?
4 i. What is the most obvious feature on examination of the mucous membranes of
the oral cavity in this 11-year-old cat with established CRF {4)?
i道. What is the likely cause of this problem and how should its management be
approached?
3,4: Answers
3 Ctenocepbalides felis adults feed almost immediately they move onto their host.
Copulation and egg-laying can take place within 24-48 hours of the first blood meal.
The eggs are laid in the fur and fall off into the environment. Under appropriate
conditions, eggs hatch in 1-6 days. Larvae feed on flea dirt shed by adults and this
stage typically lasts 1-3 weeks. The pupa develops within a cocoon, and adults can
emerge within a week, although this can be much delayed. The complete life cycle
takes around 2-40 weeks (typically 3-5) depending on environmental conditions.
Treatment must be aimed at the affected cat, in-contact animals, and the environment.
Short-acting glucocorticoids and/or antihistamines may be needed to control pruritus.
Adulticides are essential and should be used on all in-contact animals. Efficacious
topical ('spot-on') products include fipronil, imidacloprid, and selamectin. Fipronil is
also available as a spray and is favoured by some for initial therapy of flea allergic
dermatitis. Nitenpyram is an oral adulticide with a rapid knock-down time. Adulticides
 must be administered on a regular basis, to maintain effective control. Adulticides should
be combined with IGRs which may be hormone analogues {e.g. pyriproxyfen) or chitin
synthetase inhibitors (e.g. lufenuron), the former given topically, the latter systemically.
The environmental stages may make up to 95% of the total flea population and
both mechanical cleaning (vacuuming, washing) and environmental chemical
sprays/foggers (e.g. IGRs, such as pyriproxyfen and methoprene, usually combined
with an adulticide) should be used to control infestation here.
4 i. The most obvious abnormality in this cat is the marked pallor of the mucous
 membranes indicating probable underlying anaemia. Although in this case the marked
 pallor is highly suggestive, routine haematology would be needed to confirm this, and a
reticulocyte count should be performed to determine whether it is regenerative or not.
ii. Anaemia in CRF has a multifactorial aetiology. Reduced production of erythro-
poietin from the failing kidneys results in a relative or absolute lack of this hormone
causing a non-regenerative anaemia. The production of uraemic toxins reduces the
half-life of circulating RBCs, and chronic blood loss can also contribute to anaemia
of CRF. Blood loss may be secondary to uraemic thrombopathy, but more commonly
 Occurs due to gastrointestinal ulceration and chronic bleeding. Determination of iron
and ferritin status may be required to identify iron deficiency.
If the anaemia is accompanied by iron deficiency, iron supplementation should be
provided {50—100 mg/day ferrous sulphate) and H,-blockers and/or sucralfate
administered. Ana bolic steroids have some role in stimulating erythrocyte production
but their efficacy is relatively poor. Recombinant human erythropoietin f 100 U/kg SC
three times weekly) has been used to correct the erythropoietin deficiency and can be
dramatically effective (as long as the cat is not iron-deficient). However, around 30%
of cats develop antibodies negating its effect. Trials are currently being carried out
with recom binant feline erythropoietin.
12
5, 6: Questions
5
 5 A 6-year-old neutered female DSH cat (5) presents with a chronic history (many
months) of bilateral nasal discharge and persistent productive mucopurulent
sneezing. Two years previously the cat had a severe acute upper respiratory tract
infection assumed to be due to FHV. Investigations suggest chronic post-viral"
rhinitis. What options should be considered for the management of this cat?
6
6 A client is a breeder of Persian cats. For some time now, several of her cats have
suffered with intermittent signs of conjunctivitis {6).
i. What are the major infectious ca uses of conjunctivitis in cats?
ii. What is a possible diagnostic plan?
13
5, 6: Answers
5 Therapy aims to improve nasal/sinus drainage, reduce mucus formation, and
control infection/inflammation. For most cases, clinical signs can be improved but not
resolved. Strategic, intermittent, or persistent therapy may be required:
Flushing the nasal cavities under anaesthesia can be useful to clear inspissated
secretions. Flushing can be retrograde (via catheters inserted through the nares) or
antegrade {via a Foley catheter in the nasopharynx). Copious volumes of sterile
saline are used, with the nose pointed down, a cuffed endotracheal tube in place,
and the pharynx packed with swabs.
Saline nebulization or steam inhalation (e.g. placing the cat in a hot, steamy
bathroom) can reduce the viscosity of secretions and encourage productive
sneezing. Also, one to two drops of sterile saline can be administered in each
nostril, as required, up to several times daily.
 Strategic systemic antibiotics are required as opportunistic infections with the
normal upper respiratory tract flora are common due to the altered micro-
environment. Prolonged (6-8 weeks) therapy may be required initially, as some
cases are associated with turbinate osteomyelitis. Mixed infections, including
anaerobes, are typical.
Topical glucocorticoids {inhaled or drops) appear to benefit some cats. Nasal
biopsies often show a predominantly lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate and there is
some rationale for topical steroids in these cases.
been advocated. However, the benefit is highly questiona ble in most cats.
6 i. The major infectious causes of conjunctivitis are the cat "flu' viruses FHV and
FCV and the ocular pathogen Chiamydopbila felis ipreviously referred to as
Chlamydia psittaci var felis).
 i. If any of the cats are currently showing signs of conjunctivitis, conjunctival swabs
should be taken and submitted for diagnostic tests. These might include PCR testing
and/or Chlamydopbila and *flu' virus isolation. Chlamydopbila serology can also be
extremely helpful in screening a cattery for evidence of recent infection and is worth
considering in those catteries where the cats are free of signs at the time of examin-
ation. Fluorescent antibody titres to Chlamydopbila persist for several months and a
high titre {>512} indicates recent or active infection. Low titres {<32} are generally not
considered to be significant. If an intermediate titre {32-512) is seen in a cat with
conjunctivitis, it may be worth repeating the serology in 2-4 weeks and looking for a
rising titre in case the cat is in the early stages of infection. Intermediate titres in cats
with no clinical signs indicate infection in the past year. Serology cannot be used as a
diagnostic test in cats that have been vaccinated for Chlamydopbila as antibodies
induced by vaccination will be detected by the test.
14
7, 8: Questions
7 A bone marrow aspirate is being performed in this cat (7). What are the indications
for performing this procedure?
8 A 4-year-old DSH {8} pre-
 sented with chronic diarrhoea.
i. How could small or large
bowel diarrhoea be differen-
tiated?
ii. What relevant feature is
shown by this cat?
ii. What is the likely diagnosis
and what treatment should be
given?
7, 8: Answers
7 Bone marrow aspirates will aid diagnosis in the following situations:
Non-regenerative anaemias, leucopenias, thrombocytopenias, and pancytopenias
where systemic diseases such as CRF, infectious diseases (e.g. FeLV, FIV), and
toxic insults have been ruled out as possible causes.
Suspected leukaemias, e.g. lymphocytic, neutrophilic.
Suspected hypereosinophilic syndrome.
Pyrexia of unknown origin.
Detection of FeLV latent infection via specialist culture of the bone marrow.
Suspected primary erythrocytosis.
8 i. Reliably differentiating small and large bowel diarrhoea can be difficult at times,
and some cases have disease involving both regions of the intestine. The table below
acts as a guide to distinguish the two.
i. In addition to the diarrhoea, this cat is showing bilateral protrusion of the nicti-
tating membranes.
m. There is a well recognized, although still poorly understood, syndrome of chronic
small intestinal diarrhoea associated with persistent or intermittent nictitating
membrane protrusion in cats. Epidemiological studies have strongly suggested there is
an infectious cause for this syndrome, and further investigations have suggested a
viral cause. A torovirus (related to coronaviruses) has been isolated from some of
these cases but definitive ca use and effect have not yet been established.
The diarrhoea in these cases is self-limiting, but it can take from a few weeks to
many months for the signs finally to resolve {with waxing and waning of signs in
some cats). There is rarely significant systemic disease or weight loss. Feeding of a
bland diet is commonly recommended, but other therapeutic interventions have failed
appreciably to alter the course of the disease or the severity of the diarrhoea in most
affected cats. The use of antibiotics is contraindicated as this can exacerbate the
diarrhoea through alteration of the intestinal microflora.
Signs of small and large bowel diarrhoea
Signs
Small bowel
Large bowel
Frequency of defecation
± Mildly increased
Increased
Lrgency/tenesmus/dyschezia
Absent
Present
Faecal mucus
Absent
Present
Faecal consistency
Loose
Loose to formed
Faecal blood
± Melaena
± Haematochezia
Steatorrhoea
Sometimes
Absent
Faecal colour
Variable
Usually brown 
Weight loss 
Common
Rare
16
9, 10: Questions
9 The blood smear stained with new methylene blue (9) is from an anaemic cat.
i. What type of anaemia is present?
i. What are the potential ca uses of this anaemia?
10 The proprietor of a rescue centre
10
reports that several cats in their care ha ve
suddenly developed 
very
watery
diarrhoea (10).
i. What infectious causes of diarrhoea
should be considered?
ii. What is your diagnostic plan?
STERILEMW286
Hosp.
9, I0: Answers
9 i.The blood smear shows many Heinz bodies within the RBCs. Heinz bodies {also
known as erythrocyte refractile bodies or Schmauch bodies) are round or oval red cell
inclusions which represent denatured haemoglobin, resulting from oxidative injury to the
erythrocyte. They are best stained with supravital stains {e.g. new methylene blue or
brilliant cresyl green) and are usually seen at the edge of the RBC, sometimes protruding
from the surface of the cell. With Romanowsky staining, Heinz bodies appear as circular
 pale areas within the RBC. A small proportion (<S-10%) of RBCs with Heinz bodies is a
normal finding in cats. Presence of small Heinz bodies is not usually associated with
 anaemia but reflects the vulnerability of feline haemoglobin to oxidative damage.
ii. Pathological numbers of Heinz bodies accumulate in situations that lead to
permanent oxidation of the RBCs. Damaged RBCs are removed by the reticulo-
endothelial system leading to a haemolytic anaemia. Potential causes include:
Intoxications, e.g- propylene glycol preservative, onions, methylene blue, zinc,
acetaminophen (paracetamol ).
Dia betes mellitus (ketoacidosis).
Hypophosphataemia.
Rare causes of clinically significant Heinz body formation:
Lymphoma.
Hyperth yroidism.
10 i. Infectious ca uses of diarrhoea include:
Viruses, e.g. feline panleucopenia virus, feline coronaviruses, torovirus ('third eyelid
diarrhoea syndrome'), immunosuppression due to FeLV or FIV infections. Rotavirus, 
reovirus, and astrovirus have been reported as uncommon causes of diarrhoea.
Bacteria, e.g. Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp., Clostridium spp.
Protozoa, e.g. Giardia, Cystoisospora, Cryptosporidia spp.
Parasitic causes include ascarids (e.g. Toxocara spp.), hookworms (e.g. Ancylostomd
spp.), whipworms (e.g. Trichuris spp.), tapeworms (e.g. Dipylidium canimum).
Mycotic causes, e.g. Histoplasma capsulatum.
Granulomatous disease caused by a variety of possible causes, e.g. FIP, mycobacteria,
Prototheca, Cryptococcus infection.
i. Further questioning and clinical examination are required to establish the severity of
the disease, whether the cats are vaccinated and whether any other clinical signs are
present (e.g. third eyelid protrusion). Faecal bacteriology and examination for parasites
 and protozoal organisms are indicated. Intermittent shedding occurs with some of these
infections so pooling faecal samples from several cats increases the chance of identifying
the causal agent. Faecal electron microscopy, faecal antigen testing, faecal PCR and
serology for anti-viral antibodies may be helpful in identifying viral causes in
unvaccinated cats. If panleucopenia is considered, haematology may reveal a leucopenia.
18
11, I2: Questions
11 A diabetic cat is presented. It was well
sta bilized with insulin when in hospital. It has
GLUC
been at home for 2 weeks following stabiliza-
tion and the owner now reports that the cat is
0
4mmol/1
again showing signs of uncontrolled diabetes
RM0:00
000
(polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia). What
is the best approach to this case?
MEM
ON/OFF
12
12 A 6-year-old neutered male DSH presented with pitting oedema of the legs, ventral
abdomen, and ventral thorax (12). Radiography revealed a mild thoracic and
abdominal effusion. Some ascitic fluid was collected and analysis revealed a total
protein of 1.5 g/l (0.15 g/dl).
i. What are the possible differential diagnoses for this cat and what is the primary
differential diagnosis?
i. How could this be confirmed and treated?
19
II, I2: Answers
11 Causes of insulin ineffectiveness seen shortly after discharge from the hospital
most commonly relate to owner problems such as:
 Administration problems:
 Not adhering to a strict routine, e.g. injections given at a different time each day.
Incorrect injection technique, including inaccurate dosage of insulin.
Insulin-related factors:
Unrecognized underdosage resulting from use of insulin which is out of date,
improperly stored, or improperly mixed before withdrawal from the bottle.
The more active cat in its home environment may have higher insulin require-
ments than when it was hospitalized.
Careful questioning of the owner and asking them to demonstrate how they inject
their cat with insulin often reveals the cause of the problem. If not, the cat should be
re-examined and assessed for evidence of concurrent disease and admitted for blood
glucose evaluation (11) and sta bilization.
12 i. The presence of both oedema and effusions could be due to congestive heart
failure but is more likely to be due to hypoalbuminaemia. The presence of a pure
transudate in the abdomen confirms the cause to be hypoalbuminaemia, and serum
albumin is usually <15 g/l (<1.5 g/dl) for this to occur.
Major causes of hypoalbuminaemia are:
Glomerulonephritis (most common cause and results in selective albumin loss).
Renal amyloidosis would be a consideration in dogs, but usually causes renal
failure rather than PLN in cats.
Insufficient synthesis {malnutrition or liver failure, but these are rare causes).
Gastrointestinal loss of albumin protein-losing enteropathy - a rare cause of such
severe hypoalbuminaemia, and usually ca uses panhypoproteinaemia).
 i. A PLN can be confirmed by evaluating urine protein loss with a UPC. In healthy
cats the UPC is <0.5, and in cats with PLN it is typically >3 and may be >10. The UPC
has to be interpreted with caution with lower urinary tract inflammation/bleeding.
Renal biopsy could confirm immune-mediated glomerulonephritis.
Treatment involves searching for and removing the inciting cause where possible
funderlying infection, neoplasia, drug therapy). Many cases are idiopathic and require
symptomatic therapy which is controversial. Diuretic use should be avoided. Protein
supplementation is contraindicated, and glucocorticoids are generally unhelpful.
Protein restriction is not valuable unless the disease has progressed to renal failure.
ACE inhibitors (ramipril, enalapril, benazepril) have proven efficacy in canine glom-
erulonephritis, reducing proteinuria and improving clinical response, and are likely to
be beneficial in cats also. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories {e.g. aspirin) may help by
reducing inflammation and any tendency for clotting due to anti-thrombin Il loss.
20
13, I4: Questions
13 A 7-month-old DSH cat is
13
presented with a 2-month
history of waxing and waning
inappetence, lethargy, and
some weight loss. The owner
has noticed that both of the
eyes look abnormal (13).
i. What abnormalities are
visible?
ii. What is the likely diag-
nosis?
iii. What are the possible
causes of this condition?
14 Microscopy of a direct smear from the joint of a 4-year-old cat is shown (14).
Aspirates from multiple joints revealed a similar picture.
i. What does this smear show?
i. What clinical signs would be expected and how should this case be managed?
21
I3, I4: Answers
13 i. There is obvious hyphaema (blood in the anterior chamber) which has clotted,
suggesting a high fibrin content. The remaining view of the aqueous chamber is slightly
hazy due to aqueous flare. The iris blood vessels are very prominent suggestive of an
intense vasculitis. A focal deposit is visible on the anterior lens capsule and is likely to
be a persistent pupillary membrane. The pupil has slightly irregular margins.
ii. Anterior uveitis {inflammation of the iris and/or ciliary body) with hyphaema.
m. Differential diagnoses include:
Infectious causes, e.g. FIP, FeLV, FIV, Toxoplasma gondi, and systemic mycoses 
(e.g. histoplasmosis, blastomycoses, cryptococcosis). Recently, FHV and
Bartonella benselae have been implicated as possible causes of uveitis.
Idiopathic uveitis.
Disseminated neoplasia, especially lymphoma.
Autoimmune disease.
Blunt and penetrating trauma to the eye.
FIP was diagnosed in this case. The cat had very high serum globulin levels (69 g/l
[6.9 g/dl]], predominantly comprising gamma globulins on serum protein electro-
phoresis. Haematology revealed a mild anaemia, and lymphopenia.
14 i. The picture shows a predominance of mature non-degenerate neutrophils in the
smear, with some macrophages and some RBCs. Normal joint fluid has a low
cellularity (less than three to five cells per high power field) and a predominance of
mononuclear cells. This picture is typical of an inflammatory arthropathy and, as
several joints are affected, this cat is suffering from polyarthritis.
 i. Typical clinical signs of polyarthritis are stiffness and reluctance to walk, shifting
lameness, pain on joint manipulation, joint swelling, and heat. This may be
accompanied by systemic signs such as pyrexia, lethargy, inappetence, and depression.
Inflammatory polyarthritis is either septic or non-septic. The former can be asso-
ciated with Mycoplasma infections and endocarditis, but such cases are uncommon in
cats. Joint fluid cultures, echocardiography, and blood and urine cultures can be
helpful. FCV infection can produce a transient polyarthritis.
Most cases of feline polyarthritis are non-septic and immune-mediated. With these the
priority is to seek a treatable underlying cause and/or to manage the joint inflammation.
Proliferative and erosive forms are well described in addition to non-deforming
polyarthritis. There may be an association with FeLV and FIV infections, and some cases
may have a polysystemic disorder such as systemic lupus erythematosus, thus evaluating
ANA titres and looking for evidence of other immune-mediated disease fanaemia,
proteinuria) is important. Some cases of immune-mediated polyarthritis will be asso-
ciated with underlying neoplasia, infections or inflammatory disease. Treatment of
idiopathic cases is with immunosuppression, initially using glucocorticoids.
22
15, I6: Questions
15a
15 A 5-year-old Siamese cat is presented with a 2-week history of anorexia and
depression. On examination the cat is pyrexic and a grade Ill systolic murmur,
loudest at the left heart base, is audible on thoracic auscultation. Echocardiography is
performed {15a) (the picture is a long axis view showing the left ventricular outflow
tract).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What further tests are indicated?
16 An 8-year-old neutered female DSH
16
cat presents with a 3-week history of
dysphagia. Oral examination reveals
bilateral proliferative lesions at the fauces
(glossopalatine folds) and on the
caudodorsal tongue (16).
i. What are the major differential diag-
noses?
ii. Histopathology of a representative
biopsy reveals 'granulomatous inflam-
mation with macrophages and giant cells
around areas of collagenolysis with
occasional mast cells and eosinophils'.
What is the diagnosis and possible
approach to management of this cat?
23
15, I6: Answers
15 i. A nodular hyperechoic vegetative
15b
lesion is visible on an aortic valve leaflet
(15b, arrowed). The most likely
diagnosis is bacterial endocarditis.
ii. Aerobic and anaerobic blood and
urine cultures are indicated before start-
ing antibiotic therapy (which should
ideally be given IV to begin with) in the
hope that it will be possible to isolate the
causal agent and thus choose an appro-
priate antibiotic on the basis of culture
and sensitivity results. Bartonella spp. have also been associated with endocarditis so
specialist blood culture and/or PCR testing for this organism may be indicated. Whilst
awaiting results and in the face of negative bacterial cultures, empirical antibiotic
treatment using a broad-spectrum agent such as amoxicillin-clavulanate is indicated,
in addition to general supportive care. In those cats where no other underlying disease
is present, the prognosis with appropriate treatment can be very good.
16 i. The major differential diagnoses for the proliferative lesions in this cat would be
lymphoplasmacytic stomatitis, squamous cell carcinoma, and EGC.
i. The appearance of this lesion and the histological changes are typical of an
eosinophilic granuloma (biopsy is always needed to confirm the diagnosis).
EGC is a collection of skin *reaction patterns' in cats rather than an aetiological
diagnosis. The presence of eosinophils does not necessarily imply an underlying
allergic disease, especially as eosinophils are often relatively sparse. Nevertheless,
allergic and parasitic infections are often cited as the major differential diagnoses for
these lesions fatopy; flea bite, mosquito bite, and food hypersensitivities; Cheyletiella
spp., Otodectes spp., and Notoedres spp., infections). Bacteria are observed within
biopsies of some cases, but their presence is probably secondary to the disease rather
than its cause. Genetic predispositions may occur for EGC lesions and the underlying
ca use in many cases remains uncertain fidiopathic).
Clinical management involves searching for and eliminating endo- and ectopara-
sites; searching for underlying hypersensitivity reactions {e.g. flea therapy, food trial).
If an aetiology can be determined, treatment is based on eliminating or avoiding this.
Symptomatic treatment is used where the aetiology is undetermined and where
needed on clinical grounds. Oral prednisolone or methylprednisolone is the drug of
choice. Cyclosporine or other immunosuppressive agents have been used in
intractable cases. Although many cases respond well to megoestrol acetate, the side
effects with this drug preclude its use as a first-line therapy. Antibiotics may be
indicated for secondary infections, but there is little evidence that bacteria can cause
these lesions.
24
17, 18: Questions
17 The graph (17) shows the
17
blood glucose results obtained
from a 6 kg diabetic cat which is
35
20U
being treated in hospital with
30-
lente
 20 U of lente insulin once daily.
(/oww)
Normal blood glucose concen-
20 
trations would be between
Glucose
3.5-7.5 mmol/l (63-135 mg/dl).
10-
i. What is the assessment of this
5
case?
0
ii. What differential diagnoses
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 
26
need to be considered?
Time (hours)
18 A 2-year-old Siamese cat presented
18
with persistent vomiting of partially
digested food several hours after feeding.
The VD abdominal radiograph (18) was
taken 16 hours after the administration
of BIPS.
i. What abnormalities can be seen?
ii. What diagnosis does this suggest and
what treatment options should be con-
sidered?
2.5
I7, 18: Answers
17 i. The glucose curve suggests that the cat is insulin resistant. Insulin resistance is
usually defined as being present in cats remaining hyperglycaemic and glycosuric in
spite of receiving >1.s U of insulin per kg bodyweight per dose, or in cats requiring
>2.2 U/kg to maintain glycaemic control.
i. Mild insulin resistance can be seen with a variety of physiological and pathological
conditions including dioestrus, pregnancy, and severe obesity. Concurrent diseases of
an inflammatory, infectious, hormonal, or neoplastic nature may all contribute to
poor stabilization via secretion of diabetogenic hormones (glucagon, adrenaline,
cortisol, growth hormone). Common concurrent diseases include urinary tract
infections, ketoacidosis, hyperthyroidism, pancreatitis, and chronic renal failure.
Affected cats generally demonstrate variable or continuously poor control of their
diabetes. Acromegaly and HAC are important causes of more severe insulin
resistance. Other endocrine tumours fislet cell glucagonoma, phaeochromocytoma)
 are rare potential causes of marked insulin resistance. Improper storage and handling
of insulin may also be a cause of apparent insulin resistance.
18 i. All the large (5 mm diameter) BIPS, and most of the small (1.5 mm diameter)
BIPS are still in the stomach. This suggests there is delayed gastric emptying.
Although gastric emptying times are very variable in normal cats, small BIPs will
usually completely empty from the stomach within 14 hours (often much quicker)
and large BIPS should at least start to empty by this time. In addition to the abnormal
retention of BIPs, the stomach body and antrum are gas-filled and dilated. This can
be seen with pyloric stenosis and other conditions interfering with gastric emptying,
and can also be seen with aerophagia (e.g. secondary to dyspnoea). However, this cat
was not dyspnoeic, and there is no abnormal air in the intestines.
 i. These changes are typical of 'pyloric stenosis". This is a well recognized congenital
problem in Siamese cats, although there is no apparent true 'stenosis', but rather a
functional motility problem resulting in poor gastric emptying in affected cats.
No treatment is universally successful for these cases. Dietary manipulation may
help: feeding a low fat diet and feeding liquid or semi-liquid foods may encourage
more rapid gastric emptying. Prokinetic drugs such as metoclopramide (meto-
clopramine), cisapride, and erythromycin may help in some individuals. Pyloro-
myotomy has also been reported to be helpful in some of these cats. As there is
usually no physical obstruction, this should probably be reserved for those cats where
medical therapy fails. Pyloromyotomy allows more rapid gastric emptying, but as
with the other treatments, the response varies considera bly between individuals.
26
19, 20: Questions
19 A water deprivation test
61
followed
ADH
1.018
response test has been
%Dehydration
performed in a cat with
USG
1.015
clinical signs and initial
assessment consistent with
1.012
 dia betes insipidus. The water
DSr
deprivation test was stopped
1.009
after 8 hours as the cat was
noted to be clinically de-
1.006
hydrated. Results are shown
graphically (19). Following
1.003
ADH administration the
Time (hours)
USG increased to 1.020.
i. What is the diagnosis?
i. What are the treatment options?
. What is the prognosis?
20
20 This lateral thoracic radiograph (20) was taken from a 9-year-old DSH cat with a
history of lethargy, episodes of breathlessness and some weight loss over the past
month. On thoracic auscultation a grade Il systolic heart murmur is heard over the
left apex. Heart rate and rhythm are normal.
i. What a bnormalities are visible on the radiogra ph?
i. What is the assessment of this case?
ii. What further tests are indicated?
27
19, 20: Answers
19 i. The absence of change in USG following water deprivation is consistent with
dia betes insipidus. The response to ADH is diagnostic of central dia betes insipidus.
i. The treatment options include:
As long as constant access to water is ensured so that the cat does not become
dehydrated, and the owner is happy to live with a very polydipsic and polyuric
cat, treatment is not mandatory. The owner should be informed of the risk of
rapid, life-threatening dehydration which can occur if access to water is restricted
or illness {e.g. vomiting or diarrhoea) occurs.
Treatment with DDAVP, a synthetic analogue of ADH. DDAVP is available as oral,
parenteral, and intranasal preparations licensed for human use. A starting dose of
1-5 pg per cat once to twice a day is recommended; in general higher doses are
required when oral dosing is used (e.g. 50 μg per cat twice daily). The intranasal
[wan oot sasuduoo pue anou jeayounluoo au Aq paaisjuupe aq ueo uoueiedaud
{one drop corresponds to 1.5-4 μg). The dose is modified to produce remission of
clinical signs. In some cases, severe polydipsia is not completely controlled by DDAVP
alone and non-hormonal treatment may be added to the regime. Chlorpropamide
[40 mg/day) potentiates the renal tubular effects of ADH and can help to stabilize cats
with central or partial central diabetes insipidus. It should be used with some caution
in view of the fact that in humans it is a potent hypoglycaemic. Thiazide diuretics can
also be used in this situation and have a paradoxical effect to reduce polyuria.
. The prognosis depends on the cause of the disease but is good with congenital and
idiopathic central diabetes insipidus, as long as the cat has free access to water.
Central diabetes insipidus has been reported following CNS trauma and may
improve/resolve with time. Where central diabetes insipidus is associated with
neoplasia, the prognosis is dependent on the rate of progression of the tumour.
20 i. The radiograph shows generalized cardiomegaly with especially marked left
atrial enlargement. There is no evidence of pulmonary oedema or a pleural effusion
which can be associated with cardiac disease.
i. The history, clinical, and radiographic findings are consistent with a cardiac
problem. Marked left atrial dilation is most frequently associated with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. However, this is not diagnostic for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
and can also be seen in cases of restrictive cardiomyopathy and other cardiac diseases.
iii. Electrocardiography may add some useful information regarding cardiac
enlargement and abnormal conduction, but echocardiography is likely to be most
Osle aie slaaal tl wnuas "aseasip seipueo jo Aiuaaas pue aunieu aul ssasse ol iyasn
indicated since hyperthyroidism can be associated with cardiac disease {in particular
left ventricular hypertrophy). SBP measurement is indicated where left ventricular
hypertrophy is found to rule out systemic hypertension as a cause of this.
28
2 1, 22: Questions
21
10
lente
2
810 12 14 16 18  20 22 24 26
(snoy) awl
21 A 4 kg diabetic cat is being treated in hospital with 5 U of lente insulin once daily.
The blood glucose results are illustrated graphically (21). Normal blood glucose
concentrations are approximately 3.5-7.5 mmol/l (63-135 mg/dl).
i. What is the assessment of this case?
ii. How should this patient be managed?
22
22 A Siamese queen is presented in late-stage pregnancy (22).
i. What are the first signs of parturition and describe the three stages of labour in cats.
i. What are the common ca uses of dystocia in cats?
29
21, 22: Answers
21 i. Insulin treatment is resulting in a fall in blood glucose levels but the duration of
action is insufficient and blood glucose levels stay below the renal threshold
(12-14 mmol/l [216-253 mg/dl]) for less than 10 hours of the day.
i. This patient will benefit from a change to the insulin regime. One option would be 
to treat the cat with twice daily lente insulin. Another option would be to change to
protamine zinc insulin which is a longer-lasting preparation. In many cats, once daily
protamine zinc insulin is sufficient to control the diabetes. The glucose curve obtained
in this cat suggests that twice daily therapy with lente insulin would provide excellent
control. The goals of sta bilization are:
 Resolution of clinical signs associated with diabetes (polyuria, polydipsia,
polyphagia, and weight loss being the major ones).
Production of a 'normal blood glucose curve.
Achieving these goals should be associated with prevention/minimization of ketoacidosis,
hypoglycaemia or the development of long-term complications of diabetes such as
peripheral neuropathy. A blood glucose of <14 mmoll (253 mg/dl) throughout the day
usually achieves these aims. Tighter control of the glucose curve may not be of additional
clinical benefit since the complications associated with long-term diabetes in man
(vasculopathy, nephropathy, coronary arterial disease) are uncommon in cats.
22 i. Many queens become inappetent or anorexic in the 24-48 hours prior to
parturition, but a prepartum drop in rectal temperature does not occur. The average
gestation length is 63-65 days but with a wide spread (between 58 and 70 days is not
considered a bnormal).
Stage I of labour involves dilation of the cervix, has a typical duration of
6-12 hours, and is accompanied by restlessness and nesting behaviour. Stages II
(delivery of the foetus) and Ill {delivery of the placenta) are usually mixed in cats as
multiple kittens are usually born. The onset of stage II is marked by abdominal
contractions and straining and the first kitten is normally delivered within 2-6 hours.
The interval between births is highly variable and it is not uncommon for a queen to
have a long interval (occasionally up to 48 hours) between some births.
i. Dystocia is relatively uncommon in cats, but pedigree breeds appear to be at a
higher risk. Dystocia is divided into maternal and foetal causes:
Maternal dystocia: primary uterine inertia appears to be the single most common
cause of dystocia and may respond to medical therapy (3-5 U oxytocin IM every
30 minutes). Other maternal factors include a narrow birth canal, uterine pro-
lapse, uterine torsion, and uterine rupture.
Foetal dystocia: common foetal causes of dystocia are malpresentation, foetal
Oversize, and foetal death.
Surgery is indicated where there is an obstructive cause of the dystocia.
30
23, 24: Questions
23
23 The ultrasound image (23) shows the right kidney of a cat with CRF.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What causes this condition, what is the typical clinical presentation and which
breeds are predisposed to the condition?
24 A 5-year-old neutered male Chinchilla
忆
is presented with a history of acute onset
mydriasis and lack of direct and indirect
pupillary light responses (24).
i. How is normal pupil size regulated?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses
that should be considered?
m. What is a possible approach to inves-
tigating this case?
31
23, 24: Answers
23 i. The ultrasound image shows multiple anechoic areas of various sizes within the
renal parenchyma, with a loss of normal renal architecture and no discernible
kidney cannot be determined from the still picture, but it was grossly enlarged
(58 mm in length).
ii. PKD is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition. Multiple microscopic cysts
are present from birth and enlarge with time. By the time clinical disease is apparent
they vary in size from <l mm to >l cm in diameter. The size of the cysts eventually
results in displacement of normal functional renal tissue, and causes CRF to develop.
The cysts usually grow slowly, so most affected cats do not show signs of renal failure 
until middle age or later (typically 7-8 years of age). However, PKD does vary in
severity and in some cases progression to renal failure will occur at a much younger
age. The clinical signs seen are typical of CRF, but abdominal palpation usually
reveals enlarged, irregular, and readily palpable kidneys.
The disease is inherited in pedigree Longhair cats. Studies in several countries have
shown that in general 30-s0% of Persian cats are affected. Other cat breeds that have
been developed using Persian bloodlines, such as Burmillas and Exotic shorthairs, also
have a significant proportion of affected cats, but in unrelated breeds it is a rare condition.
24 i. Pupil size is controlled by the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve Ill). A normal
PLR requires a functional retina, optic nerve ipsilateral to the side stimulated, and
Oculomotor nerve ipsilateral and contralateral to the side stimulated. In dark
conditions, shining a light into one eye should result in constriction of the pupil
stimulated (direct PLR) and of the pupil of the other eye (indirect PLR).
ii. Differential diagnoses of mydriasis include:
Retinal disease, e.g. retinal degeneration, detachment, glaucoma.
Optic nerve or optic tract disease, e.g. optic neuritis, neoplasia.
Optic chiasm lesion, e.g. neoplasia.
Midbrain lesion, e.g. compression due to tentorial herniation, neoplasia.
 Central blindness caused by hypoxia/anoxia during or following general anaesthesia.
Lesion affecting function of the oculomotor nerve, e.g. feline dysautonomia,
neoplasia, FeLV-associated 'spastic pupil syndrome'.
Mydriatic drugs, e.g. ketamine, anaesthetic agents, atropine.
Iris disease affecting its ability to constrict, e.g. iris hypoplasia, iris atrophy.
ii. Assessment of vision and a complete ophthalmological and neurological examin-
ation will help to localize the lesion causing the mydriasis. Depending on these results,
further investigations may include virus screening tests and CT or MRI of the brain.
The diagnosis in this case was feline dysautonomia. The cat also had reduced tear
and saliva production, bradycardia, urine retention, and constipation.
32
25, 26: Questions
25
25 The sonogram (25; 1 duodenum, 2 liver) is from a 10-year-old neutered female
DSH presented with a chronic {several months) history of inappetence, weight loss,
vomiting, and intermittent diarrhoea. Thoracic and abdominal radiographs were 
unremarkable.
i. Comment on the appearance of the pancreas (outlined by arrows). What is a
possible interpretation of this?
i. What additional diagnostics may be indicated?
26 i. What technique is being
26
performed here (26)?
ii. How is this technique
performed?
mi. What are the indications for
this procedure?
iv. What are the disa dvantages
Of this procedure?
33
25, 26: Answers
25 i. The sonogram demonstrates patchy hyperechogenicity of the pancreas, which
has taken on a somewhat nodular appearance. This is a non-specific finding and
could be associated with inflammatory or infiltrative (neoplastic) change. However,
the lack of gross enlargement of the pancreas and the chronicity of the signs would
suggest that neoplasia is less likely.
The sonogram is thus suggestive of pancreatitis, and the mottled increased
echogenicity suggests this may be chronic rather than acute or oedematous. The
significance of this is uncertain. Chronic pancreatitis is a common incidental finding
in older cats, but chronic active pancreatitis can be a cause of morbidity in its own
right (causing various but often vague clinical signs), or can be a component of other
diseases such as inflammatory bowel disease and/or cholangiohepatitis.
i. Currently used blood tests are notoriously unreliable for the diagnosis of active
pancreatitis in cats; amylase and lipase have long been recognized to have little or no
diagnostic value in the cat, and the assay of fTLI has been very controversial. While
seaioued yim sieo Aueu 'seauoued aaioe jo aaoddns aq aew siaaal Ilif ya
have normal serum fTLI levels and mild to moderate elevations may be seen in some
cats without appreciable pancreatic disease. The test therefore is neither sensitive nor
specific and results need to be interpreted with caution. Assay of feline pancreatic
lipase immunoreactivity may be of more clinical value.
In this case, an exploratory laparotomy was performed to evaluate the pancreas
and rule out neoplasia. Biopsies confirmed chronic active pancreatitis, with
concomitant lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory bowel disease and mild lymphocytic
portal hepatitis. An fTLI assay was normal.
26 i. Cystocentesis is being performed with the cat in dorsal recumbency.
 i. Cystocentesis can be performed in conscious, sedated, or anaesthetized cats in any
position, as long as the bladder can be palpated. The bladder is gently stabilized and a
5-20 ml syringe with a 1-2 inch 23 gauge needle is introduced at an oblique angle, to
reduce the risk of urine leakage, and directed into the bladder cranial to the junction
between the bladder and urethra. Once the sample has been aspirated, pressure on the
bladder is released and the needle is withdrawn.
ii. This is a simple technique for obtaining urine samples for urinalysis and, in
particular, urine culture. Cystocentesis can be used to drain the bladder in cats with
urethral obstruction and severe bladder enlargement.
iv. Cystocentesis complications are rare. Additional care is necessary with urethral
obstruction, as there is a higher risk of urine leakage or bladder rupture - a greater
volume of urine should be removed to relieve bladder pressure. Very rarely, cats have
been reported to retch/vomit, pant, and temporarily collapse after cystocentesis,
presumably as a result of vagal stimulation. Spontaneous recovery occurs within minutes.
34
27, 28: Questions
27 This intra-oral nasal
27
radiograph (27) is from an
11-year-old neutered male
DSH cat.
i. What abnormalities can be
seen radiographica lly?
ii. What is the likely diag-
nosis and how would this be
confirmed?
m. What clinical signs is the
cat likely to be showing?
28 A 15-year-old neutered
28
male DSH cat is presented
with a history of sudden
onset blindness. On further
questioning the owner reveals
that the cat has been some-
what lethargic and depressed
for some time. Both eyes
contain similar changes, a
picture of the right fundus is
shown (28).
i. What abnormalities can be
seen?
ii. For what condition are
 these changes typical?
i. What ocular changes can
generally be seen with this
disease?
3.5
27, 28: Answers
27 i. The radiograph demonstrates a relatively normal appearance to the left nasal
chamber with the turbinate structure still being visible. There appears to be a mild
increase in soft-tissue density on the left side, particularly rostrally, and the external
nares are not clearly visible suggesting some nasal discharge in and from this side. The
right nasal cavity has a marked diffuse increase in soft tissue density along with loss
of most of the normally visible turbinate structures. This is consistent with turbinate
destruction and an expansive soft tissue mass which is most likely to be neoplastic.
Granulomatous fungal rhinitis or destructive rhinitis with inspissated fluid/pus would
also be possible but less likely.
i. The likely diagnosis in this case is nasal neoplasia, primarily affecting the right
nasal cavity, with possible extension to, or reaction in, the left nasal chamber. The
diagnosis would be best confirmed by nasal biopsy (guided via rhinoscopy or blind)
using suction-catheter or grab-forceps techniques. The two most common nasal
tumours in cats are lymphoma and adenocarcinoma. Radiotherapy may be an option
for both tumours (lymphoma generally responding very well) and chemotherapy
would also be an option for lymphoma.
. The cat would be likely to be showing progressive signs of inspiratory dyspnoea,
stertor, nasal discharge, and sneezing. Severe dyspnoea may cause inappetence and
weight loss. Local expansion of a tumour mass may cause facial distortion, and this is
important to assess during clinical examination along with any distortion to the hard
palate and enlargement of regional lymph nodes.
28 i. There are large areas of retinal detachment (from 2 o'clock to 7 o'clock) and
extensive intraocular haemorrhage. Two blood-filled bullae are clearly visible {10
o'clock and 12 o'clock); blood in these has originated from ruptured aneurysms,
proba bly involving retinal arterioles.
ii. Hypertensive chorioretinopathy.
m. Systemic hypertension can be associated with many ocular abnormalities. Ocular
haemorrhage can involve the anterior chamber in some cases {hyphaema) and
haemorrhage into the vitreous can extend to involve the anterior chamber. Fundic
eéxamination may reveal subtle changes such as focal areas of effusion from choroidal
vessels producing areas of subretinal oedema which may progress to bullous detach-
ments, and, in severe cases, total retinal detachment. Retinal vessel abnormalities
which may be visible include frank haemorrhage, apparent variation in the diameter 
of the vessels along their length, arteriovenous nipping, and aneurysms. Areas of retinal
detachment may reattach and, when this occurs, retinal folds may be seen. Subtle papil-
loedema may be seen in some cases. Over a long period of time retinal degeneration,
recognized as areas of hyperreflectivity, and optic atrophy may develop. Abnor-
malities are usually detected in both eyes although they may be more severe in one.
36
29, 30: Questions
29 A 13-year-old neutered
29
female DSH cat presents with
recurrent and progressive signs
of dysuria and haematuria.
 Physical examination reveals an
irregularly thickened bladder
wall and cystoscopy of the
bla dder apex is shown (29).
i. What changes are evident and
what  are
the differential
diagnoses?
ii. What is the most likely
diagnosis in this case and how
could treatment be attempted?
30 The laboratory results below
30
were obtained from a 6-year-old
neutered male domestic long-
haired cat which was presented
with a history of lethargy and
inappetence. The owner also
reported that one eye looked
abnormal (30).
i. What is the assessment of this
case based on the results shown?
ii. What are the differential diag-
noses and what further tests are
appropriate?
. If a single disease is respon-
sible for this cat's
signs, what is it
Parameter
Result
Reference range
most likely to be
and how might it
Urea mmol/l (mg/dl)
7.2 (20.2)
6.0-10.5 (17.0-29.0)
Creatinine μmoil (mg/dl)
112 (1.3)
<175 (<2.0)
be managed?
Phosphate mmol/l (mg/dl)
1.8 (5.6)
0.95-1.95 (2.9-6.0)
Sodium mmol/l (mEq/l)
15 1
145-160
Potassium mmol/l (mEq/l)
2.9
4.0-5.0
Calcium mmol/l (mg/dl)
2.1 (8.4)
2.0-2.7 (8.0-10.8)
Glucose mmoll (mg/dl)
4.8 (86)
3.5-7.5 (60-135)
Urine specific gravity
>1.050
Systolic blood pressure (SBP)
245 mmHg
37
29, 30: Answers
29 i. Cystoscopy shows the presence of haemorhage from the bladder wall and an irregu-
lar, poorly defined polypoid-like mass lesion. The major differential diagnoses would be:
Neoplasia - most likely TCC.
Polypoid cystitis.
Severe cystitis secondary to urolithiasis.
 i. TCC would be the most likely diagnosis in this cat. Urolithiasis could be ruled out by
diagnostic imaging, but a bladder biopsy (surgical or catheter biopsy) would be required
 to make a definitive diagnosis. Cytology of urine sediment or a fine needle aspirate may be
diagnostic, but TCCs do not always exfoliate neoplastic cells, and even when neoplastic
cells are present they can be difficult to distinguish from reactive cells. Thoracic
radiographs and abdominal radiography and ultrasonography would be indicated to look
for metastases, as by the time a diagnosis is made, metastases are common.
In cats, TCCs commonly affect the apex rather than the trigone of the bladder, so
surgical excision is often feasible and is regarded as the treatment of choice where
possible and appropriate. In dogs and humans, COX-2 inhibitors appear to help
many cases of TCC, probably because these tumours over-express COX-2 and this
tnzyme may play a role in tumourigenesis. On this basis, COX-2 selective non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may have a role in managing feline patients too.
Piroxicam has produced anecdotal beneficial effects, but drugs such as meloxicam
and carprofen may have greater COX-2 selectivity. Cats receiving these drugs should
ha ve renal function monitored and be monitored for gastrointestinal side effects.
30 i. Hyphaema is evident in the picture and, given the SBP reading, this is most likely
to be a result of systemic hypertension. The most striking laboratory finding is a marked
hypokalaemia. Renal function is normal so this is not the cause of the hypokalaemia.
 i. Differential diagnoses for hypokalaemia in this cat include:
Diuretic therapy, e.g. furosemide.
Overzealous intravenous fluid thera py.
Persistent prolonged poor appetite (usually only mild hypokalaemia with this).
Hyperaldosteronism.
Further diagnostic tests to be considered include serum aldosterone assay and adrenal
ultrasonography (in order to try to locate an adrenal tumour). Retinal examination may
be helpful in order to identify further changes consistent with hypertension.
. Given the clinical and laboratory findings in this case, hyperaldosteronism is most
likely. Medical management of these cases includes potassium supplementation (intra-
venously or orally) and use of spironolactone, an aldosterone antagonist. Surgical
removal of the tumour, where possible, is also an option.
38
31, 32: Questions
31
31 An exploratory laparotomy is performed in a 9-year-old neutered female DSH cat;
the proximal duodenum is displayed (31).
i. What abnormality can be seen?
ii. What clinical signs would this cat be expected to show?
mi. What other diagnostic tests would be valuable?
iv. What would be the recommended treatment in this case?
32 A 3-year-old entire male DSH cat
32
presents with lethargy, pyrexia and
depression of S days' duration. Clinical
examination reveals inspiratory dyspnoea
and bilateral ventral dullness on thoracic
VisitID18282
percussion. Thoracocentesis yields a
turbid foul-smelling fluid (32).
i. What is the likely diagnosis in this cat?
What are the typical biochemical and
cytological findings with the fluid?
道. What ca uses this condition in cats and
how does it differ from that found in
dogs?
Ca
H11
39
31, 32: Answers
31 i. The picture shows the proximal small intestine and the pancreas. The pancreas
appears severely hypoplastic/aplastic. There is no obvious associated inflammation of
the pancreas, peripancreatic fat, mesentery, or intestine.
i. This cat would probably be suffering from EPl. This is an uncommon disorder in
cats, and would result in chronic diarrhoea, often with steatorrhoea (malodorous,
pale faeces) and weight loss, possibly in the face of an increased appetite. Faeces are
often voluminous and examination may reveal undigested meat fibres and fat. The
hair coat, particularly around the perineum, may become very greasy. If the
pancreatic pathology also affected the endocrine portion {i.e. β-cells) this cat could
also have diabetes mellitus.
mi. Histology of the pancreas would be valuable. In this case, histology revealed
normal pancreatic islets, but only occasional foci of acinar cells along with several
foci of lymphoid infiltrates, suggesting a possible immune-mediated aetiology of the
EPl. Assay of serum fTLI is a sensitive and specific non-invasive marker of pancreatic
function and is reliable for the detection of EPI (low serum levels being diagnostic).
The majority of cases of feline EPl also have very low (sometime unmeasurable}
serum Bi2 concentrations as "intrinsic factor' secreted by the pancreas is required for
its efficient absorption from the small intestine. Measurement of faecal trypsin
activity is notoriously unreliable for the diagnosis of this condition.
iv. Treatment of feline EPI is similar to canine EPI with supplementation of pancreatic
enzymes, ideally in the form of powder supplementation mixed in with food. The
food should be given as small frequent meals. Bi2 supplementation may be required.
32 i. The clinical signs and foul-smelling nature of the effusion are typical of pyo-
thorax. The fluid in cases of pyothorax is an exudate with a high protein and cell
content. Cytology reveals abundant degenerate neutrophils and often both intra-
cellular and extracellular bacteria are seen.
i. The foul smell of the fluid is due to the presence of anaerobic bacteria. Feline
pyothorax is usually a mixed infection, with anaerobic Gram-negative rods
{Bacteroides spp., Fusobacterium spp.), anaerobic Gram-positive rods and cocci
(Clostridia spp., Peptostreptococcus spp.), and Pasteurella multocida being common
isolates. If there is a significant delay in a sample reaching the laboratory, cultures
may be sterile if there are only strict anaerobes present.
Pyothorax is more common in the cat than the dog and can arise from a pen-
etrating wound, haematogenous spread, a migrating foreign body, or local extension
of infection {e.g. oesophageal rupture, bronchopneumonia). In dogs, it is more
common to identify a specific underlying cause fe.g. foreign body), whereas in cats,
many cases remain idiopathic. In dogs, the most common bacteria isolated are
Nocardia, Actinomyces, and Bacteroides spp.
40
33, 34: Questions
33
33 i. What feature is being shown by this 18-month-old neutered female Burmese
cat (33)?
ii. What is the most likely cause of this sign and its aetiopathogenesis in this cat?
34 Examine the radiograph
34
(34).
i. What abnormalities can be
seen?
ii. What is the most likely
cause of these changes and
what is the likely aetiopatho-
genesis?
fi. What clinical signs would
this cat be expected to show?
iv. What laboratory abnor-
ma lities might be present?
v. How should this case be
managed?
41
33, 34: Answers
33 i. The most obvious feature is ventroflexion of the neck; the head is therefore not
being held in a normal position. This is a non-specific sign of muscle weakness in cats
and can occur as a result of numerous myopathies and junctionopathies.
ii. The single most common cause for neck ventroflexion is hypokalaemic
 polymyopathy, which can occur for a variety of different reasons. A recognized breed-
related and probably inherited form of hypokalaemic polymyopathy has been
described in Burmese cats in several countries. Affected cats usually display signs of
polymyopathy by 2-6 months of age, and the disease varies in severity. Many cats
display intermittent hypokalaemia/polymyopathy and therefore clinical signs may be
episodic. The disease has some resemblance to periodic hypokalaemic polymyopathy
in humans where there is a sudden shift of potassium from extracellular fluid to
intracellular fluid resulting in hypokalaemia, altered muscle resting membrane
potential, and, if severe enough, myonecrosis. In affected cats, serum potassium
concentrations are typically <3 mmol/l (<3 mEq/l) and there is often very marked
elevation in serum CK concentrations. The precise aetiopathogenesis of the condition
in Burmese cats has not yet been elucidated but it is likely to represent either an
intracellular shift of potassium, and/or inappropriate kaliuresis.
34 i. The radiograph is from an immature cat fgrowth plates not yet fused) and
demonstrates severe osteopenia with thinning of the bone cortices and a pathological
fracture of the distal femur.
 ji. These findings are characteristic of nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
which is seen occasionally in cats fed an all meat diet. In this condition the osteopenia
results from excessive bone resorption. An all meat {or mainly all meat) diet is rich in
 phosphate but deficient in calcium. A meat diet provides a Ca:P ratio of around 1:20
as opposed to the 1:1 ratio recommended for cats. The hypocalcaemia causes
hyperparathyroidism, resulting in calcium resorption from bone and increased urine
phosphate excretion.
im. Typical clinical signs are pain, lameness, stiffness, reluctance to move, and pain on
handling. There may be mild pyrexia and pathological fractures are common.
Verte bral fractures may cause neurological signs.
iv. Due to the hyperparathyroidism, serum calcium and phosphate levels may be normal,
but calcium will tend to be low and phosphate will tend to be high. There will be a
marked increase in parathyroid hormone concentrations and a high fractional clearance
of phosphate in the urine with a low fractional clearance of calcium.
v. Affected cats usually respond rapidly to therapy. Cats should be confined for a few
weeks to prevent fracture formation and the diet should be altered to a balanced one
containing a recommended Ca:P ratio.
42
35, 36: Questions
35 A 7-year-old male neutered
35
DSH is presented because it
has an abnormal gait (walking
with the hocks touching the
ground) and posture (35).
There is no history of trauma
and the owner believes that
these abnormalities have
developed over the last few
weeks. On further question-
ing, the owner reveals that the
cat has been losing weight for
the last 2 months, during
which time it has also been
noticeably polydipsic and
pol yuric.
i. Describe the cat's posture.
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. What is the most likely cause of the cat's clinical signs?
36 A 6-year-old male DSH cat presents
36
with inspiratory dyspnoea and pyrexia.
i. What features can be seen on the DV
radiograph {36)?
i. Cytological examination of fluid col-
lected reveals numerous degenerate
neutrophils and abundant bacteria
(Gram-positive and Gram-negative).
How should this case be managed?
m. What is the value of glucose and pH
measurements in monitoring response to
therapy?
43
35, 36: Answers
35 i. The cat has a bilateral plantigrade stance.
i. The posture and gait abnormalities are suggestive of bilateral LMN disease and
likely causes include:
Metabolic/endocrine causes of polyneuropathy such as diabetes mellitus, lipid
 granulomas impinging on nerves (hyperlipidaemic cats).
Toxic polyneuropathy caused for example by exposure to organophosphates,
heavy metals, or vincristine.
Infectious and inflammatory causes of polyneuropathy, e.g. Toxop lasma gondii,
idiopathic polyneuritis, FeLV- or FIV-associated polyneuropathy.
Spinal cord disease (e.g. neoplasia, disc compression, inflammatory disease)
causing LMN deficits.
 Neoplasia affecting peripheral nerves (unlikely to be bilaterally symmetrical),
 paraneoplastic ca uses of peripheral neuropathy.
Idiopathic polyneuropathy (often associated with other nerve involvement).
il. In this case the most likely cause is diabetic neuropathy.
36 i. The DV radiograph demonstrates the presence of a bilateral pleural effusion,
with retraction and rounding of the lung lobes. It is impossible to see the diaphragm,
but the gas-filled fundus of the stomach appears to be in a normal position.
i. The cytology is consistent with a diagnosis of pyothorax. Regular pleural drainage is
necessary for successful therapy, and to relieve dyspnoea. Repeat needle thoracocentesis
can be performed, but in most cases the treatment of choice is an indwelling thoracic
drain(s). Frequency of drainage will depend in part on the rate of accumulation of fluid
but will typically be two to three times daily, or more initially. Drainage should be
continued until radiographic resolution occurs, the fluid is free of bacteria, and is of a
small volume (2-4 ml/kg/day). If pleural fluid is very viscous or pocketing of fluid
occurs, pleural lavage {with 10 ml/kg warmed sterile saline) can be performed twice
daily. Radiogra phy and/or ultra sonography can be helpful in monitoring response.
Systemic antibiotics should be administered for a minimum of 4-6 weeks. Culture
and sensitivity testing is ideal, but empirical therapy is required, at least initially, and
should be broad-spectrum, covering the mixed infection commonly seen, which
 generally includes anaerobes and facultative anaerobes. Antibiotic combinations are
required for adequate cover and common combinations are metronidazole with
ampicillin/amoxicillin, or clindamycin with enrofloxacin/marbofloxacin. Antibiotic
therapy should be continued for at least 2 weeks beyond clinical resolution of disease.
Studies have shown no benefit from local (intrapleural) instillation of antibiotics.
. In pyothorax, both the pH of the exudate and the glucose content are low. This
can be used to monitor response as levels return to those found in blood as the
condition resol ves.
44
37, 38: Questions
37
37 Thoracic radiographs from a 4-year-old domestic longhaired cat show gross cardi-
omegaly. Thoracic ultrasonography reveals liver (1) adjacent to the left ventricle (2)
in the pericardial sac (37).
i. What is this condition?
ii. What is the cause of this condition?
m. What is its significance to the cat?
iv. What advice should be given regarding treatment?
38 An 8-year-old neutered
38
male DSH cat presented
with anorexia, pain on
opening the mouth, and
 severe foul-smelling puru-
lent discharge around the
gingiva. The cat was re-
examined after 5 days of
broad-spectrum bacteri-
cidal antibiotics.
i. What is demonstrated in
this picture {38)?
i. What is the diagnosis/
differential diagnosis for 
this cat?
m. How should this case be investigated and treated?
4.5
37, 38: Answers
37 i. A PPDH with liver contained in the pericardial sac.
risk include British Shorthair and domestic longhaired cats. In this condition there is a
communication between the pericardial sac and the peritoneal cavities allowing
herniation of abdominal contents.
. PPDHs are often clinically insignificant and in some cases only identified because
screening thoracic radiographs have been performed. Most commonly, liver is present
in the pericardial sac. Where present, clinical signs vary according to the nature and
volume of the herniated contents and therefore can include muffled heart sounds on
auscultation, and respiratory and gastrointestinal signs such as dyspnoea and vomiting.
iv. Corrective surgery can be performed in those cases where the PPDH is associated with
clinical signs. In most cases this is associated with a good prognosis although the presence
of adhesions can complicate surgery and worsen the prognosis. Where a PPDH has been
 identified as an incidental fnding in an older animal, surgery may not be needed.
38 i. This cat demonstrates severe necrotizing periodontal disease affecting the 2nd
 and 3rd upper premolars, with marked erythema, gingival and periodontal destruction
(revealing the tooth root), and erosion/bleeding. There is a moderate amount of
dental calculus present. Saliva, and saliva staining, on the hair around the chin
suggest the presence of ptyalism due to oral pain.
i. Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis is an unusual disease in cats, and is similar to
"Vincent's infection' or 'trench mouth" in humans. In humans, the disease is caused by
a mixed infection with anaerobes fespecially Fusobacterium spp. and Bacteroides
spp.) which accounts for the particularly unpleasant smell, due to production of
volatile fatty acids by the anaerobic bacteria. It is typically associated with poor oral
hygiene, malnutrition, and immunosuppression, including that due to human
immunodeficiency virus infection.
Similar bacteria are responsible for the disease in cats, and there is often pre-
existing periodontal disease {as in this cat). Immunosuppression with either FeLV or
FIV infection is a recognized predisposing factor in cats.
ii. Testing for FeLV and FIV is important in the evaluation of cases of acute
necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis. The disease can affect the gingivae, periodontal
structures, tongue, and pharynx. Surgical debridement of affected tissue may be
required along with dental extraction as necessary. Broad-spectrum antibiotics with
good activity against anaerobes should be used such as metronidazole, penicillin, or
clindamycin. Prognosis is good if there is not severe underlying disease.
In this case the cat was infected with FIV, and developed other complications,
despite control of the necrotizing periodontal disease with a combination of
metronidazole and amoxicillin.
46
39, 40: Questions
39 i. What feature(s) can be seen in this
39
lateral view of the right stifle (39) from
a 12-year-old neutered female DSH cat
presented for investigation of dyspnoea?
ii. What is the likely cause of these
changes and how could this be con-
frmed? Comment on the significance
of this finding.
40 A S-year-old neutered
40
female Cornish Rex cat
presents with a 3-month
history of sneezing and
inspiratory dyspnoea.
The appearance of the
cat at the time of exam-
ination is shown (40).
i. What abnormalities
can be seen?
ii. What are the major
differential diagnoses?
i. If this is due to an
infection, what is the
 most likely cause and how should this be diagnosed?
47
39, 40: Answers
39 i. The lateral stifle radiograph shows peri- and intra-articular new bone formation
with no evidence of joint swelling or a joint effusion.
i. The most likely diagnosis would be DJD but a joint tap and cytology would be
needed to rule out an inflammatory arthropathy. With DJD there may be a small
number of neutrophils present along with mononuclear cells in the joint fluid, but these
are present in low numbers. In contrast, there is a very high number of neutrophils in
 inflammatory arthropathies (>5,0o0/μl) and these cells are the predominant type.
retrospective radiographic studies have suggested that it is actually a common
phenomenon in older cats (radiographic evidence of DJD being present in at least
90% of cats over 12 years of age in one study). The DJD evident in this cat is likely to
be unrelated to its dyspnoea, but DJD has been an under-recognized problem in cats.
Clinical signs of DjD in cats may potentially be much more subtle than in dogs.
The lifestyle of cats may mean that they can mask signs more readily and a lack of
overt lameness should not necessarily be taken as evidence of a lack of joint pain.
Signs such as reduced agility, reduced activity, and altered attitude faggression,
reduced grooming, inappropriate urination) are common in older cats, and chronic
joint pain could be a potential cause of these.
Trial therapy may be justified with, for example, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
agents, injectable or oral pentosan polysulphate, or oral glucosamine.
40 i. A red mass can be seen protruding from the right nostril with swelling over the
bridge of the nose, especially on the right, and a small crusted lesion.
i. The two major differential diagnoses for these changes would be:
 Neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma), or fungal infection (e.g. cryptococcosis).
m. If this lesion is due to an infection, then nasal cryptococcosis would be most likely as
Cryptococcus neoformars is the most common cause of fungal rhinitis in the cat. There
are two varieties of C. neoformans: C. neoformans var neoformans and C. neoformans
var gatti. The former has a worldwide distribution (more common in warmer
environments) and is found in pigeon droppings and decaying vegetable matter,
whereas the latter is present in tropical/subtropical environments and is strongly
associated with various eucalyptus trees. Cats probably become infected by inhalation
of spores, although cuta neous or ocular inoculation, or ingestion may also occur.
Diagnosis is based on finding the organism in cytological examination of exudates,
aq osje ueo wsjueaio aui wusiueano aui supunouns ajnsdeo ypiul e yiim aoueieadde
cultured from samples, although false positives can occur as a result of transient
contamination. Serological testing {latex agglutination test) for serum antigen is
useful, and is a relatively sensitive and specific indicator of infection. A decreasing
titre during treatment is a good prognostic indicator.
48
41, 42: Questions
41
dental prophylaxis {41)? What is known about the nature of these lesions and what
treatment is recommended?
42
42 The picture (42) is of a 5-year-old neutered male DSH with lymphoplasmacytic
gingivostomatitis. What treatment options should be considered for this cat based on
knowledge of the aetiopathogenesis of this condition?
49
41, 42: Answers
41 The right upper canine tooth of this cat shows a classic 'neck' lesion at the gingival
margin. *Neck' lesions or FORLs are commonly recognized in cats, occurring in an
estimated 20-60%. Most affected cats are over 4 years old, the prevalence increases
with age, and apparently also with FIV infection. Lesions are most common on the
buccal tooth surface.
The underlying aetiology remains obscure, but there is an odontoclastic resorptive
process which is typically seen at the cervical (cemento-enamel) junction. The presence
of gingivitis has been suggested to be an initiating factor, promoting osteoclastic activity
and the erosive process. The resorption is progressive, leading to pain and frequently
resulting in fracture and loss of teeth. Some studies have suggested the disease begins in
the tooth root rather than the subgingival cervical region, and is not associated with
inflammation but possibly a disregulation of the normal resorptive/repair process.
Regardless of the precise aetiology, these lesions are quite distinct from dental caries.
Radiographically, affected teeth show destruction of root and periodontal bony tissue,
and there may be extensive resorption within the tooth but only a small visible surface
lesion. Resorptive lesions are typically filled with granulation tissue.
Most advanced FORLs are probably best treated by tooth extraction. Attempts at
 restoration have generally been unsuccessful in the long term.
42 Lymphoplasmacytic gingivostomatitis is a common but poorly understood disease.
There is often a superficial neutrophilic infiltrate, but the deeper tissues have a heavy
lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. Serum biochemistry commonly reveals a hyperpro-
teinaemia and hyperglobulinaemia which is usually due to a polyclonal hypergamma-
globulinaemia. Investigation of the antibody response has shown high titres to a
number of normal oral bacteria (including common anaerobes found in the gingival
sulcus). Numerous studies have also shown that the majority of affected cats have
FCV infection and there is a clear epidemiological link between the two. A proportion
of affected cats are also FIV-positive.
antigenic challenge, most likely from the normal oral bacterial flora (particularly
anaerobes) and/or persistent FCV infection. FIV infection may contribute to this.
Medical therapy is aimed at maintaining optimal oral hygiene {dental prophylaxis)
to control bacterial numbers, but if this alone fails to control the signs then additional
therapy with immunosuppressives to combat the inflammatory response is indicated
(initially prednisolone, progressing to more potent drugs such as chlorambucil as
necessary). Dental extraction {removing all the molars and premolars) has been
reported to have a high efficacy rate in the management of this disease, presumably
by reducing the anaerobic bacterial burden by removing the gingival sulcus. In many
cats the disease can be controlled but not cured.
50
43, 44: Questions
43
43 This image {43) was obtained by ultrasound examination of the left eye of a
12-year-old female neutered DSH cat.
i. What is the arrow pointing to?
if. What is a working diagnosis given the information available at this stage?
i. What differential diagnoses need to be considered?
iv. Which tests should be performed?
44. An owner brings a cat in with a
history of lethargy. The owner admin-
istered half of one of the tablets shown
(paracetamol or acetaminophen) {44) the
Paracetamol
previous day and that morning, but
TabletsBP500mg
reports that the cat has deteriorated.
What are the likely effects of the owner's
action and what treatment should be
Effective
Relief
administered?
ofPain
16
43, 44: Answers
43 i. The arrow is pointing to a portion of bullous detachment of the retina. The
detached retina appears thickened which is most likely to be because of intra-retinal
Dedema and/or haemorrhage. The optic nerve head is prominent, possibly due to
papilloedema, and there is some peripapillary oedema adjacent to this. A small area
of retinal detachment is also visible.
ii. Bullous retinal detachment with a variety of additional subtle retinal changes.
. Causes of retinal detachment include:
Systemic hypertension (serous or haemorrhagic detachment).
Inflammatory disease, e.g. infectious causes (FIP, FeLV, FIV, toxoplasmosis,
cryptococcosis), immune-mediated panuveitis.
Neoplasia.
 Subretinal haemorrhage following trauma, vasculitis or a coagulopathy.
Hyperviscosity, e.g. due to polycythaemia.
iv. A thorough history and clinical examination should be performed in order to look
for evidence of trauma (e.g. scuffed nails), systemic hypertension (e.g. ocular changes
consistent with this, raised SBP), causes of systemic hypertension {e.g. thyroid
nodule), and other evidence of systemic diseases listed above. Haematology, bio-
chemistry, virus screening tests, coagulation profiles, and other investigations (e.g.
radiography, ultrasonography to identify neoplasia) may be required to diagnose
some of the other causes listed above.
44 Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is highly toxic to cats, with doses of 50-60 mg/kg
producing toxic effects. Paracetamol is metabolized in the liver by conjugation to
inactive glucuronide and sulphate metabolites. Oxidation via the cytochrome P-450
system also occurs, producing a highly toxic metabolite (NAPQI) that is inactivated
by glucuronidation with glutathione. Due to the relative defectiveness of the feline
glucuronidation pathway, cats are very susceptible to paracetamol intoxication.
Accumulation of NAPQI causes hepatocyte injury and death, erythrocyte oxidative
stress (haemolysis and Heinz body formation), and methaemoglobin production.
Clinical signs of intoxication include depression, weakness, dyspnoea, cyanosis,
jaundice, vomiting, methaemoglobinaemia (chocolate-brown blood colour),
haemoglobinuria, bilirubinuria, facial and paw oedema, liver necrosis, and death.
Treatment involves induction of emesis and/or gastric lavage for recent ingestion,
followed by use of activated charcoal {1-3 g/kg). NAC can provide an alternative sub-
strate for conjugation of metabolites and help replenish glutathione. 5% NAC is given 
at 140 mg/kg, then three to five treatments at half this dose every 4 hours. It can be
given orally or slowly IV. Cimetidine (5-10 mg/kg orally or IV every 8 hours) may help
by inhibiting cytochrome P-450 activity. Additional supportive therapy with oxygen,
blood transfusions or *Oxyglobin', and antioxidants (e.g. SAMe) may be required.
52
45, 46: Questions
45 Taurine (45) is an essential micro-
45
nutrient in cats.
i. What is taurine and what is its physio-
logical role?
i. What are the common clinical signs
associated with ta urine deficiency?
m. How can taurine status be assessed?
SIGMA
T-0625
Lot101H0377
TAURINE
(2-Aminoethanesulfonic acid)
Synthetic;Approx.99%
Storeatroomtem-
C,H,NO,S
perature
Prepred er Sim
46 The picture {46) shows CSF collected
46
from a cat with neurological disease.
i. What diagnostic tests should be per-
formed on the CSF?
ii. Are there any contraindications to
collection of CSF?
53
45, 46: Answers
45 i. Taurine is classified as a β-amino sulphonic acid; it is not, strictly speaking, an
amino acid and it does not form part of polypeptides or proteins. Taurine is produced
from the metabolism of sulphur-containing amino acids such as methionine and
cysteine, but the enzymes responsible for this have minimal activity in cats, so cats
rely on exogenous sources of this nutrient. Many species use either taurine or glycine
to conjugate bile acids prior to excretion in the bile, but cats only conjugate to taurine
resulting in an obligatory loss of {and therefore requirement for) taurine.
Taurine is thus an essential nutrient for cats, and is known to have a number of
physiological roles including acting as an antioxidant. Within the retina, taurine is
believed to sta bilize cell mem branes, and in the heart, taurine is involved in regulation
of calcium flux through ion channels. Taurine also affects reproduction and is
thought to act as a neurotransmitter in the foetus.
 i. The classic syndromes of taurine deficiency occur after prolonged deprivation and
include progressive central retinal degeneration and/or dilated cardiomyopathy. While
the former is permanent, the latter may be reversible with taurine supplementation.
Reproductive failure and foetal abnormalities may also occur in queens that are
taurine deficient.
m. Taurine status is best assessed using a whole blood assay, as plasma taurine can be
affected by recent feeding or ha emolysis.
46 i. The CSF should be collected into EDTA tubes for cytology and plain tubes for
biochemical analysis. (0.s-1 ml for each of these). It is important to process the sample
quickly since cellular degeneration will make interpretation difficult. It is therefore
recommended that cytological analysis takes place within 30 minutes of sampling. CSF
 protein levels are more stable. If a bacterial infection is suspected then a Gram-stained
smear may be helpful in detecting microorganisms. Culture is indicated where
organisms have been seen on CSF cytology but false-negative results are common. If
cryptococcosis is suspected then a drop of India ink may be mixed with CSF sediment
allowing detection of encapsulated yeasts. CSF analysis may be performed by com-
mercial veterinary laboratories, veterinary school cytologists, or pathologists and it
may be possible to use local hospital laboratories on an individual basis.
il. CsF collection is not advised in the following cases:
Known or suspected cases of increased intracranial pressure, e-g. cranial trauma.
CSF collction in these cases may precipitate herniation of the brain through the
foramen magnum.
Fractures, dislocations, or bony lesions involving structures adjacent to the site of
CSF collection.
Known or suspected intracranial haemorrhage where sampling may precipitate further
haemorrhage or herniation.
Normal CSF characteristics
Gross appearance
Clear and colourless
Nucleated cell count
<6 cells per mm3 (<6 × 106/)
Protein
(/aw 00E>) I1p/aw 0E>
54
47, 48: Questions
47 Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (47) has been
47
retrieved from a S-year-old Siamese cat with a
history of chronic, persistent coughing and a
marked bronchial pattern on radiography.
Cytology revealed mainly neutrophilic inflam-
 mation and culture of the fluid yielded a scanty
growth of Mycoplasma felis. What is known
about the potential role of mycoplasmas in
feline lower respiratory tract disease and how
should this case be managed?
48 Microsporum canis was identi-
48
fied in fungal culture from hair
pluckings taken from the periphery
of the lesion visible in this cat {48),
which came from a multi-cat
household where several other cats
were also showing characteristic
skin lesions. What treatment regime
should be used to control the
dermatophyte infection in such a
situation?
5.5
47,48: Answers
47 The significance of Mycoplasma spp. in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from cats is
controversial and their role as feline pathogens not well characterized. From several
Aioteidsau addn au ui punoy Auouuos aie dds rusudos.w ieq sueadde i sapnis
tract of cats {especially oropharynx, but also the nose and eyes) and they are probably
a normal commensal organism at this site. However, they are less frequently isolated
siunioddo, Aepuooas se papiesau uaaq uao aaey sewseidosau yanoui
primary pathogens and may be a potential cause of chronic bronchial disease and
pneumonia. There are now many reports of Mycoplasma spp. being isolated in pure
culture from some of these cases and/or cats showing clinical improvement to
appropriate therapy. There is growing evidence in human medicine that Mycoplasmd
spp. may also have a role in provoking and/or exacerbating asthma.
Although the role of Mycoplasma felis in the respiratory disease of this cat would
be unknown, its isolation is sufficient grounds for trial therapy. Drugs known to have
good anti-mycoplasma activity include macrolides and azalides (e.g. erythromycin,
clindamycin, azithromycin), tetracyclines {e.g. doxycycline), and fluoroquinolones.
48 The major infectious particles of dermatophytes are arthrospores, present around
infected hairs. Transmission can occur through direct contact with an infected cat, or
through contact with a contaminated environment (spores can survive for 1-2 years}.
In catteries, treatment must be aimed at eliminating the organism from the
environment and the cats, but this can be extremely difficult, time consuming, and
expensive. Rather than segregating infected and uninfected cats, it is better to treat all
the cats in the household/cattery. Ideally the cats should be treated with a combination
of systemic and topical therapy. Systemic therapy with an efficacious anti-fungal agent 
(e.g. itraconazole) should be used in all cats where possible (avoiding use in pregnant
and very young cats). Studies have clearly demonstrated the high efficacy of twice
weekly shampooing with an anti-fungal shampoo (e.g. a combination of chlorhexidine
and miconazole); this significantly reduces the shedding of viable arthrospores into the
environment and may also enhance clinical recovery. If a shampoo cannot be used,
lesional therapy with an anti-fungal cream may also be of value.
Environmental control should incorporate regular and thorough vacuum cleaning
(ideally followed by burning of the vacuum bag), disinfection of surfaces where 
possible (e.g. with glutaraldehyde), and possibly steam-cleaning soft furnishings. After
therapy of the cats for 2-4 weeks (when new healthy, uninfected hair growth should
be visible), careful clipping of hairs around the lesions can also be performed to
remove remaining arthrospore-infected hairs. Monitoring efficacy with Wood's lamp
examination and fungal culture is needed.
56
49, 50: Questions
49
2.13CM
1.01CM
49 Adrenal ultrasonography was performed in a 7-year-old female neutered DSH cat.
The adrenal glands, measured, are indicated in the picture (49).
i. What is the assessment of the adrenal glands?
ii. What differential diagnoses need to be considered?
50 A 6-month-old neutered male
50
Balinese cat presents with recent
 onset persistent regurgitation after
feeding.
i. What are the differential diag-
noses?
i. What can be seen on the contrast
 oesophagram taken after the cat was
offered food mixed with barium
(50)? Suggest a likely diagnosis.
m. What would be a suitable treat-
ment regimen?
49, 50: Answers
49 i. The adrenal glands differ in size. One adrenal gland has normal dimensions
(1.01 cm long); the other adrenal gland is enlarged.
ii. Differential diagnoses which need to be considered include:
Neoplasia of the adrenal gland, e.g. adenoma, carcinoma, teratoma.
Hyperplasia of the adrenal gland; unlikely since the disease is unilateral.
Other causes of unilateral adrenomegaly, e.g. haematoma, abscess, cyst. The
ultrasound appearance can be helpful in diagnosing these causes. Organizing
haematomas and inspissated pus can have a similar echogenicity to soft tissue but
cystic fluid is usually very hypoechoic.
HAC, hyperaldosteronism, hyperprogesteronism, and phaeochromocytoma are
conditions which can be caused by adrenal tumours.
50 i. There are many differential diagnoses for regurgitation, but they can broadly be
divided into obstructive disorders (luminal, mural, and extramural), inflammatory
disease, and motility disorders.
Luminal causes include foreign bodies and oesophageal diverticulae, mural causes
include neoplasia and strictures, while extramural obstructions include anterior
thoracic masses and vascular ring anomalies (persistent right aortic arch).
Jo xnau oi Arepuoas suua uaisisiad o aruoas inoo ueo saeudosao
gastric juice, secondary to hiatal hernia, and following ingestion of caustic
substances.
Oesophageal motility disorders include primary megaoesophagus, myasthenia
gravis, dysautonomia, and polymyopathy.
Of these potential causes, acute onset regurgitation in a young cat would be most
commonly due to oesophagitis, oesophageal stricture, foreign body, anterior
mediastinal lymphoma, primary megaoesophagus, and persistent right aortic arch.
The recent onset of signs would suggest the latter two are less likely.
i. The spot fluoroscopy film demonstrates accumulation of a barium bolus in the
cervical and proximal thoracic oesophagus, cranial to a tapered area of barium
typical of a stricture. The narrowed area is too far cranial to be due to a persistent
right aortic arch. This cat had been anaesthetized for castration 2 weeks previously,
and this was a post-anaesthetic {reflux) stricture.
im. Optimal treatment for this case would be repeat balloon dilation of the stricture
(several dilations may be required initially at 2-3 day intervals but less frequently as
the condition improves), combined with medical therapy. This comprises a mucosal
of prednisolone, possibly colchicine (to inhibit fibrosis and stricture reformation), and
a low-fat diet to éncourage gastric emptying.
58
5 1, 52: Questions
51 A 7-month-old male DSH
51
cat {51) is presented for evalu-
ation. The owner is concerned
that the kitten is very small,
seems generally lethargic,
mentally dull and suffers from
constipation. She also reports
that she has not been able to
litter train him.
i. What obvious abnormalities
can be seen from the picture?
ii. What is the main differ-
ential diagnosis?
ji. How can this suspicion be
confirmed?
iv. What treatment can be offered?
y. What is the prognosis?
52
52 A 3-year-old neutered female DSH cat presents with a 10-day history of productive
coughing and progressive, mainly expiratory, dyspnoea. Radiography reveals patchy
bronchoalveolar infiltrates, mainly in the cranioventral lung fields. The picture {52)
shows the cytological appearance of a bronchoalveolar lavage conducted under general
anaesthesia.
i. What can be seen on the cytology?
i. What does this suggest as the cause of the cat's disease and how should manage-
ment be approached?
59
51, 52: Answers
51 i. The kitten is disproportionately stunted with very short legs and a short body.
The head is quite large and broad.
i. Congenital hypothyroidism is the most likely possibility given the history of mental
retardation, disproportionate stunting, and constipation which are all common
features of this condition.
. Routine laboratory profiles may reveal hypercholesterolaemia and mild anaemia
although these are not consistent findings. Basal serum total T4 levels are low normal
or below normal in affected cats. A TRH stimulation test is needed to confirm the
diagnosis. Serum is collected for measurement of total T4 before, and 4 hours after,
administration of 100 μg of TRH intravenously. Hypothyroid kittens have a low
serum total T4 which does not increase on stimulation.
iv. Clinically hypothyroid cats can be treated with L-thyroxine at 10-20 μg/kg orally
daily.
v. The prognosis depends on the severity of disease and when treatment is instituted.
Even when treatment is prescribed at an early age, it is not always effective in
resolving the clinical signs and some owners elect for euthanasia in cats where the
quality of life is considered to be poor.
52 i. The cytology (if representative) demonstrates a highly cellular lavage fluid with a
proteinaceous background. There are abundant neutrophils present; this indicates the
presence of predominantly neutrophilic inflammation. Some of these neutrophils are
degenerate suggesting an underlying infectious process. On higher magnification, both
extra- and intracellular bacteria could be seen.
i. This appearance would be typical of a bronchopneumonia lavage fluid. There is
unequivocal evidence of bacterial infection with intracellular bacteria and degenerate 
neutrophils, and this is also consistent with the radiographic appearance. This could
be a primary bacterial infection, or it could be secondary to another disease process
(e.g. foreign body inhalation, aspiration pneumonia, primary viral infection, FIV
infection); thus, in addition to treating the pneumonia, consideration of underlying
ca uses is necessary.
Antibiotics should ideally be based on culture and sensitivity testing, but empirical
-weio suaaool Aleuui iseal ie pauinbau si Adenaul lepiouaioeg lueipenb 1nos
positives, Gram-negatives, aerobes, and anaerobes) as mixed infections are common.
In addition, good hydration should be maintained (to reduce the viscosity of
i uoneznqan saseo araaas ui paunbau aq Aeu Adeiau uaaaxo pue (suoaioas
sterile saline {using a nebulizer in a semi-closed cage) for approximately 10 minutes
three to four times daily can also be beneficial in decreasing the viscosity of secretions,
and, if tolerated, this can be combined with gentle coupage. Bronchodilators
(terbutaline or theophylline systemically, salbutamol by inhalation) may help.
60
53, 54: Questions
 53 i. What procedure is being performed
53
in this cat (53) and what are the indica-
tions for this procedure?
ii. How is this procedure performed?
54 A 6-year-old neutered
54
male DSH presents with a 6-
week history of unilateral
nasal discharge (mucopuru-
lent) and productive sneez-
ing. An intra-oral nasal
radiograph is taken (54).
i. What can be seen on this
ra diograph?
ii. What is the likely diag-
nosis/differential diagnosis
and how should this case be
managed?
61
53, 54 Answers
53 i. A cisternal puncture is being performed in order to obtain a sample of CSF {CSF
tap). In most cats, 1-2 ml of CSF can be collected from this site. CSF analysis is useful
where differential diagnoses include infectious causes {e.g. cryptococcus, FIP,
toxoplasmosis), neoplasia (e.g. lymphoma), previous trauma and haemorrhage {look
for xanthochromia), and inflammatory disease (e.g. sterile meningitis). Inflammatory,
infectious, and neoplastic conditions often result in an increase in the number of cells
and amount of protein present. Neoplastic cells may occasionally be seen in CSF.
i. The anaesthetized cat is intubated to allow administration of oxygen and
anaesthetic gases and placed in right lateral recumbency. The hair over the occipital
and cervical region is clipped and this area is aseptically prepared. The neck is fexed
so that the head is at a 90 degree angle to the neck, with the line of the nose and the
occipital crest parallel to the table. Palpating the external occipital protuberance with
the middle finger, the cranial border of the wings of the atlas with the thumb, the
index finger is placed in the midline halfway between these first two points. A 22
gauge 1.s inch spinal needle is introduced perpendicular to the skin at the point
where the index finger was placed and directed slightly cranially. The stylet is
removed once the needle is fully through the skin allowing the needle to be gently
advanced. Once the needle enters the subarachnoid space there is a sudden loss of
resistance after which CSF is seen flowing up the needle. Where frank blood is seen,
the needle should be withdrawn and the procedure repeated using a midline
approach, since the cervical venous sinuses which run on either side of the spinal cord
 are likely to have been penetrated. If bone is hit then the needle should be redirected
more cranially or caudally until the subarachnoid space is entered. Between l and
2 ml of CSF should be collected allowing the fluid to drip into collection tubes. If the 
flow of CSF is very slow then gentle suction using a 1 ml syringe can be performed.
54 i. The radiograph demonstrates a normal appearance to the left nasal chamber
with good definition of the turbinate bones. The right nasal chamber contains an area
of lucency, primarily medial to the second maxillary premolar. There is some mild
increase in soft tissue density medially and rostrally to the area of lucency consistent
with some accumulation of nasal discharge.
i. The appearance is highly suggestive of periapical loss of bone due to a tooth root
abscess. Additional radiographs would be required to confirm this fas was the case in
this cat); other differentials would include fungal infection and neoplasia.
In any cat with chronic nasal discharge, particularly if it is unilateral, the
possibility of underlying dental disease and tooth root abscess or oronasal fistula
should be considered. Thorough examination of the teeth, probing of the gingival
sulci, and radiographs are therefore an important part of the evaluation and disease 
should be treated as appropriate.
62
55, 56: Questions
55 What are the implications
55
for the immune status of a
kitten (5s) that is deprived of
colostrum/milk for the first
24 hours of life? What prac-
tical measures can be taken to
overcome this?
56 A S-year-old DSH cat is presented
56
which has been depressed, anorexic, and
showing upper respiratory tract signs
(sneezing, nasal discharge) for the last
 2 days. On clinical examination, the cat
is pyrexic and has several small lingual
ulcers (56).
i. What is the most likely diagnosis?
ii. What are the most likely causal
infectious agents?
m. What treatment is recommended?
iv. How can this illness be explained in a
fully vaccinated cat?
63
55, 56: Answers
55 Failure of passive transfer of maternal antibodies is a well recognized cause of
morbidity and mortality in neonates. In cats, the vast majority of antibodies are
transferred to the kiten post-partum via the colostrum, such that newborn kittens
have undetectable serum IgG concentrations prior to sucking. The intestine of the
neonate is uniquely permeable, and this allows the direct absorption of antibodies
when kittens suck immediately after birth. However, this permeability only lasts 24
hours, following which no further antibodies will be absorbed; in addition to this, the
concentration of antibodies in colostrum declines dramatically 24 48 hours after birth.
Thus kittens deprived of colostrum in the first 24 hours of life will have virtually
no maternal-derived antibodies and be at significant risk of disease. However, studies
have shown that subcutaneous administration of adult cat serum at a dose of
approximately 150 ml/kg fapproximately 15 ml for a newborn kitten) can achieve
serum IgG concentrations in a kitten equivalent to that seen following normal
sucking. This is a simple and practical way to overcome lack of passive transfer of
antibodies, although it is important to ensure the serum is from a matched blood type
{to avoid erythrolysis} and that it is free of infectious diseases.
56 i. The acute onset of clinical signs and pyrexia are suggestive of an infectious
cause, therefore cat flu' is the most likely diagnosis.
ii. FHV and FCV are the most likely causal agents. FCV is more frequently associated
with tongue ulcers although both viruses can cause all of the signs described in this case.
m. Supporti ve care of the individual cat is a priority and may include:
Anti biotic cover for secondary bacterial infections.
General nursing care, intravenous fluid therapy, and nutritional support.
 Steam therapy and/or nebulization.
 Use of antiviral agents such as interferon has been shown to be helpful in experi-
mental FHV infection and may be of benefit.
If the cat is hospitalized, barrier nursing is required in order to reduce the risk of
spreading infection to other hos pita lized patients.
iv. No vaccine offers 100% protection and potential causes of *vaccine failure' include:
Overwhelming challenge.
Immunosuppressed individual (due to other disease, e.g. FIV, FeLV, or chemo-
therapy treatment).
The cat was incubating the disease when vaccinated.
Many different isolates of FCV exist in the field and the vaccine virus strains used
will not provide cross protection for all of these.
Clinical signs may not be caused by FCV or FHV infection.
The cat was already a carrier of FCV or FHV and shedding of virus was
associated with recurrence of clinical signs of disease.
64
57, 58: Questions
57
57 A 4-year-old DSH cat is presented with a 2-week history of progressively worsen-
ing sneezing and epistaxis (57). Initially the owner reports epistaxis from the left
nostril only but now both nostrils are affected.
i. What differential diagnoses should be considered?
ii. What is a possible approach to managing this case?
8S
58 The picture (s8) shows fluorescent microscopy of hair pluckings from a cat,
stained with calcofluor white.
i. What does this picture demonstrate?
i. How else could this condition be identified and what are the advantages and
disadvantages of the various techniques?
6.5
57, 58: Answers
57 i. Differential diagnoses for epista xis include:
Bleeding disorder, e.g. thrombocytopenia, thrombocytopathy, vasculitis.
Clotting disorder, e.g. rodenticide toxicity, liver disease, DIC.
Trauma.
Foreign body.
Neoplasia.
Hypertension.
 Fungal rhinitis, severe chronic rhinitis, or bacterial rhinitis.
Hamartomatous nasal polyp.
i. Haematology should be performed in order to assess the platelet count and look
for evidence of anaemia. Serum biochemistry including pre- and post-prandial bile
acids enables assessment of liver function. Clotting profiles (PT, APTT, fibrin
degradation products, fibrinogen) and systemic blood pressure should be assessed.
Nasal radiography, rhinoscopy, nasal flushes, and biopsies may help to identify some 
of the nasal causes of disease. Whilst awaiting results, the cat should be kept calm and
 supportive treatment including blood transfusion administered if needed.
58 i. Calcofluor white binds to polysaccharides in fungal cell walls causing them to
fluoresce under appropriate lighting. This picture demonstrates a hair shaft sur-
rounded by a mass of arthrospores and is diagnostic of an ectothrix dermatophyte
infection, most likely Microsporum canis.
i. The three tests most widely used for dermatophyte diagnosis are:
Wood's lamp illumination: hairs infected with M. canis may produce a charac-
teristic yellow-green fluorescence and thus examination of lesions or plucked
hairs can be valuable. However, of the dermatophytes that infect cats and dogs,
only M. canis fluoresces and only a reported 50-60% of M. canis infections result
in fluorescence. It is valuable as a rapid screening test, but the lamp should be
warmed for 5-10 minutes prior to use, and the examination should take place in
a darkened room. Positive results should be confirmed by other tests.
Direct microscopy: examination of hair/scale is simple and valuable. It is rapid
and provides unequivocal evidence of dermatophytosis if infection is identified.
Positive diagnoses are typically achieved in around 40-60% of infections.
Fluorescence microscopy with calcofluor white increases the sensiti vity.
Fungal culture is generally regarded as the gold standard', and culture of
 representative material from a lesion, or by brushing the coat with a sterile brush
is sensitive and allows speciation of the dermatophyte. Passive carriage of spores
can lead to occasional false-positive? results, and prior treatment can lead to
"false-negative' results, emphasizing the value of using all three techniques.
66
59, 60: Questions
59
 59 What neurological abnormalities are present in this 4-year-old Devon Rex cat
(59)? List the major differential diagnoses.
60
60 A 7-year-old male neutered Siamese cat {60) is reported by its owner to be drink-
ing excessively.
i. What water consumption is considered to be abnormally high?
ii. What are the major differential diagnoses for polydipsia in cats?
mi. What is a possible initial diagnostic plan?
67
59, 60: Answers
59 The cat has a left-sided head tilt and left-sided Horner's syndrome (third eyelid
protrusion, miosis and ptosis affecting the left eye). The major differential diagnoses
for these signs are otitis media/interna caused by inflammatory disease, neoplasia (e.g.
lymphoma), tra uma, or a polyp. Assuming that the disease is not multifocal, idiopathic
vestibular disease is not a differential diagnosis since the cat has Horner's syndrome.
60 i. A water intake >60-100 ml/kg per day is generally considered to be abnormal.
Water consumption in cats receiving a totally wet diet is normally less than in those
receiving a dry diet although upper limits of normality are not well defined in cats.
il. Major differential diagnoses are endocrine and renal disorders:
Endocrine causes:
Hyperthyroidism.
Diabetes mellitus.
Acromegaly (may be associated with secondary diabetes mellitus which
causes the polyuria and polydipsia ).
HAC {may be associated with secondary diabetes mellitus or may cause
polyuria and polydipsia without this).
Central diabetes insipidus.
Hypoadrenocorticism.
Renal causes:
ARF.
CRF.
Pyelonephritis.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
 Primary renal glucosuria.
Electrolyte disturba nces:
Hypercalcaemia.
Hypokalaemia.
Other causes include:
Hepatic disease.
Polycythaemia.
[atrogenic causes {e.g. diuretic therapy, phenobarbitone, salt supplementation).
Psychogenic polydipsia has not been well documented in cats.
ii. The most important initial step would be quantification of water intake and
confirmation of polydipsia. Clinical examination and thorough history taking may
guide subsequent tests but urinalysis, routine haematology, and biochemistry are
likely to be required.
68
61, 62: Questions
61 An exploratory lapar-
61
otomy is performed on an
18-month-old Oriental cat
which has been presented
with a 1-month history of
progressively worsening
anorexia, abdominal dis-
comfort, lethargy, and
weight loss.
i. What abnormalities are
evident on examination of
the liver {61)?
i. What are the differential
diagnoses based on this
picture?
im. What is a possible diag-
nostic plan?
62 A 2-year-old DSH cat
62
presents with diarrhoea and
mild haematochezia
of
S days' duration. Faecal
culture reveals Campylo-
bacter jejuni, and micros-
copy of faecal flotation
reveals many of the objects
shown in the picture (62).
i. Identify the structure in the
picture fit measures approxi-
mately 50 μm in lengthj.
i. What is the significance
of the findings and how
should the cat be treated?
69
61, 62: Answers
61 i. Multiple cream coloured nodules are visible over the surface of the liver.
ii. Differential diagnoses include:
 Inflammatory and infectious causes e.g. FIP pyogranulomatous lesions, hepatic
abscessation, granulomas associated with bacterial causes fe.g. mycobacterial
infections).
Neoplasia.
 Regenerative hepatic nodules.
Others, e.g. areas of calcification, fibrin deposits on the surface of the liver.
m. A liver biopsy incorporating one or more of these lesions is required in order to
make a diagnosis. Biopsy tissue should be submitted for histopathology and
bacteriology. Ideally, a portion of tissue should be frozen at -20°C {-4°F) in case
future submission for specialist mycobacterial culture or PCR is required.
In this case, histopathology revealed FIP as the cause of the disease.
62 i. The picture shows a typical coccidian oocyst. The two species most commonly
affecting cats are Cystoisospora (Isospora) rivolta and Cystoisospora {Isospora) felis.
The latter of the two has larger oocysts {measuring 40-50 μm in length) and the
former are slightly smaller (20-30 μm}
ii. The significance of both findings {Cystoisospora felis and Campylobacter jejuni) is
uncertain. Both can be primary pathogens, but may also be found in healthy cats.
Infection with coccidian parasites is extremely common in cats, especially in kittens
from crowded environments. The life cycle is direct or indirect (via paratenic hosts), and
replication occurs in the enterocytes of the distal small intestine. Sporulation of oocysts 
occurs within 24 48 hours, after which they are infectious. Severe infections in kittens
are more likely to cause clinical signs and in this case, the age of the cat suggests that the
infection may be coincidental. Where warranted, suggested treatments include
sulphonamides (sulfonamides) and sulphonamide (sulfonamide)/trimethoprim
combinations, amprolium, and furazolidone, although the response is varia ble.
Campylobacter jejuni can be a commensal, a secondary pathogen, or a primary
associated with acute haemorrhagic diarrhoea, and so could be responsible for the
clinical signs in this case. Treatment is probably also justified based on the fact that
the organism is a zoonosis. Unlike Salmonella infections, there is little evidence that
treatment willinduce or prolong a carrier state. Treatment should ideally be based on 
results of sensitivity testing, but empirical treatment is possible with erythromycin,
clindamycin, enrofloxacin, or doxycycline.
70
63, 64: Questions
63 This blood {63) was collected from a 6-week-old
63
kitten that had been fasted for 7 hours before sampling.
i. Describe the appearance of the blood sample.
ii. What are the potential causes of the appearance?
ii. What other investigations should be performed?
64 i. What technique is being per-
64
formed here (64)?
i. How should it be performed?
63, 64: Answers
63 i. The appearance is similar to strawberry milkshake or creamy tomato soup.
apaoaia aui uaum anaisial eiuaedi unoyoud jo aasasans s aoueieadde aui 
content is >3.5-4.5 mmol/l [300-400 mg/dl]). Chylomicrons and VLDLs are large
triglyceride-containing lipoproteins which give the milky/lactescent appearance.
. Affected kittens are likely to have lipaemia retinalis {white retinal vessels, seen when
the serum triglyceride is >11 mmol/l [1000 mg/dl]]. Chylomicrons present will separate
in serum left to stand for longer than 6 hours at 4°C (38°F), rising to the top of the
serum forming a cream layer, whereas VLDLs remain suspended. This observation can
be used to assess whether the lipaemia is due to hyperchylomicronaemia and/or excessive
levels of VLDLs. Lipoprotein electrophoresis and other specialist assays can be
 performed to obtain a full lipid analysis of the sample.
Causes of hyperlipoproteinaemia in cats are:
 Physiological causes, e.g post prandial, excessive dietary lipid intake.
Secondary to other diseases, e.g- pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, HAC, nephrotic
syndrome, neoplasia, cholestatic liver disease, hypothyroidism.
Primary abnormality of lipoprotein metabolism, e.g. familial hyperchylomicronaemia
due to a deficiency of lipoprotein lipase.
Hyperchylomicronaemia has been reported as a transient abnormality in anaemic
kittens with either heavy flea burdens and/or FIA. Investigation of this kitten
identified anaemia related to Mycop lasma baemofelis infection (FIA).
64 i. The cat is being fed a liquid diet via a naso-oesphageal (nasogastric) feeding tube.
i. Naso-oesophageal feeding tubes are easy to place in conscious cats and allow
nutritional support of anorexic patients. Local anaesthetic drops {0.s% proxy-
metacaine) are applied to the nostril before placing a 4-8 fg tube. The lubricated tube
is passed through the nostril in a ventromedial direction until it reaches the 8th-10th
rib space. When correctly placed, the tube should terminate in the distal oesophagus
rather than the stomach to reduce the risk of gastric reflux. Before the tube is secured
in place, an empty syringe should be attached to the tube and aspirated. After a small
amount of air, a vacuum should be encountered if the tube is in the oesophagus.
5-10 ml of sterile water or saline can then be injected down the tube and the cat
should not cough. Once it is established that the tube is in the oesophagus, it can be
secured in place by supergluing tape attached to the tube to the bridge of the nose and
s yanoue aoeid u panns aq ueo aqni aul kiaaeuav peau sies aui jo doi
requires sedation or anaesthesia. An Elizabethan collar is placed to stop the cat from
pulling the tube out.
The cat should be fed one-third of its calculated energy requirements on the first
day, two-thirds on the second day, and all of the requirements from the third day
onwards. Proprietary liquid foods designed for cats should be used.
72
65, 66: Questions
65a
65b
65 A S-year-old female neutered domestic longhaired cat is presented for investi-
gation of skin disease. The pictures show the cat's head (65a) and an area of the
lateral trunk {65b).
i. Describe the lesions that can be seen.
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
m. How should diagnosis of this case be approached?
66 The fluid in the bottle
66
(66) has been drained from
the pleural space of this 7-
year-old neutered male
domestic longhaired cat.
i. What is this fluid?
ii. What routine laboratory
tests would confirm the
diagnosis?
ii. What potential under-
lying causes should be con-
sidered for this cat?
iv. If additional investiga-
tions yielded no specific
identifiable cause, what
should the approach be to
therapy?
73
65, 66: Answers
65 i. Multiple cutaneous nodules of varying size are visible on the cat's face and body.
 ii. Differential diagnoses include:
Neoplasia, e.g. mast cell tumour, epitheliotropic lymphoma, histiocytoma {rarely
causes multiple nodules), multiple papillomas, amelanotic melanomas.
Fungal infection, e.g. cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, sporotrichosis.
Bacterial infections, e.g. mycobacterial infections, tularaemia, feline leprosy.
Other possibilities, e.g. follicular cysts, panniculitis.
m. Investigation of nodular skin disease should include biopsy for histology finclud-
ing special stains for fungal and bacterial organisms) and bacterial and fungal culture.
Fine needle aspirate cytology may also be of some diagnostic value.
In this case, biopsy confirmed multiple mast cell tumours.
66 i. The milky appearance of this fluid suggests it is chyle, a chylomicron-rich fluid
that has leaked from the thoracic duct. Chylous effusions have a milky-white
appearance, although they can be blood-tinged causing a pink ('strawberry milk-
shake') appeara nce.
 i. Definitive diagnosis of chylothorax is achieved by demonstrating chylomicrons on
agar lipoprotein electrophoresis. More practically, comparing chyle with serum
reveals triglyceride levels are typically higher in chyle, and cholesterol levels
equivalent to or lower in chyle compared with serum. Cytology usually reveals a
predominance of mature lymphocytes, and there may be lipid-laden macrophages.
m. Recognized causes of chylothorax include:
Cardiomyopathy/congesti ve heart failure.
Traumatic rupture of the thoracic duct.
Anterior mediastinal neoplasia (lymphoma, thymoma).
Hea rtworm disease.
Lymphangiectasia.
Idiopathic chylothorax: in many cases, an underlying cause is not found.
iv. Management of idiopathic cases involves initially conservative treatment with
repeat thoracocentesis as necessary (possibly via an indwelling chest drain) and
reducing the flow of chyle by feeding a low fat diet. Addition of medium chain
triglycerides is not recommended; it is questionable whether they are absorbed directly
into the circulation (rather than via lymphatics) and their use has been associated with
hepatic lipidosis in cats. The benzopyrone derivative, rutin (250-500 mg/cat three
times daily, orally), has been recommended, but evidence supporting its efficacy is
lacking, and some cases will resolve spontaneously.
Where conservative management fails, surgical treatment is recommended with
ligation of the thoracic duct. Fibrosing pleuritis can be a long-term complication.
74
67, 68: Questions
67
67 A S-year-old neutered female DSH cat {67) is presented. The owner complains
that the cat urinates in the house and fails to use a litter tray. How should inappro-
priate urination be differentiated from LUTD?
68
R
68 The radiograph {68) is from a 6-year-old neutered male DSH with a 14-day
history of progressive inappetence and intermittent vomiting and retching. On
examination the abdomen had an indistinct *doughy' feel on palpation, the cranial
abdomen was uncomfortable and a cranial abdominal mass was suspected.
i. What radiographic changes can be seen?
ii. If acute pancreatitis is suspected how should the case be further investigated and
managed?
7.5
67, 68: Answers
67 LUTD is often accompanied by dysuria, pollakiuria, and haematuria. The results
of urinalysis typically reveal evidence of inflammation. If LUTD is accompanied by
urination outside the litter tray the volume will often be variable, it may be grossly
abnormal (e.g. contain blood) and it will typically be on random, horizontal surfaces.
Inappropriate urination may occur for a number of different reasons. It can be
stress-related, related to litter tray problems {litter preference, litter hygiene), or related
to territory marking. Inappropriate urination is not associated with pollakiuria or
dysuria, and classically involves repeat urination at the same locationfs).
Urine spraying is one form of inappropriate urination and is done far more
frequently by males than females. It typically involves small volumes of urine sprayed
onto vertical surfaces and is the most common form of territorial marking. House
soiling is a form of inappropriate urination most often caused by anxiety or litter
tray-related problems that can involve small or normal volumes of urine being passed
on horizontal surfaces. It can be more difficult to differentiate from LUTD, although
the same locationfs) are used and results of urinalysis are normal.
Occasionally diseases other than LUTD may result in urination outside a litter tray
(e.g polyuria/polydipsia, arthritis); the urination will tend to occur in random places.
68 i. The radiograph shows poor serosal detail, especially in the cranial abdomen.
This suggests serosal inflammation (peritonitis) and/or the presence of free fluid.
i. Serum biochemistry, diagnostic imaging, and abdominal fluid analysis may assist
the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity may be a better
test than fTLI for acute pancreatitis in cats, and in severe cases ionized hypocalcaemia
may be present.
In this case, abdominal ultrasonography confirmed the presence of an enlarged
pancreas, which had a patchy hypoechoic architecture, consistent with acute inflam-
mation. There was evidence of secondary biliary stasis. Definitive diagnosis would
require biopsy, but the signs, clinical findings, and imaging were all consistent with
acute pancreatitis. Ultrasonography also confirmed some ascites, and assay of lipase
in this fluid revealed levels more than 10 times higher than serum concentrations.
Feline acute pancreatitis is increasingly recognized, but treatment remains con-
troversial. Supportive therapy is with analgesics, intravenous fluids, and antiemetics
(e.g. chlorpromazine, prochlorperazine, or ondansetron) as necessary. Broad-spec-
trum antibiotics are prudent as bacterial translocation from the intestine may exacer-
bate the disease. Unless contraindicated due to vomiting, feeding is recommended in
cats with acute pancreatitis, and tube feeding is warranted if they are inappetent.
There is little or no evidence that feeding exacerbates the disease, whereas starvation
has many adverse effects. While there is little evidence that glucocorticoids cause or
exacerbate pancreatitis, there is also little evidence that they are of benefit.
76
69, 70: Questions
69
69 A 3-year-old neutered male DSH cat is presented having been involved in a road
traffic accident. The cat is admitted to the hospital for monitoring and supportive
sul Jo alids ul laol (auipaay aqnl leageqdosao-oseu pue spimy snouaaeu aum
therapy, the cat does not pass any urine for 36 hours.
i. Is this finding of concern?
il. What are the possible reasons for this lack of urination?
ii. What investigative procedures may be worth pursuing at this stage?
70
70 A 2-year-old neutered female DSH cat presents with slowly progressive, persistent 
clinical signs that were first noticed at around 4 months of age. In addition to the
features visible in the picture (70), the cat has pectus excavatum, hindlimb lameness
and ataxia, and reduced cervical movement (flexibility).
i. What features are evident from the picture?
i. What is the most likely diagnosis and how could this be confirmed?
m. What, if any, treatment is available?
77
69, 70: Answers
69 i. Lack of urination is of concern, since it may be associated with post-renal ARF,
hyperkalaemia, and meta bolic acidosis.
ii. Rupture of the bladder and/or ureters or urethra, or obstruction to urinary outflow
from the bladder are two concerning possibilities. Rupture is more likely given the
history of trauma. Another possibility is that the cat is unwilling to urinate for other
'2ieulun oi auinisod uo ued 1o 5sauis se yons suosea1
m. Palpation of the bladder will identify bladder distension where present but the
bladder may still be palpable in those cases where small bladder tears or urethral
rupture are present. Plain radiography may be useful in confirming the presence of
urine in the abdominal cavity. Contrast studies {e.g. retrograde urethrogram,
intravenous excretory urography) may be necessary to identify and locate rupture of
the urinary tract.
70 i. The picture of the cat shows two obvious abnormalities: there is clouding of
both corneas fit is impossible to tell the cause from this picture, it could be oedema,
lipid, or some other cause), and there is depression of the nasal bridge {difficult to see
 from this view). Although equivocal, the ears also appear somewhat small.
i. All these signs are typical of the lysosomal storage disease, mucopolysaccharidosis.
There are in fact many different forms of mucopolysaccharidosis, several of which
have been documented in cats, including mucopolysaccharidosis I which can affect
DSH cats. Mucopolysaccharidosis I is caused by a deficiency of the enzyme α-L-
iduronidase. Typical signs are lameness and spinal abnormalities fdue to skeletal
 malformation such as coxofemoral subluxation, bone dysplasia, and vertebral fusion),
a broad face with depressed nasal bridge, small ears, corneal clouding, hepatospleno-
megaly, and hindlimb proprioceptive deficits.
Diagnosis may be suspected from typical clinical signs. Affected cats also excrete
excessive amounts of glycosaminoglycans in urine, and simple commercial tests are
available to detect this, which strongly supports the diagnosis. On histological
examination, various tissues (neurones, myocytes, hepatocytes, fibroblasts and
chondrocytes) show accumulations of glycosaminoglycan within the cells. However,
specific diagnosis relies on demonstration of low a-L-iduronidase activity, and this is
usually achieved by assaying the enzyme on cultured fibroblasts {usually from a skin
punch biopsy), or lymphocytes. Several laboratories will screen for a panel of inborn
errors of metabolism from these cell cultures.
ii. Enzyme replacement therapy with weekly injections of recombinant α-L-
iduronidase has been reported and was partially successful in reversing the effects of
the disease in some tissues. Although not currently available this may offer hope for
future treatment.
78
71, 72: Questions
71
71 A S-year-old neutered male Siamese cat presents with inspiratory dyspnoea and
intermittent regurgitation. Radiography reveals a large anterior mediastinal mass. A
fine needle aspirate (71) is taken from the mass.
i. Describe what can be seen.
i. What is the diagnosis?
i. What are the typical clinical features of this disease?
iv. How should management be approached in this case?
y. What is the best predictor of long-term response to therapy?
 72 A 7-year-old neutered male cat presents with a 4-month history of weight loss,
reduced appetite, and polyuria/polydipsia.
i. What breed of cat is this (72)?
i. If the signs are due to an inherited disease, what is this likely to be?
m. What other inherited diseases are recognized or postulated in this breed and what
are their clinical manifestations?
79
71, 72: Answers
71 i. The cytological sample reveals an abundance of polymorphic lymphocytes
showing distinct characteristics of neoplasia fvariable nuclear size, coarse chromatin
and prominent nucleoli).
ii. This picture is typical of AML.
. Cats affected with AML typically present with either dyspnoea {due to the size of
the mass and/or the presence of an effusion), regurgitation (due to external pressure
from the mass on the oesophagus), or a combination of the two. Typically cats with
AML are <2 years of age, and historically approximately 70% of these tumours have
been reported to be associated with FeLV viraemia, although recent studies suggest
that this proportion may now be lower. Results of a number of studies and clinical
observations suggest that young Siamese cats may be predisposed to this form of
lymphoma, independent of FeLV infection. AML can occur alone, or it can be part of
more widespread or multicentric lymphoma.
iv. This cat would need to be staged fexamined for lymphoma elsewhere), have
retrovirus status evaluated, and be checked for paraneoplastic syndromes fe.g.
hypercalcaemia, although this is unusual with feline lymphoma). Good responses are
reported to standard chemotherapy protocols (e.g. COP protocol).
v. Studies suggest the single most valuable predictor of long-term response to
chemotherapy is the quality of the response in the first few (1-3) weeks.
72 i. This is an Abyssinian cat.
i. Several inherited diseases have been described in this breed, but the presentation
and signs would be consistent with renal amyloidosis.
mi. Inherited diseases in this breed include:
 Serum AA amyloidosis has been identified, but the mode of inheritance is not yet
known. Age of onset and severity are variable; the amyloid is preferentially laid
down in the kidneys resulting in progressive CRF.
Progressive retinal atrophy occurs in two inherited forms in Abyssinian cats. One is
an autosomal dominant trait manifested in kittens, the other an autosomal recessive
manifested in young adults. Both cause progressive retinal atrophy and blindness.
 Congenital hypothyroidism due to dyshormonogenesis has been identified in a group
of Abyssinian cats with a probable autosomal recessive inheritance. Typical signs
(disproportionate dwarfism, constipation, and goitre) have been reported.
Osmotic fragility of erythrocytes causing a chronic intermittent severe haemolytic
anaemia has been identified in young adult Abyssinian and Somali cats. It has been 
proposed that this may be an inherited disorder of the erythrocyte membrane.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency has been identified as an autosomal recessive disease
and results in chronic intermittent haemolytic anaemia in affected individuals due 
to erythrocyte mem bra ne instability.
80
73, 74: Questions
73 i. What can be seen in the
73
picture {73) of a urine sedi-
ment analysis?
ii. What is the significance of
this finding and how should it
be interpreted?
i. What is the potential rela-
tionship with bacterial infec-
tions, and how common is this
in cats?
74 A 7-year-old cat that has a
74
skin wound on its lateral body
wall is presented for evalua-
tion. The owner reports that
the cat was normal this morn-
ing and came in with the
wound after a few hours out-
side. When attempting to
suture this wound, the skin is
found to be extremely fragile
and tears easily producing an
extensive wound over the cat's
ventrum and lateral body
wall (74).
i. What differential diagnoses
need to be considered for skin with this description?
ii. What investigations are required to confirm the cause of the disease?
iff. What is the most likely diagnosis?
81
73, 74: Answers
73 i. This urine sediment analysis shows the typical appearance of struvite
(magnesium ammonium phosphate) crystals.
i. The finding of struvite crystals in urine sediment analysis is not necessarily
abnormal and in many cases may be an in vitro artefact {i.e. the crystals precipitate in
the urine after it has been collected due to cooling of the urine). Even when seen in
freshly collected, immediately examined urine, this can be a normal finding. It
indicates relative supersaturation of the urine with crystalloids, but crystals
themselves are not a pathological finding. Epidemiological studies have not found any
relationship between the prevalence of crystalluria and cystitis. Although their
presence may be regarded as a risk factor for urolith development, in most cats they
are of no clinical significance. Cats on dry diets are more likely to have crystalluria
than those on 'wet' diets.
ii. Bacterial cystitis with
 urease-producing organisms (staphylococci, Proteus) can
predispose to struvite crystalluria and urolith formation by degradation of urea and
release of ammonium {one of the struvite constituents) and by increasing the pH (thus
decreasing the solubility of struvite crystals). Bacterial urinary tract infections are
uncommon in cats, and generally only account for 2-3% of cases of lower urinary
tract disease. Compromise to normal defences {catheter placement, perineal
urethrostomy) will predispose to bacterial infections, as will a lower USG.
74 i. Major differential diagnoses are:
Endocrinopathies, e.g. HAC (Cushing's disease), diabetes mellitus.
Concurrent therapy affecting skin fragility, e.g. corticosteroids, progestagens.
 Paraneoplastic skin fragility.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (cutaneous asthenia). This is a group of inherited con-
nective tissue disorders whereby affected cats suffer from loose, fragile skin which
is hyperextensible and prone to tears. Since this is a congenital defect, it would be
unlikely in this case since no previous history of skin wounds is reported.
i. A thorough history and physical examination should be helpful in eliminating some
of the possibilities considered {e.g. concurrent drug therapy). Further investigations are
likely to include laboratory profiles (e.g. haematology, serum biochemistry including
blood glucose, fructosamine levels, urinalysis) and more specific tests as indicated (e.g.
dexamethasone screening test for HAC). Survey radiographs of the chest and abdomen 
may be helpful in identifying adrenomegaly, metastatic spread of tumours, and
abnormalities consistent with other problems (e.g. hepatomegaly is common with
diabetes and HAC). Histopathology (and possibly electron microscopy) of a skin
biopsy may be helpful particularly in diagnosing Ehlers-Danlos and neoplastic disease.
. Spontaneous or iatrogenic HAC as causes of skin fragility are most likely given the
lack of previous history of problems.
82
75, 76: Questions
75 Doxorubicin (adriamycin) (75)
75
is a drug that is being used with
increasing frequency in feline
medicine.
i. What is this drug and what is its
mechanism of action?
iil. What are the clinical indications
for its use, its practical application,
50mg/25ml
and potential side effects?
50mg/
76
76 A breeder client has a litter of 6-week-old kittens which are showing signs includ-
ing depression, coughing, and dyspnoea (76). One kitten has required extensive nurs-
ing care and is deteriorating rapidly.
i. What are the most likely infectious ca uses of these clinical signs?
if. What is a possible diagnostic plan?
ii. How should the kittens be treated while awaiting laboratory results?
83
75, 76: Answers
75 i. Doxorubicin is a water-soluble anthracycline antibiotic. It is a cytotoxic drug
used in the treatment of various neoplasms and acts principally by interfering with
DNA and RNA synthesis by inhibiting topoisomerase I. It is a cell-cycle non-specific
cytotoxic. Following administration it is cleared by hepatic metabolism and excreted
 in bile and urine. It does not penetrate into the CNS.
 i. Doxorubicin has a broad range of anti-neoplastic activity. It is usually used as part
of a multidrug regime, and its reported uses in feline medicine include:
 Lymphoma. In cats doxorubicin is not useful as a sole induction agent, but there
is some evidence that its incorporation in a multidrug regime may prolong
remission and survival times.
Sarcomas (e.g. fi brosarcomas, vaccine-associated sarcomas).
Carcinomas {e.g. thyroid carcinoma, prostatic carcinoma, mammary carcinoma ).
 Doxorubicin is very irritant perivascularly and must be given by careful IV infusion
over at least 10-15 minutes {usually in dextrose saline or lactated Ringer's). In
addition to typical side effects (bone marrow suppression, anorexia, weight loss, and
gastrointestinal disturbances) doxorubicin exerts additional side effects, in part due to
generation of oxygen free radicals. These cause cardiotoxicity {thought to occur with
cumulative doses >170-240 mg/m?) and at these doses some cats also exhibit
nephrotoxicity. Current recommendations are for a dose of 20-30 mg/m? for
1 mg/kg) IV every 3 weeks to a maximum cumulative dose of 180-240 mg/m2. Close
monitoring of haematology, cardiac and renal function is important.
76 i. The main possibilities are the flu' viruses, FHV and FCV, and the bacterium
Bordetella bronchiseptica. Other possibilities would include Mycoplasma spp.
infection and secondary infection with other bacteria fe.g. Escberichia coli,
Stapbylococcus, Streptococcus, and Pasteurella species). Chlamydopbila felis,
reovirus, systemic poxvirus, and severe parasitism {involving lung migration) would
represent rare potential causes of these signs.
i. Diagnostic tests that are helpful in this situation include oropharyngeal swabs for
"flu' virus isolation and/or PCR tests. Bordetella bronchiseptica, Mycoplasma, and
other bacteria can be isolated from oropharyngeal swabs or bronchoalveolar lavage
fluid culture, although special media may be required, so the laboratory should be
informed of what infections are being considered when samples are submitted.
ji. The kittens should be treated supportively (fluids, warmth, general nursing,
oxygen, nebulization, and nutritional support as required) whilst awaiting results.
Antibiotic cover should be provided and, in this situation, a tetracycline fe.g.
doxycycline) is an appropriate choice since this will have activity against Bordetella
bronchiseptica, Mycoplasma spp., and also Chlamydophila.
84
77, 78: Questions
77
77 A 7-year-old neutered male DSH cat (77) is presented having been imported to the
UK from Australia 18 months previously. During this time the cat has had five
episodes of acute-onset dyspnoea characterized by severe expiratory effort, but had
no signs prior to coming to the UK. The cat has apparently responded to
administration of glucocorticoids each time with resolution of the clinical signs
within 24-48 hours. What are the major differential diagnoses for this cat? If its
previous residence in Australia is relevant what is the likely cause of the clinical signs?
78 Infection with cat *flu' viruses (78) may
78
lead to development of a 'carrier status'.
i. What is meant by the term “carrier
status'?
ii. What is the clinical relevance of carrier
status?
il. What percentage of cats develop carrier
status?
iv. How can carrier cats be identified?
8.5
77, 78: Answers
77 The expiratory effort present would suggest that the dyspnoea is due to a lower
respiratory tract problem. The major differential diagnoses for acute-onset episodic
lower respiratory tract dyspnoea would be:
Recurrent "flash oedema"
- acute onset pulmonary oedema typically due to
underlying restrictive or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Feline “asthma’ syndrome - the relatively good apparent response to therapy
would be consistent with acute onset reversible bronchoconstriction, one of the
classic features of "asthma'.
Feline heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) infection. Although not endemic in the UK,
heartworm is present in Australia and if this part of the history is relevant, this
would be the most likely cause.
Dirofilariasis is less common in cats than dogs {they are naturally more resistant), but
can occur anywhere that the organism is endemic. Cats generally harbour less than six
adult worms in the right ventricle or pulmonary artery. Persistent or episodic clinical
signs include coughing, dyspnoea, vomiting, anorexia, and neurological signs. Acute
intermittent respiratory signs may be seen as a result of the death of adult worms.
78 i. A carrier cat is one which is not showing clinical signs of disease although it is
infected with one or both of the "flu' viruses {FHV and FCV). Development of carrier
status is a potential sequela to infection.
f. Carrier cats can be a source of infection to other cats and environmental contamination.
. Following FHV infection, it is thought that 80-100% of cats develop carrier status 
with up to 50% of these cats shedding virus from time to time. FCV carrier status de-
clines with time with 100% shedding at 30 days post infection, 50% at 75 days, and
a smaller proportion that remain long-term carriers. FCV carriers shed the virus contin-
uously although the amounts of virus shed vary from cat to cat and from day to day.
iv. FCV carrier cats can be identified by taking oropharyngeal swabs and performing
virus isolation or, where available, PCR testing. FHV carrier cats are harder to
identify since their carrier status is characterized by latent infection of the trigeminal
 ganglia, ocular and nasal tissues. Whilst in the latent state, there is no viral replication
and virus cannot be isolated from oropharyngeal or conjunctival swabs. Viral
shedding may be reactivated spontaneously or following stressful events (e.g.
parturition, attending a cat show), other illness, or administration of corticosteroids.
Typically viral shedding starts 1 week after the stressful event and lasts for 1-2 weeks.
PCR testing for FHV may be a more sensitive test for identification of carriers: some
studies have shown that this test identifies a higher proportion of infected cats than is
achieved with virus isolation.
86
79, 80: Questions
79 A 9-year-old neutered
79
male domestic long-
haired cat presents with
progressive non-pruritic
coalescing plaque-like
cutaneous lesions over
the ventral abdomen and
thorax (79). There is
 some erythema and scal-
ing present. The lesions
are non-ulcerated and
nodular in some areas.
The owner reports that
these lesions have been
slowly enlarging over the past 4 months. A fine needle aspirate from one nodule
reveals mixed inflammatory cells with a high proportion of lymphocytes.
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What is the likely diagnosis?
. What are the potential treatment options?
80
80 A 3-year-old male neutered DSH cat presents with a history of lack of urination
 since a road traffic accident 2 days ago. Ultrasonography is performed and a picture
taken of the cranioventral abdomen (80).
i. What can be seen?
i. What additional tests should be performed?
mi. How should this case be managed?
87
79, 80: Answers
79 i. Major differential diagnoses for nodular/plaque-like lesions over the trunk
would be:
EGC (eosinophilic plaques).
Multicentric sebaceous adenocarcinoma.
Cutaneous lymphoma/epitheliotropic lymphoma.
Cutaneous metastases of mammary neoplasia.
Multiple mast cell tumours.
Fibrosa rcoma s/fi bromatoses.
Atypical mycobacterial infections.
 Subcutaneous fungal infections.
i. The long and progressive history, lack of ulceration and/or exudation, and the
results of the fine needle aspirate are all consistent with a diagnosis of cutaneous
epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides). This was confirmed by biopsy. In many
reported cases the lesions may be pruritic, and there may be quite marked scaling. This
 is an uncommon tumour in cats, mostly being seen in individuals >10 years of age.
These are T cell lymphomas, but non-epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma can be
either B or T cell in origin. Most reported cases have been FeLV-negative.
m. Isolated lesions can be removed surgically or treated with radiation therapy (although
full staging is recommended). Traditional multi-agent chemotherapy can be used for non-
epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma but litle has been published on the treatment of
mycosis fungoides in cats. Retinoids fe.g. isotretinoin at 3-4 mg/kg/day orally, or
etretinate at 1.2s mg/kg/day orally) have been recommended, but efficacy is unknown.
 80 i. There is free abdominal fluid in the abdomen (black) adjacent to abdominal organs 
(liver is visible on the left of the ultrasound image and bowel is visible on the right).
 i. Given the history, it is likely that the fluid in the abdomen is urine. Although large
amounts of urea and creatinine are present in urine, urea present in fluid within the
peritoneal cavity will rapidly equilibrate with that in the blood stream. Therefore, if
the rupture is thought to have been present for greater than 24 hours, as in this case,
creatinine should be assayed in blood and fluid. In bladder rupture cases, the fluid
creatinine levels are typically double the serum levels. Similarly, fluid potassium levels
are much greater than serum levels.
m. The cat needs supportive care which may include:
Drainage of urine from the abdomen and peritoneal dialysis.
Intra venous fluid therapy with electrolyte and acid-base therapy as needed.
Analgesia and general nursing, e.g. warmth, nutritional support.
Once stable, contrast radiographs of the bladder and urethra should be taken to
locate the site of the rupture so that appropriate curative therapy can be performed.
88
81, 82: Questions
81 The picture (81) shows
18
microscopy of urine sediment
from a cat.
i. How would urine sediment
microscopy be performed and
what are considered normalf
abnormal findings?
ii. How should the findings in
this cat be interpreted?
82 The cat (82) is having its CVP
82
monitored.
i. Why is it useful to monitor CVP?
i. What is the normal CVP?
im. How, practically, is CVP measured?
89
81, 82: Answers
81 i. Prior to microscopy the urine (5-10 ml) is sedimented by centrifugation at
approximately 500g for S-10 minutes. Most of the supernatant is removed leaving
only 0.2-0.5 ml in which the sediment is resuspended, effectively concentrating the 
urine sediment by approximately 20-fold. A wet preparation of the sediment can be
examined by pipetting two drops onto a clean microscope slide and placing a cover-
slip on top. The sediment is examined under x400 magnification, and normal urine
will contain <10 erythrocytes/hpf and <5 leucocytes/hpf. There should be no bacteria
and only occasional epithelial cells and hyaline or granular casts. If preferred, new
methylene blue or a commercial urine sediment stain can be added fone drop of stain
to one drop of sediment), which makes cytology easier (although it may make
examination of crystals and casts more difficult). Air-dried smears can also be made.
i. In this cat, there are clearly large numbers of erythrocytes and leucocytes (mainly
neutrophils). This finding is consistent with a severe inflammatory process. Bacteria
are not obvious, but examination under higher magnification would be needed to
exclude this possibility. Major differential diagnoses would be sterile inflammation
{idiopathic cystitis, urolithiasis, neoplasia) or infection {bacterial cystitis); the presence 
of degenerate neutrophils makes the latter more likely.
82 i. CVP gives a measure of right atrial pressure and evaluates cardiac function,
blood volume and indirectly assesses vasomotor tone. A low CVP is seen with
hypotension and hypovolaemia. Elevated CVP is associated with volume overload,
cardiac failure, vasoconstriction, and pericardial effusion.
i. Normal CVP is 0-10 cm water.
m. An intravenous catheter, bag of intravenous fluids, extension set, water manometer,
and three-way tap are required. The catheter is placed into the anterior vena cava via
the jugular vein and an extension set joined to this is attached to the fluid line via the
three-way tap. A water manometer is also attached to the three-way tap and the three-
way tap is held or taped at the level of the right atrium (the top of the manubrium).
The fluid bag giving set is attached to the third port of the three-way tap. The stopcock
qanouu seq Pmh aul woy smoy Pimy ieui os pauni Aleuui si dei Aem-aaui aul jo
the catheter to check the patency of this. The stopcock is then turned towards the
patient so that fluid fills the water manometer. Finally, the stopcock is turned towards
the fluid bag; the level of fluid in the water manometer will fall until the pressure in
this column of fluid is equal to the patient's central venous pressure. The top of the
fluid column should oscillate up and down with the cat's heart beat and breathing.
 Following trends of CVP is more useful than single measurements.
CVP can be crudely estimated by observing filling of the jugular vein when moving
the head up or down. Animals with raised CVP will have veins distended above the
level of the right atrium.
06
83, 84: Questions
83
83 A Holter monitor is being used in this cat (83).
i. What is the Holter recording?
if. What are the indications for performing a Holter test in cats?
i. What are the disadvantages of this test?
84 A 9-year-old neutered male DSH
84
cat presents with diarrhoea charac-
terized by progressive haematochezia
and dyschezia of 2 months' duration.
i. What differential diagnoses should
be considered?
i. Colonoscopy is performed and the
picture {84) is taken in the proximal
descending colon. What can be seen
and what are the differential diag-
noses and treatment options?
91
83.84: Answers
83 i. A Holter continuously records the ECG over a 24-hour period. Patients are able
to move around whilst the recordings are measured. The unit can be taped to the body
{although many Holters are too cumbersome to allow this in cats) or kept alongside
the patient and attached to them by an *umbilical cord' as shown in the picture.
ii. Analysis of Holter recordings allows assessment of heart rate, rhythm, and
presence of normal and abnormal complexes. Holter assessment is indicated in cases 
where episodic arrhythmias are suspected and can be used to assess treatment
efficacy. Holter analysis allows determination of frequency of arrhythmias and can
help to identify whether arrhythmias are associated with clinical signs.
m. The equipment required is expensive and specialist analysis of the results can be
very time consuming. Body movement, day to day variation, and the rapid heart rate
 present in most feline patients can ma ke assessment and diagnosis difficult.
84 i. Haematochezia, dyschezia, and passage of mucus-covered faeces of variable
  os  so  o   s   
underlying disease may be affecting both the small and large intestine and this can
sometimes be difficult to determine. The presence of weight loss, if the appetite
remains good, would be suggestive of small bowel involvement.
Major differentials for haematochezia and dyschezia would be:
Dietary indiscretion/abrasive colitis {less common in cats than dogs!}.
Dietary hypersensiti vity.
Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease {some studies suggest there is colonic
involvement in up to 40-50% of cases).
Infection (Salmonella, Campylobacter, Clostridia, Giardia, Cryptosporidia,
hookworms).
Neoplasia.
Idiopathic large bowel diarrhoea.
Other inflammatory/granulomatous disease (e.g. FIP, mycobacteria ).
i. In this case, the colonoscopy shows a large irregular intraluminal mass in the proximal
descending colon. This is likely to be neoplastic. The most common colonic neoplasia in
cats are lymphoma or adenocarcinomas. Other tumour types fe.g. mast cell tumours and
neuroendocrine carcinomas) are rare. The treatment depends on the tumour type and on
the presence or absence of metastases. Colectomy would be indicated as a potentially
curative or palliative procedure. Follow-up chemotherapy would be indicated for
lymphoma (e.g. vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and prednisolone). Adenocarcinomas are
more difficult to manage, and, if surgery yielded incomplete margins, the prognosis
would be poor. There has been interest in the use of COX-2 inhibitors for the treatment
of carcinomas, and such agents {e.g- piroxicam, meloxicam) although not licensed for
this purpose, may also produce clinical improvement in some cases.
92
85, 86: Questions
85
 85 A 3-year-old neutered female DSH cat (85) is showing recurring signs of oestrus
behaviour (vocalization, lordosis, rolling) after being neutered (ovariohysterectomized)
6 months previously.
i. What are the likely and potential causes of this?
ii. How should this case be investigated and managed?
86
86 i. What is the mode of inheritance of the major blood groups described in cats?
93
85, 86: Answers
85 i. This cat is showing typical signs of "ovarian remnant syndrome', a relatively
common problem. The most common cause of this problem is remnants of ovarian
tissue left behind at the time of surgery (ovariohysterectomy) or possibly ovarian
tissue that is 'seeded' to the abdomen during the surgical procedure. Other explana-
tions are possible but rare or undocumented. These include oestrogen production
from the adrenal glands fpossible adrenal tumour) and behavioural problems,
'suais oiposida ueul rauie saisisiad asneo oi apeyi aie asaui yanoui
i. Oestradiol assays are variable in both intact and ovariectomized cats and thus are
unreliable in determining the presence of functional ovarian tissue. During oestrus
behaviour, the cat can be injected with 50-100 U hCG IM to induce ovulation and
formation of a corpus luteum. Serum progesterone can be measured after 5-7 days,
and, if >4-6 nmol/l, this confirms the presence of functional ovarian tissue. This is not
entirely reliable however, and should be combined with performing vaginal cytology
during oestrus behaviour to see if cornified epithelial cells are present (not always
 present, but this is a reliable indicator if they are evident).
Definitive treatment involves repeat surgery to search carefully for the ovarian
remnant. It has been recommended that this should be done during oestrus beha viour
to ma ke identification of the tissue easier.
86 i. The AB blood group system is the major blood group system in cats and includes
type A, type B, and type AB. Feline blood type is determined by red cell surface
cats are homozygous for the B allele (B/B) whereas type A cats can be homozygous
{A/A) or heterozygous (A/B). Blood type AB (rare) is inherited separately.
i. Blood type A is the most prevalent overall but the frequency varies according to the
breed of cat and geographical area it is from. Certain breeds (British Shorthair and
Rex cats) have a high prevalence of type B in contrast to other breeds, such as
Siamese, where all of the cats are type A. Type AB cats are generally rare; most
studies show a <5% prevalence. The table summarizes current prevalence data for
type B cats. Some of the data has been obtained from studies involving only small
numbers of cats from each breed.
Approximate prevalence (%) of type B cats according to
breed and geographical location (na: data not available)
Breed
UK
USA
Italy
Australia
Japan
DSH and DLH
8
5
1
27
12
Siamese
D
0
0
na
na
Burmese
10
D
0
na
na
Abyssinian
0
25
20
na
na
Persian
12
25
24
na
na
Birman
29
25
18
na
na
Rex
50
43
na
na
British Shorthair
59
50
59
na
na
94
87, 88: Questions
87
87 The lateral thoracic radiograph (87) was taken from a 4-year-old domestic
longhaired cat.
i. What major abnormalities are evident in the radiograph?
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What further diagnostic test is most appropriate?
88
88 This cat {88) is ha ving its chest drained.
i. What are the indications for this procedure?
ii. How is it performed?
m. What analysis should be performed on the fluid obtained?
9.5
87, 88: Answers
87 i. The cardiac silhouette is dramatically enlarged and globular in outline and the
trachea is elevated.
i. Differential diagnoses are:
 Pericardial effusion, or perica rdial mass.
Generalized cardiomegaly.
Combination of the above.
PPDH.
m. Ultrasound examination is likely to be the most helpful test. In the absence of
diay aq Aeu wunaoigue aaalas-uou e se yons Apnis iseuoo e 'saeg aqes
in eliminating or confirming some of the possi bilities identified above.
88 i. Thoracocentesis is indicated {diagnostically and therapeutically) whenever fluid
or air is present in the pleural space.
i. Thoracocentesis can be performed in conscious, sedated, or anaesthetized cats; the
choice of these depends on the cat's temperament and condition. Oxygen therapy by
 mask (if tolerated) should be initiated while preparing the patient.
The equipment needed includes:
19 or 21 gauge butterfly needle, a three-way tap, and 10 or 20 ml syringes.
Kidney dish.
EDTA and plain tubes, and microscope slides.
The chest should be clipped and aseptically prepared on both sides from the 5th to the
10th rib. The site of thoracocentesis is at the level of the costochondral junction if an
effusion is suspected (dorsal third of the chest for pneumothorax). The patient is
positioned in sternal recumbency. The needle is introduced immediately in front of
the 7th or gth rib {the blood vessels and nerves run just behind the ribs) at an angle of
approximately 30 degres to the chest wall, angling cranially to minimize trauma to
the lungs. Fluid can be aspirated and then, once samples have been collected, expelled
into the kidney dish via the three-way tap. Although local anaesthesia can be used
prior to centesis, this is rarely needed in the emergency situation. Bilateral drainage is
us ually required for optimal treatment.
Although an over-the-needle catheter allows removal of the needle, so preventing
lung trauma, the catheter frequently kinks or occludes and is generally less successful
for thoracocentesis.
mi. Samples should be submitted for
Cytology (EDTA tube and smear).
 Biochemistry (plain tube: total protein, albumin, globulin, and possibly LDH,
cholesterol, triglycerides, glucose, and pH).
Bacterial culture if indicated fplain tube with air evacuated submitted with
accompanying charcoal swab).
96
89, 90: Questions
68
89 Thyroid histology results have just been received from a hyperthyroid patient on
whom a surgical thyroidectomy has been performed (89). The cat has a thyroid
carcinoma.
i. How common is this condition?
ii. What is the prognosis?
90 i. What can be seen on this gastro-
06
scopic picture (90) from a 3-year-old
neutered male cat with a 6-month
history of recurrent episodic severe
vomiting?
i. What would the differential diag-
noses be?
ji. In general, what are the advan-
tages and disadvantages of endoscopy
for the investigation of gastrointes-
tinal disease?
.6
89, 90: Answers
89 i. Thyroid carcinomas are a very rare cause of hyperthyroidism, probably present in,
at most, 2% of all hyperthyroid cats. The majority of thyroid carcinoma cases described
have resulted in hyperthyroidism although non-functional carcinomas may also occur.
i. The tumour is extremely likely to recur and surgical removal is rarely effective as a
sole treatment. This cat is vulnera ble to local tumour regrowth and metastasis, most
commonly to the lungs. Further surgery is contraindicated as this is unlikely to be
completely effective and the risk of damage to or removal of the parathyroid glands
increases with successive surgeries. The treatment of choice for functional carcinomas
is high dose radioactive iodine {around 30 mCi, 1.11 GBq) available at certain
specialist centres. This is a highly effctive and safe treatment and, as long as no other
complicating factors or concurrent diseases are present, the cat's prognosis following
therapy is good. Non-functional carcinomas are more difficult to treat.
90 i. The endoscopic picture shows the body (to the left), angulus, and antrum of the
stomach. The mucosal surface has an irregular appearance with evidence of erosion
{ulceration) and bleeding.
i. Differential diagnoses would include neoplasia, foreign body, irritant gastritis,
Helicobacter-induced gastritis, uraemic gastritis, idiopathic chronic gastritis/ulceration,
inflammatory bowel disease, and parasitic gastritis (Ollulams tricuspis).
In this cat, there was a mixed inflammatory infiltrate and recurrent acute gastritis
due to dietary indiscretion was diagnosed.
. The major advantages of endoscopy are:
The ability to view the lumen and mucosal lining in a non-invasive manner.
The ability to retrieve foreign bodies, obtain fluid and brushings for cytology,
and/or culture of organisms.
The ability to obtain mucosal biopsy material.
Although endoscopy is an extremely valuable technique for investigating signs of
chronic gastrointestinal disease (unrelated to systemic disease) it has some disadvantages:
The equipment needed is relatively expensive (an insertion tube diameter of
<8 mm is genera lly required for duodenoscopy in cats).
Not all the intestinal tract is readily viewed endoscopically (the distal half of the
small intestine is especially difficult).
Biopsies obtained with the endoscope are relatively superficial in nature and small,
making orientation and interpretation of sections potentially difficult. Significant
pathology may therefore be missed if it is in a part of the gastrointestinal tract
inaccessible endoscopically, if the significant pathology lies deep to the biopsies,
or if the sections examined are distorted.
As endoscopic biopsies are small, it is recommended that a minimum of eight biopsies
should be obtained and submitted from each site of the gastrointestinal tract examined.
98
91, 92: Questions
16
91 A 3-year-old neutered female DSH presents with dyspnoea (91). Describe how the
history, character, and nature of the dyspnoea should be used to help narrow down
the potential differential diagnoses of the aetiology of the condition.
66
 92 A S-year-old neutered male cat presented with typical signs of urethral obstruc-
tion. The obstruction {urethral plug) was removed promptly and easily, and the
bladder flushed with sterile saline. There was no radiographic or ultrasonographic
evidence of uroliths or debris in the bladder or urethra, but the cat still showed signs
of dysuria (92), passing small volumes of urine despite having a distended bladder.
What is the most likely cause of this and how should the case be managed?
99
91, 92: Answers
91 Historical features may indicate an obvious cause of dyspnoea such as trauma or
inhalation of a foreign body (rare in cats). With recurrent dyspnoea, history may
reveal a seasonal or environmental trigger. The speed of onset of the dyspnoea can be
misleading however, as the adapta bility of cats may mean that even a chronic disease
 process results in few overt clinical signs until a *critical threshold' is reached.
The clinical examination should be directed at localizing the source and assessing the
severity of the dyspnoea. Severe dyspnoea may require emergency symptomatic treatment.
 Inspiratory dyspnoea implies either upper respiratory tract disease (obstruction)
or decreased lung ca pacity (thoracic effusion, pneumothorax, large mass).
Upper respiratory tract disease may be {but is not necessarily) accompanied by
nasal discharge, sneezing, stertor (snorting/snoring), stridor (wheezing), facial
deformity, and dysphagia. Dysphonia may be present with laryngeal disease.
'aseasi pe1l A10ieudsau 1amoijo uais e ilensn si baoudsap Aoie1dxg
Tachypnoea (polypnoea) and hyperpnoea (increased depth) do not localize the
cause of the dyspnoea. However, obstructive disease (e.g. pleural effusion, large
lung mass) tends to result in slow deep breathing whereas restrictive disease tends
to result in shallow rapid breathing.
Orthopnoea {dyspnoea in stermal recumbency with neck extended and abducted
forelimbs) and open-mouth breathing are signs of severe dyspnoea.
92 Recurrent obstruction could occur as a result of new plug formation or due to
 urolithiasis, but the initial investigations suggest that this is unlikely and the cat is able
to pass some urine. The process of catheterization to remove the plug and flush the
bladder, if not done carefully, can result in urethral stricture formation and subsequent
 partial urethral obstruction, but this is likely to take 1-2 weeks to develop.
The persistence of signs after removal of the plug suggests that the problem is
likely to be due either to urethral swelling caused by local inflammation and/or a
result of urethral spasm induced by local inflammation/irritation, and this is a
common complication (*spastic urethra*). Other possi bilities would include an "UMN"
bladder, and prolonged bladder distension leading to detrusor atony.
Treatment in this cat would be aimed at inducing urethral relaxation; the urethra
contains both smooth and striated muscle and thus a combination of skeletal and
smooth muscle relaxa nts provides optimum thera py.
Skeletal muscle relaxation is typically achieved with diazepam (2-5 mg/cat orally
two to three times daily) or dantrolene {2-10 mg/cat orally three times daily). The
latter is preferred as diazepam can cause hepatic necrosis in cats.
Alpha-blockers are used to provide smooth muscle relaxation and most commonly
phenoxybenzamine (2.s-7.5 mg/cat orally once to twice daily) or prazosin
(0.5 mg/cat orally once to three times daily) are used.
100
93, 94: Questions
93 Pregnancy (93) is not always
6
desirable, even in pedigree breeding cats!
What forms of pregnancy control/
Oestrus suppression should be recom-
mended for a queen intended for future
breeding and what are the advantages
and disadvantages of these methods?
94 i. What procedure is illustrated
94a
{94a) and when is it indicated?
i. What is the assessment in this
case?
101
93, 94: Answers
93 Potential solutions include?
Allow the queen to cycle normally but prevent any possibility of mating by keeping
her physically separated (not always practical, and undesirable for some queens).
Use a vasectomized tom to mate the queen during oestrus and induce ovulation,
or use manual stimulation of the vagina {e.g. glass rod or cotton-tipped swab) to
induce ovulation. These give only short-term control of oestrus unless repeated.
Use progestagens to suppress oestrus. Although these can be given in oestrus or
dioestrus, high doses are required and it is safer to start using these during
anoestrus. Injectable (proligestone, medroxyprogesterone acetate) or oral
(megoestrol acetate) preparations have been used, but the latter is preferable as it
can be stopped if any side effects occur. Megoestrol acetate is used at a dose of
2.5 mg orally once weekly when started in anoestrus. The use of progestagens
increases the risk of cystic endometrial hyperplasia, mammary tumours, mammary
hyperplasia, dia betes mellitus, adrenal suppression, and behavioural changes.
Recently, oestrus control has been attempted with induction of antibodies against
of the ovum; with a long-acting injectable GnRH analogue (successfully) aimed at
down-regulating GnRH receptors; and alternative progestagens (successfully)
with potentially fewer side effects.
94 i. A portovenogram is being per-
94b
formed. This technique is indicated in
cases where congenital or acquired
portosystemic vascular anomalies are
suspected on the basis of clinical
findings, laboratory results (e.g. fasting
hyperammonaemia and elevated pre-
and/or post-prandial bile acid results), or
hepatic ultrasonography.
i. A normal portovenogram is shown.
Contrast material is injected into a
mesenteric vein where it flows to the liver
via the hepatic portal vein. Once within
the liver, the blood flow is often
described as arborizing like the branches
of a tree. A portovenogram from a cat
with a congenital portosystemic vascular anomaly is shown {94b). In this case,
contrast in the hepatic portal vein bypasses the liver via a single anomalous vessel.
102
95, 96: Questions
95a
95 This contrast retrograde urethrogram (95a) was obtained from a 7-year-old male
neutered cat that was showing signs of dysuria, haematuria, and constipation.
i. What abnormalities are evident?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
mi. How can the ca use of the disease be confirmed?
96 FeLV infection has been diag-
9%
nosed in one of the cats pictured
(96). The cat is one of a group of
cats housed in a rescue centre.
i. In a household where FeLV is
endemic, what are the potential
 outcomes following exposure to
FeLV?
ii. What factors influence the
Outcomes in any individual cat?
103
95, 96: Answers
95 i. There is irregular filling of the
95b
urethra at the level of the prostate
(95b). The colon is gas filled and
there is dorsal deviation of gas
within the distal colon consistent
with a mass below this.
ii. Major differential diagnoses are
 Prostatic disease, e.g. neoplasia,
prostatitis, a bscessation.
 Urethral disease, e.g. neoplasia,
urethritis.
ii. Ultrasonography of the prostate is likely to be helpful and may allow fine needle
aspirate or core biopsies to be obtained. Prostatic washes and urethral suction
catheter biopsies can also be performed and assessed cytologically.
96 i. There are five potential outcomes:
 Persistent viraemia likely to be associated with disease in the future.
Latent infection of certain tissues, most commonly the bone marrow. Virus-
neutralizing antibodies produced by the cat inhibit viral replication. The lack of
viral replication means that virus and viral antigens are not detectable in blood
samples. Most latently infected cats are thought eventually to eliminate the
infection completely. In a small proportion of cats, latent infection may later
result in haematopoietic disease or reversion to persistent viraemia.
Focal or localized infection of certain tissues with viral replication at these sites
(this appears to be a rare outcome following infection). For example focal
infection of the mammary tissue has been reported to result in transmission of
infection to kittens via the milk.
Transient infection after which the cat is able to eliminate the infection. Elimina-
tion of the infection may take several weeks and is usually associated with
production of high levels of virus-neutralizing antibodies. Many, if not all,
transiently infected cats will go through a period of latent infection before they
completely eliminate the virus.
Insufficient exposure to establish infection. Transmission of FeLV is generally
inefficient and may require prolonged periods of close contact to be successful.
i. The outcome following infection is affected by many factors including the age of
the cat (cats <6 months old are particularly vulnerable to developing persistent
viraemia) and the dose and route of infection finfection via a bite is more efficient
than oronasal infection). Cats with reduced immune status due to other illnesses or
medications are vulnera ble to persistent infection.
104
97, 98: Questions
97 A 10-month-old Persian cat is
16
brought in with a history of 1 month's
vague lethargy, inappetence, and
malaise. The owner also reports recent
abdominal distension (97). Clinical
examination suggests that the distension
is due to ascites but does not reveal any
more a bnormalities.
i. What laboratory tests should be per-
formed initially?
ii. What are the major differential diag-
noses for ascites in a young cat?
i. What further tests may be helpful in
this case?
98 A S-year-old neutered female DSH
98
cat presented with chronic, persistent
vomiting. At exploratory surgery an
intra-luminal pedunculated mass was
found in the proximal duodenum (98).
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
i. Suggest the likely diagnosis, treatment,
and prognosis for the cat.
10.5
97, 98 Answers
 97 i. The most important initial diagnostic test is abdominocentesis, with sampling
and analysis of fluid obtained. Fluid cytology and biochemistry are essential to assess
the nature of the ascitic fluid present. Bacterial culture should be performed if
indicated on the gross and/or cytological appearance of the fluid. Haematology,
biochemistry, and virus screening tests (FeLV, FIV especially) may also be helpful.
i. Major differential diagnoses at this stage are:
FIP.
Lymphocytic cholangitis with abdominal effusion.
Abdominal neoplasia with effusion.
Right-sided heart failure.
mi. Further tests which may be helpful in this case include:
Thoracic and abdominal radiography: if pleural and abdominal fluid is present
then ca uses such as lymphocytic cholangitis can be ruled out.
Abdominal ultrasonography: may identify hepatic disease or presence of
abdominal masses.
Echocardiography to rule out cardiac disease as a cause.
Detailed ophthalmic examination: may identify ocular inflammatory disease
consistent with infectious diseases such as FIP.
Serum protein electrophoresis: increased levels of gamma globulins and other
acute phase proteins are often identified in cats with FIP.
98 i. The major differential diagnoses for this mass would be:
Neoplasia: lymphoma, adenocarcinoma, mast cell tumour.
Focal inflammation/infection.
 Regional granulomatous duodenitis.
Foreign body reaction.
Gastric heterotopia/ectopia.
Duodenal polyp: small intestinal polyps have been described in both the proximal
and distal small intestine in cats.
i. The pedunculated nature of the mass, and the multi-nodular appearance would be
most suggestive of a benign polyp in this case. Histological examination of resected
tissue revealed that it was composed of a mix of ectopic hypertrophied and distorted
glandular pyloric mucosal tissue and adenomatous polypoid duodenal
mucosa/submucosa. Similar adenomatous polyps have been well described in cats,
albeit relatively uncommonly. These generally occur within 1 cm of the pylorus. The
polyps cause clinical signs of partial obstruction typical of delayed gastric outflow or
proximal intestinal obstruction.
These polyps are benign and respond extremely well to simple resection.
106
99, 1o0: Questions
99
Placement
of
naso-
99
 Oesophageal feeding tubes (99)
offers a simple and effective
method of providing nutritional
support to anorexic cats.
i. Are there any contraindi-
cations to their use?
ii. How can the ideal naso-
Oesophageal tube be selected?
iii. How long can a naso-
oesophageal tube be left in
place?
iv. Are there any useful tips for
unblocking tubes when block-
age occurs?
100 What are the advantages,
100
disadvantages, and limitations
of "dipstick’ evaluation of
urine chemistry {100)?
107
99, 100: Answers
99 i. Naso-oesophageal tubes are contraindicated in some circumstances, e.g. cats
with oesophageal or gastric disease, persistent vomiting, unconscious, or severely
obtunded cats. In cats with nasal or pharyngeal disease, placement may be resented
due to discomfort and alternative strategies {e.g. oesophagostomy tube) may be
preferable. If long-term nutritional support is anticipated then other techniques such
as oesophagostomy or gastrostomy tube feeding should be considered.
i. The largest gauge tube that can be comfortably passed should be chosen. A variety
of different tube types are available including polyurethane, silicone, and PVC.
Polyurethane tubes are preferable as these have the largest intermal diameter and
cause the least local tissue reaction. Silicone tubes have a smaller internal diameter
but are a good second choice as these also cause very little tissue reaction in situ.
m. Naso-oesophageal tubes are suita ble for short-term nutritional support (1-2 weeks).
iv. Proprietary liquid foods should be used where possible to prevent blockages from
occurring. It is important to flush the tube with water before and after each feed to
prevent blockage. If the tube does become blocked, fushing with warm water or a
carbonated soft drink may help break the blockage down.
100 The major advantages of urine "dipstick' evaluation are the speed, availability, and
relative reliability for a number of urine chemistries. The disadvantage is that the sticks
are generally designed for human use, so are not always appropriate for use in animals
and some results have to be interpreted with caution. The strips are also labile so need
to be stored and used correctly, and must not be used beyond their expiry date.
The strips are valua ble for determination of:
pH: generally reliable. If accuracy is very important, a pH meter can be used.
Protein: the strips provide semi-quantitative determination and are mainly sensitive
to albumin. A UPC is required for quantitative assessment of proteinuria.
Glucose: reliable, semi-quantitative assessment. False positives occur with
contaminating oxidants {e.g. sodium hypochlorite), and false negatives with
a dministration of ascorbic acid ( vitamin C) supplements.
 Blood: the strips react with erythrocytes, haemoglobin, and myoglobin thus further
 analysis, including sediment examination, is required when there are positive 
results. Sodium hypochlorite or iodine contamination give false positi ves.
Bilirubin: generally reliable. False-positive results have been reported with
chlorpromazine and etodolac use, and false negatives with ascorbic acid use.
Ketones: reliable semi-quantitative assessment of acetone and acetoacetate, but the
strips do not detect β-hydroxybutyrate which is usually the major ketone in cats.
 Dipstick analysis is unreliable for the following in cats:
Specific gravity {this should be performed with a refractometer), nitrate, leucocytes.
Additionally, urobilinogen measurement is not a useful test in small animals.
108
101, 102: Questions
101 The picture (101) shows a Rapid H
101
feline blood typing card. These cards are
widely available and provide a quick, simple,
Auto-
 and reliable method of blood typing in the
Agglutination
Saline Screen
practice situation. The test requires 0.25 ml
of EDTA blood.
i. What blood type is this cat?
ii. What are the indications for blood typing?
iii. How else can feline blood types be
TypeA
determined?
Patient
Test
TypeB
102
102 A bilateral thyroidectomy has just been performed (102) in a hyperthyroid
patient.
i. How soon after surgery will hypocalcaemia develop if the parathyroid glands have
been damaged or removed?
i. What clinical signs are associated with hypocalcaemia?
109
101, 102: Answers
101 i. This cat is blood type A.
ii. Blood typing prior to transfusion helps to minimize the risk of transfusion
reactions. Blood typing is also advisable pre-mating in breeding cats where the
prevalence of type B cats is significant in order to prevent neonatal isoerythrolysis
from developing. If pre-mating blood typing has not been possible then any kittens
Auy "ulu jo aw aul ie 'poog puos Susn padki pooq aq ueo suaanb g adki oi uog
type A kittens identified should be separated from their mother and hand-reared for
the first 24 hours whilst colostral antibodies are capable of crossing the bowel.
. Many commercial laboratories offer blood typing services which generally require
1 ml blood in EDTA or ACD anti-coagulants. Alternatively, cross-matching or back
typing tests can be done using previously typed donor samples. Cross-matching
detects presence of anti bodies to blood group antigens and requires 1 ml EDTA blood
collected from the patient and donor/s. The samples are centrifuged and plasma
separated from the red cells which are washed two to three times by resuspending
these in 2 ml saline, re-centrifuging and removing the supernatant. Finally the red
cells are resuspended in sufficient saline to give a 2-4% solution of red cells. {For
example 0.1 ml pelleted red cells resuspended in 2.4 ml gives a 4% solution.) Cross-
matching can be done using small blood tubes or ELISA plate wells as follows:
Incubate samples at 37°C [98°F] for 15 minutes before observing for gross and
microscopic evidence of agglutination.
Major cross-match: two drops patient plasma and one drop donor RBC solution.
Minor cross-match: two drops donor plasma and one drop patient RBC solution.
Donor control: two drops donor plasma and one drop donor RBC solution.
Patient control: two drops patient plasma and one drop patient RBC solution.
'Back typing' can be done in a similar manner but using known type A and B plasma
and cells. Plasma from all type B cats contains naturally occurring anti-A antibodies
resulting in agglutination when mixed with type A red cells. Type A patients typically
have no or only very low levels of naturally occurring anti-B antibodies and so show
little or no agglutination with type B red cells; type AB cats show no agglutination
with either type A or type B red cells.
juaned jo sdoup omi Suisn auop aq osie ueo Suupieu-ssouo kouaauaua pidry
plasma and one drop of whole donor blood placed directly onto a microscope slide.
102 i. Hypocalcaemia is usually evident within 72 hours of surgery.
i. Mild hypocalcaemia may not result in any clinical signs although it will be 
detectable on blood tests. Early clinical signs of hypocalcaemia include behavioural
changes including restlessness and irrita bility, stiffness, weakness, hyperaesthesia to
touch and sound, and muscle twitches. More profound signs include severe
generalized muscle tremors, seizures, coma, and death.
110
103, 104: Questions
103 The VD abdominal radiograph (103)
103
is from a 6-year-old cat presented with a
12-month history of recurrent constipation.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What alternatives should be con-
sidered for the long-term management of
the problem?
104
104 FeLV viraemia has been confirmed in a healthy cat from a multi-cat household
(104).
i. What preventive medicine plan should be recommended for this cat?
ii. What is the risk to the other cats it is housed with?
111
103, 104: Answers
103 i. The radiograph shows severe constipation with a distended colon, and a
significantly narrowed pelvic canal due to an acetabular fracture on the right hand
side. The constipation is likely to be secondary to the narrowed pelvic canal and the
degree of colonic distension suggests that this has potentially progressed to megacolon.
constipation using a combination of dietary and drug therapy, sub-total colectomy, or
surgery to correct the pelvic canal stenosis. If megacolon has been present in excess of
6 months, correcting the stenosis is unlikely to resolve the constipation, although,
depending on the severity of the pelvic canal narrowing, it may still be helpful.
Addition of fibre to the diet to promote bulk and water retention in the faeces may
help, but with severe constipation this is often ineffective on its own, and indeed low
residue diets may be more effective in cases of megacolon. Various laxative drugs are
available which act in different ways. Emollient laxatives fe.g. dioctyl sodium
sulphosuccinate, 50 mg/day) promote water penetration into faeces, stimulant
laxatives {e.g. bisacodyl, 5 mg/day) stimulate colonic motility, and osmotic laxatives
(e.g. lactulose, 0.s-1.0 ml/kg two to three times daily) promote water retention by
osmotic effects. Of these drugs, lactulose is probably the most useful for long-term
control and the dose can be adjusted according to effect. Sub-total colectomy is a very
valuable procedure for cats with severe intractable constipation and produces
excellent long-term results in most patients.
104 i. Vaccination for FHV, FCV, and feline panleucopenia is especially important
since FeLV-infected cats may be more susceptible to infection and, if infected, are
likely to develop more severe disease. Use of killed vaccines, where available, may be
advisable since this minimizes the potential risk of an attenuated virus strain causing
disease in an immunosuppressed patient. Additional boosters may be warranted
before the cat goes to any *high risk' situation such as a cattery or for elective
procedures at a veterinary hospital. There is no benefit in vaccinating an FeLV-
infected cat with FeLV vaccines. Flea treatment is recommended to minimize the risk
of FIA transmission and the cat should be prevented from hunting or eating raw meat
in order to reduce the risk of Toxoplasma gondii infection. The owner should be
advised to keep the cat indoors as this will minimize contact with other disease-
carrying cats in the area, reduce the risk of fight wounds or other traumatic injuries,
and also limit the transmission of FeLV to other cats.
i. The risk of infection of healthy adult cats living for several months or longer in the
same household as an FeLV-infected cat is estimated at 10-30%. All of the in-contact
cats should be tested to establish whether or not they are already infected and would
benefit from the preventive health measures outlined above. Segregation of infected
and uninfected cats is important to limit the spread of infection.
112
105, 106: Questions
105
InjectionBP
contl743
10moereopho
S
105 The picture shows a vial of *Tensilon', or edrophonium chloride injection {105).
What is this drug, how does it work and what is the major indication for its clinical
use in feline medicine? What alternatives are there to the use of this product?
106
106 An 8-year-old DSH cat is presented with a 4-week history of gradually progres-
sive lethargy, inappetence and weight loss. The cat is an indoor only cat and there is
no history of toxin exposure. Abnormalities are seen on oral examination, especially
when examining the under side of the tongue (106).
i. What abnormalities can be seen?
i. What are the possible causes of this?
mi. What is a possible initial diagnostic plan?
113
105, 106: Answers
105 Edrophonium chloride is a short-acting anticholinesterase. By inhibiting
endogenous cholinesterase at neuromuscular junctions it potentiates neuromuscular
transmission at the motor end plate. Overdose can result in a cholinergic crisis
(miosis, muscle tremors, bronchoconstriction, salivation, urination, vomiting,
defecation, and bradycardia).
Edrophonium is mainly used in the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis; the effects are
seen within 1 minute of IV injection and last up to 10-15 minutes. The initial dose is
0.2 mg/cat IV, but incremental doses of 0.1 mg IV can be given every minute up to a
total dose of 1 mg.
The response to edrophonium (increased muscle strength) may be marked, but
both false-positive and false-negative results occasionally occur. Alternative or
additional tests include electromyography to demonstrate a decremental response to
repetitive nerve stimulation, muscle biopsy and immunohistopathology to
demonstrate reduced numbers of acetylcholine receptors in cases of congenital
myasthenia gravis {rare), and a positive serum acetylcholine receptor antibody titre in
cases of acquired disease {normal values <0.3 nmol/l at the Comparative Neuro-
muscular Laboratory, University of California, with some affected cats having titres 
>8.0). The latter is considered the most reliable test for acquired myasthenia gravis.
106 i. There is petechiation visible.
il. This can be caused by:
Thrombocytopenia.
 Abnormal platelet function (thrombocytopathy) caused by exposure to drugs (e.g.
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent, anti-coagulant drugs), secondary to
another disease (e.g. hepatic disease, uraemia), or due to a congenital defect.
An unlikely possibility in this case would be a coagulopathy. Coagulopathies can
be seen as rare inherited problems or following exposure to anti-coagulant
rodenticide poisons.
Vascular disease.
DIC.
ii. A complete blood count and differential haematology are required initially to
assess the platelet numbers. Platelet clumping is a common phenomenon with feline
blood that accounts for falsely low machine platelet counts, therefore it is important
to evaluate platelet numbers on a blood smear. If this assessment proves normal then
further investigations are required and may include a buccal mucosal bleeding time
{assesses platelet and vascular function), coagulation tests {PT, APTT), and fibrin
degra dation products.
114
107, 108: Questions
107 The histological section {107)
107
is of a small intestinal villus from a
cat with chronic diarrhoea. The
biopsy report suggested there were
increased numbers of mononuclear
cells (mainly lymphocytes and
plasma cells) in the lamina propria
and some increased numbers of
intra-epithelial lymphocytes. What
is a possible diagnosis in this cat
 and what further investigations are
indicated?
108
108 A lead II ECG is shown (108). The paper speed is 25 mm/second and amplitude 
is set so that 1 cm is equivalent to 1 mV.
i. What is the heart rate?
ii. Is the heart rate regular?
ii. Describe the complexes present.
iv. What is your assessment of this ECG?
11.5
107, 108: Answers
107 The changes described are typical of (lymphocytic-plasmacytic' inflammatory
bowel disease. Such changes can be focal/regional faffecting only part of the
gastrointestinal tract) or generalized (affecting stomach, small intestine, and colon).
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic inflammatory bowel disease is not a diagnosis but rather
an inflammatory reaction pattern commonly seen in the gastrointestinal tract. It
implies an active immune response, but the histological features cannot determine the
causative antigenfs). Further investigations must be aimed at identifying potential
antigens that could be ca using the inflammation.
The first priority in such cases would be to exclude enteropathogens as an
underlying cause. Faecal samples should be examined for the presence of nematode
and cestode parasites. A minimum of three faecal samples should be evaluated for the
presence of Giardia and Cryptosporidia organisms, and faecal cultures should be 
performed for recognized bacterial pathogens (e.g. Salmonela, Campylobacter).
If enteropathogens are excluded as a cause of the inflammation, a dietary trial
should be performed to exclude dietary hypersensitivity. Suitable diets would be
composed of a single, ideally novel protein source, or composed of hydrolysed
proteins. A response is usually seen within 3 weeks if there is an underlying dietary
hypersensitivity. Only if these causes are excluded can a diagnosis of idiopathic
inflammatory bowel disease be made.
108 i. The easiest way to assess heart rate on an ECG is to count the number of
complexes present in 6 seconds and then multiply this number by 10 to obtain a heart
rate in beats per minute. In this question, only a short trace is included which means 
that this technique cannot be used. Since the heart rhythm is regular, the heart rate
can be calculated by measuring the distance between the QRS complexes. If the paper
speed is 25 mm/second, there will be 1500 mm/minute, thus the heart rate is 1500 +
distance between two complexes. Using the formula in this case, the heart rate is
estimated to be 100 beats per minute.
ii. Yes, the heart rate is very regular.
m. There are no visible P waves and the QRS complexes are wider than they should
be {around 0.06 seconds; normal QRS duration is <0.04 seconds). It is also important
to check the traces from other leads for presence of P waves.
iv. This is an example of atrial standstill with an escape rhythm. Failure of atrial
 activity (which can be confirmed on echocardiography) may be present because of
hyperkalaemia fe.g. hypoadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus ketoacidosis, lower urinary
tract obstruction), toxicity {e.g. digoxin), or severe cardiac disease. Escape rhythms are
characterized by their slow rate and wide QRS complexes and they occur when the
normal pacemaker tissue fails to discharge for a prolonged period. Ventricular escape 
rhythms originating in the tissues closest to the atrioventricular node fjunctional escape
complexes) appear most like normal QRS complexes, as in this example.
116
109, I 10: Questions
109a
109 A 5-year-old neutered female DSH cat presents with a persistent purulent vulval
discharge. The cat is constantly licking the perineal area but is able to defecate and
urinate normally and the urine and faeces are grossly normal.
i. What changes can be seen on this lateral abdominal radiograph {109a) and what is
the likely diagnosis?
ii. How should this cat be treated, and how should an entire breeding queen with a
similar problem be treated?
110 Some clients have found a stray
110
kitten which they wish to adopt (110).
On examination, the kitten is very bright,
in reasonable condition, and you esti-
mate it is around 10 weeks old. Blood is
collected for FeLV antigen and FIV
antibody testing. The FIV antibody test is
positive.
i. How reliable is this test result as an
indicator of persistent infection?
ii. What should be the advice to the
kitten's prospective new owners?
117
109, II0: Answers
109 i. A soft tissue density can be clearly
109b
seen between the neck of the bladder
ventrally and the descending colon
dorsally (109b). This is a typical finding
in uterine "stump' pyometra where a
remnant of uterine tissue is left behind at
ovariohysterectomy and subsequently
develops infection. This is an unusual
condition, probably in part because
cystic endometrial hyperplasia often
precedes pyometra and in ovariectomized
cats there is no progesterone secretion that could cause this.
Pyometra is also uncommon in entire cats, as they are induced and not spon-
taneous ovulators, again there is less progesterone drive for endometrial hyperplasia.
i. In this cat, the treatment of choice would be surgical resection of the infected tissue
(which was performed and was curative). In a breeding female with an open pyometra,
natural prostaglandin F2α (0.1-0.2 mg/kg SC every 12-24 hours) therapy for 3-5 days
is highly successful when combined with appropriate broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Temporary side effects that typically resolve within 30-60 minutes of injecting the
prostaglandin F,,
include panting, salivation, vomiting, urination, and defecation.
Recurrence of pyometra after successful medical treatment is not uncommon, and
so it is usually recommended that queens are bred from at their next oestrus.
110 i. A positive FIV antibody test result is found in the following situations:
Persistently infected cat.
Kitten born to an FIV-infected queen. Maternally-derived anti-FIV antibodies are
passively acquired via the colostrum and these antibodies will be detected when
the kitten is blood tested. Although all of the kittens born to an FIV-infected
queen may be antibody positive, not all of them will necessarily be infected with
the virus. Maternally-derived antibodies may persist for up to 4 months and, in
infected kittens, it may be a further 2 months before they seroconvert. It is
therefore recommended that kittens born to FIV-infected queens are not antibody
tested until they are at least 6 months old.
Kittens born to a queen that has been vaccinated for FIV will also passively
 acquire maternally-derived antibodies via the colostrum.
False-positive result: no test is 100% accurate.
i. Further options include repeating the antibody test when the kitten is older or
considering an alternative diagnostic test such as PCR, where availa ble.
118
111, 112: Questions
111 A S-year-old female domestic
三I
longhaired cat presents with progressive
stertorous breathing over a 2-month
period. There is occasional non-produc-
tive sneezing. Clinical examination
shows poor movement of air through
both nostrils, and the stertor resolves
during open-mouth breathing. The
picture (111) is of nasopharyngoscopy
under general anaesthesia looking
towards the choanal area.
i. What abnormality can be seen?
ii. What are the major differential
diagnoses?
ii. In cases such as this, what can be
done to obtain tissue for histology
either with or without an endoscope?
112 A haematology report is
presented for this cat (112).
i. What is the assessment of this
leucogram?
ii. What differential diagnoses need
to be considered?
ii. What is a possible diagnostic
plan?
Haematology
Parameter (10)
Value
Reference range
WBC
10.4
5-19
Neutrophils 
3.4
2.5-12.5
Lymphocytes
2.2
1.5- 6.0
Monocytes
0.5
0.1-0.7
 Eosinophils
4.3
<1.5
119
IlI, II2: Answers
111 i. In a normal cat, nasopharyngoscopy allows visualization of the internal nares 
(choanae) as two small dark openings at the rostral nasopharynx. In this case the
choanae are obliterated by a smooth, lobulated, pink/red mass in this region.
ii. Major differential diagnoses would be:
Neoplasia (lymphoma, confirmed in this case, or adenocarcinoma).
Fungal granuloma (cryptococcosis).
001 si siui se dajod jeseu e jo uoisuedxayuoisuaixa Aiqeqoudy dklod Aioiewmeu
far rostral to be a classic nasopharyngeal polyp).
. With a flexible endoscope, forceps can be advanced through the biopsy channel to
allow guided biopsy of the mass. The forceps have to be passed prior to retroflexing
[eyo asdo aul oi aaewep u isau asimauo pinom alaue ainoe al se 'adoos aul
while passing the forceps. Alternatively, either forced nasal flushing or catheter biopsy
can be attempted via the external nares.
To perform forced flushing, the nasopharynx is packed with swabs, and the nozzle
of a 10-20 ml syringe filled with sterile saline is placed in one of the external nares,
the other being occluded by digital pressure. The saline is flushed through under sig-
nificant pressure, and the procedure repeated if necessary. If a mass is present, tissue
is often dislodged. A flexible catheter with a side opening {e.g. feeding tube) can also
be passed via the nose to the level of the choanae (measured radiographically) and a
suction biopsy can be attempted.
112 i. The leucogram shows a moderate eosinophilia.
i. Differential diagnoses include:
 Parasitic causes, e.g. intestinal nematodes and cestodes, heartworm, and external
para sites including fleas and mites.
Allergic causes, e.g. feline ‘asthma', food allergy. Fleas and flea allergy are the
single most common cause of a circulating eosinophilia in cats.
EGC.
Eosinophilic inflammatory bowel disease.
Drug therapy, e.g. methimazole, carbimazole.
Chronic tissue damage, e.g. pansteatitis, eosinophilic myositis.
Mast cell tumour.
Hypereosinophilic syndrome (often marked hypereosinophilia).
Bone marrow disorders including eosinophilic and mixed cell leukaemias.
ii. Thorough clinical examination may be helpful in diagnosing one of the above
causes. Trial anti-parasitic treatment is warranted in cases where there are no specific
clinical signs to investigate. Where specific clinical signs {e.g. coughing, diarrhoea ) are
present, further investigations are targeted at these areas initially (e.g. bronchoscopy
and bronchoalveolar lavage, endoscopy, and intestinal biopsy as appropriate).
Persistent unexplained hypereosinophilia is one indication for bone marrow biopsy.
120
113, 114: Questions
113 The picture {113) shows a fentanyl
113
transdermal patch. What is this used for
and what is known about the use of this
Durogesic25
product in cats?
fentanyltrar
I
114 An owner is concerned that her cat
is polydipsic and has measured her cat's
water intake as between 450 and 600 ml
per day (118-158 ml/kg/day)(114).
Examine the la boratory results.
i. What are the main differential diag-
noses you are considering in this case?
i. What is your approach to confirming
the diagnosis?
Haematology
WWithin normal limits
Biochemistry
Value
Reference range
Urea mmol/l (mg/dl)
10.3 (28.8)
6.0-10.5 (17.0-29.0)
Creatinine μmoll (mg/d)
126 (1.4)
<175 (<2.0)
Phosphate mmol/l (mg/dl)
1.2 (3.7)
0.95-1.95 (2.9-6.0)
Glucose mmol/l (mg/dl)
5.0 (90)
3.5-7.5 (60-135)
Total protein g/l (g/dl)
69 (6.9)
55-80 (5.5-8.0)
Albumin g/l (g/dl)
34 (3.4)
24-35 (2.4-3.5)
(p/8) I/ unqol5
35 (3.5)
2 1-50 (2.1-5.0)
Alanine aminotransferase (IU/l)
43
15-45
Alkaline phosphatase (lU/l)
47
15-60
Calcium mmol/l (mg/dl)
2.3 (9.2)
2.0-2.5 (8.0-10.0)
Sodium mmol/l (mEq/)
151
145-160
Potassium mmol/l (mEq/l)
4.4
4.0-5.0
Total T4 nmoll (μg/dl)
37 (2.8)
19-65 (1.5-5.0)
Urinalysis
SG
1.006
PH
6.7
Protein:creatinine ratio
0.21
Glucose/blood/ketones
negative
Sediment
 scant struvite crystals
121
I13, 114: Answers
113 Fentanyl is a synthetic μ-agonist opioid with potent analgesic activity.
Transdermal fentanyl has been widely used to provide effective analgesia in many
situations, and especially for postoperative pain. Dose-related side effects of
respiratory, CNS, and cardiovascular depression, and possibly mild sedation can
occur. Dysphoria or agitation is also seen occasionally.
Transdermal fentanyl is delivered at a constant rate, the dose being proportional to
the surface area of the patch. A patch delivering 25 μg/hr is used in cats. It takes ap-
proximately 4-8 hours for effective plasma concentrations to be achieved, and the
patches should therefore be applied pre-emptively, or additional therapy should be
provided for the initial period (e.g. methadone by injection). Fentanyl patches provide
sustained release of the drug at therapeutic concentrations for approximately 4-5 days.
Disadvantages of transdermal fentanyl include some variability in absorption
between individuals, and if subjected to heat there will be a greater release/absorption
of the drug (treated cats should not sleep on heated beds). Care must be exercized to
ensure accidental human exposure is avoided (e.g. children chewing patches). A
25 μg/hr patch is suitable for most cats, but if side effects occur, or for small cats, it is
possible to remove the backing from only half the patch to slow the absorption (care
should be taken to avoid damaging the patch). Prior to application, the hair should be 
clipped close to the skin and the skin cleaned with alcohol and dried. Hand-warming
the patch prior to application and then holding it in place with a hand for
1-2 minutes ensures good adhesion to the skin (through heat activation of the
Piae oi Aeue pue queh aui uo ya padde iensn ae sauied aui "aaisaue
cats licking them off, and lightly bandaged if necessary.
114 i. The haematology is reported to be normal with no evidence of dehydration or
other abnormalities. The urine is hyposthenuric and serum biochemistry is normal.
Therefore, the main differential diagnoses under consideration are:
Central diabetes insipidus.
Nephrogenic dia betes insipidus.
Psychogenic polydipsia (extremely rare ).
ii. A modified water deprivation test is indicated in cats where all causes of
polyuria/polydipsia other than diabetes insipidus and psychogenic polydipsia have
been ruled out. In long-standing cases of polyuria/polydipsia, medullary washout may
be present and can confuse interpretation of results. Gradual restriction of water
intake for 3 days leading up to the start of the water deprivation test may help to
minimize the effects of this. To determine whether central or nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus are present, an ADH response test should be started at the end of the water
deprivation test.
122
115, Il6: Questions
115 An 8-year-old neutered female
5
DSH cat presents with 12 months'
progressive submandibular lymph-
adenomegaly, and recent coughing.
Lymph node aspirates reveal mixed
inflammation {neutrophils, macro-
phages, lymphocytes). A routine
blood panel and urinalysis are un-
remarkable other than persistent
hypercalcaemia (3.9
mmol/l
[15.6 mg/dl], reference range
2.0-2.5 [8-10 mg/dl]). Parathyroid
hormone concentrations are subnormal, and retrovirus screening tests are negative.
i. What abnormalities can be seen on the lateral thoracic radiograph {115) from this cat?
i. What differential diagnoses should be considered and how should this case be
investigated?
116 An 11-year-old female neutered domestic
6
longhaired cat that has a 3-month history of
progressively worsening weight loss in spite of a
voracious appetite is presented. The owner also
reports that the cat is hyperactive and irritable. On
clinical examination, the cat is bright and, although
thin, is in reasonable condition. A nodule is palpated
in the ventral neck {116) and the cat is tachycardic
(>240 beats per minute). Serum biochemistry results
are shown.
i. What is the assessment of this case on the basis of
what is known at this stage?
i. What is a possible diagnostic plan?
Biochemistry
Parameter
Result
Reference range
Urea mmol/l (mg/dl)
10.2 (28.6)
6.0-10.5 (17.0-29.0)
Creatinine μmoll (mg/dl) 
110 (1.2)
<175 (<2.0)
Phosphate mmol/l (mg/dl)
2.0 (6.2)
0.95-1.95 (2.9-6.0)
Glucose mmol/l (mg/dl)
6.3 (113)
3.5-7.5 (60-135)
Total protein g/l (g/dl)
75 (7.5)
55-80 (5.5-8.0)
Abumin g/l (g/dl)
35 (3.5)
24-35 (2.4-3.5)
Globulin g/l (g/dl)
40 (4.0)
21-50 (2.1-5.0)
Alanine aminotransferase (IU/)
324
15-45
Alkaline phosphatase (U/l)
216
15-60
Total T4 nmol/l (ug/dl)
56 (4.3)
19-65 (1.5-5.0)
123
115, 1l6: Answers
115 i. The lateral radiograph reveals a diffuse, patchy/nodular predominantly alveolar
and interstitial infiltrate affecting most of the visible lung fields. The cardiac
silhouette is partially obscured but does not look grossly abnormal.
 i. Major differential diagnoses for this radiographic appearance would be:
 Primary or metastatic neoplasia.
Fungal pneumonia (Cryptococcus, Blastomyces, Histoplasma, Coccidioides).
Tuberculous mycobacterial infection.
Other less likely causes would include parasitic pneumonia and severe asthma.
If the enlarged submandibular lymph nodes are part of the same disease process,
then lymphoma would be the most likely neoplastic disease, but while paraneoplastic
hypercalcaemia could occur with this, the cytology from the lymph node aspirate
suggests inflammatory rather than neoplastic disease. Both fungal and mycobacterial
disease can cause granulomatous lung disease, and hypercalcaemia can be seen
secondary to this. Further investigations should include:
pue (svd ga) leauny 1oy suuieis pue ksojoisiy 1oy Asdoq apou qdwa]
mycobacterial (e.g. ZN) organisms {± culture or PCR analysis).
Bronchoalveolar lavage for cytology, bacterial, and fungal cultures, and/or PCR
testing for appropriate microorganisms fe.g. mycobacteria ).
 Serological testing as appropriate (e.g. cryptoccocal antigen titres).
If treatment has to be delayed pending results of investigations, the hypercalcaemia
should be managed with IV fluids and, possibly, calcitonin or bisphosphonates.
This cat had mycobacterial infection confirmed, proba bly Mycobacterium microtii.
116 i.The history and clinical findings are most suggestive of hyperthyroidism. Serum
biochemistry shows elevation of liver enzymes and a mild hyperphosphataemia which
are common in hyperthyroid cats, but the total T4 results are normal meaning that
the nodule palpated may be a non-functional thyroid mass. Blood glucose results are
normal ruling out diabetes mellitus as a potential cause of the cat's clinical signs.
Other differential diagnoses that cannot be ruled out at this stage would be primary
liver disease and gastrointestinal disease, although these would not explain the
behaviour changes and tachycardia.
i. The serum T4 is at the top of the reference range which is unusual in an elderly cat
and suspicious of underlying hyperthyroidism. This result is consistent with early or
mild hyperthyroidism when variation in serum T4 levels includes fluctuation in and
out of the reference range. Another possibility would be that the T4 is being
suppressed by the presence of other illnesses ('sick euthyroid'). Since the cat is
currently bright and reasonably well, it may be simplest to repeat the serum T4 in
2-4 weeks' time. Further tests for other diseases (e.g. survey radiographs, abdominal
ultrasonography) can also be considered at this stage.
124
117, 118: Questions
117
10 μm
117 The structure in the picture (117) is seen on microscopy following faecal
flotation from a cat with diarrhoea.
i. What is this structure and what is its significance?
ii. What is the optimal method of making a diagnosis of this infection, and how
should the cat be managed?
118
118 A 3-year-old DSH cat that has marked jaundice is presented to you {118).
i. What are the three categories of causes of jaundice?
i. How can it be established which one of these is present in this cat?
12.5
I17, I18: Answers
117 i. This is a Giardia cyst. Giardia preferentially infects the distal small intestine of
cats, and infections can range from being completely asymptomatic to being a cause
of profound debilitating diarrhoea. Diarrhoea may be acute, chronic, or intermittent,
and is frequently characterized by steatorrhoea. Giardia infections will cause
lymphoplasmacytic intestinal inflammation, and the organism can directly inhibit
brush-border enzymes. Therapy is always warranted when Giardia is detected, and
the organism is regarded as a likely zoonosis.
il. Giardia cysts are best identified by the zinc sulphate centrifugation technique as
routine faecal flotation methods will cause distortion of the cysts making them difficult
to identify. Cysts may only be shed intermittently, and thus optimal diagnosis requires 
the examination of at least three faecal samples collected at 24-48 hour intervals.
Other methods of diagnosis include examination of faecal smears (wet preparations) to
look for the characteristic binucleate motile trophozoites (less sensitive than looking
for cysts), and faecal ELISA tests to detect Giardia antigens. If the latter is used, care
should be taken to use a test that has been validated for use in cats.
A variety of drugs have been used to treat Giardia in cats, but the two most
commonly employed are metronidazole (20-25 mg/kg twice daily for S-10 days) and
fenbendazole (50 mg/kg daily for 5 days). Due to concerns over possible resistance to
metronidazole, fenbendazole is now commonly recommended. Treatment should
include all animals in a household as asymptomatic carriers could be present, and
recent evidence suggests shampooing at the same time as systemic treatment may
reduce the risk of recurrence by removing any cysts present in the haircoat.
118 i. Jaundice can be classified as being:
 Prehepatic, hepatic, or post-hepatic (obstructive jaundice).
i. A logical plan involves:
Thorough history taking may identify exposure to toxins such as acetaminophen
fparacetamol) which can cause oxidative damage to RBCs leading to a Heinz
body haemolytic anaemia.
Clinical examination should pay particular attention to palpation of the cranial
abdomen for the presence of a mass causing obstruction to the bile duct and other
evidence of systemic causes of jaundice such as ascites due to FIP.
Haematology and serum biochemistry help to identify haemolytic anaemia
( prehepatic jaundice), elevation of liver enzymes (hepatic disease).
Imaging by radiography and ultrasonography may allow visualization of
abnormal hepatic tissue or evidence of post-hepatic obstruction of the bile duct.
Cats with FIP may have pleural effusion and/or ascites.
In most cases, further specific diagnostic tests will be required to confirm the exact
cause of disease. Haematology to rule out haemolytic anaemia and ultrasonography
to rule out biliary obstruction are valua ble early tests.
126
I19, 120: Questions
119 A 4-year-old neutered male Siamese cat presents with persistent paroxysmal
coughing and intermittent episodes of dyspnoea of varying severity. A routine blood
panel is unremarkable, but radiography reveals a moderate to marked generalized
bronchial pattern. A bronchoalveolar lavage is performed which yields a turbid fluid
with much mucus. The cytological appearance of the fluid is shown (119).
i. What does this reveal and how should this finding be interpreted?
ii. What differential diagnoses should be considered?
120 A short axis view of
120
the heart in diastole from
a 7-year-old DSH cat is
shown {120). The left ven-
tricular lumen is indi-
cated (1).
i. Comment on the ap-
pearance of the left ven-
tricle.
ii. What further tests are
a ppropriate?
127
119, I20: Answers
119 i. The cytology in this case shows a predominance of eosinophils with some
neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages. This is difficult to interpret in cats as
bronchoalveolar lavage cytology in healthy cats is very variable. In most healthy cats,
alveolar macrophages predominate in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and account for
around 70% of all the cells. However, eosinophils, neutrophils, and lymphocytes can
all make a significant but varia ble contribution. Unlike most species, eosinophils form
they are typically the second most common cell and account for 20-30% of the total.
However, even in healthy cats, eosinophils can predominate, and can make up as
much as 80-85% of the total cells. The finding of a large proportion of eosinophils
alone is thus not abnormal but has to be evaluated in the light of the total cell count 
sl ssasse oi (ssuipuy yiydeisoipeu 'snonu jo aouasaud s'a) ssuipuy yauio pue
significance. In this case, the high cellularity and appearance of the fluid suggest this
is genuinely eosinophilic inflammation.
i. The true significance of eosinophilic airway inflammation in cats has yet to be
esta blished; however, when found it is believed that this is most likely to reflect under-
lying asthma or respiratory parasitism. The history of this cat would be consistent with
asthma, but parasites could not be ruled out. These would include Aelurostrongyhus
abstrusus, Dirofilaria immitis, Paragonimus spp., Capilaria aerophila.
m aul pue azis ul paonau Apaalqns sadde uaw reinouaa al ai 1 o
subjectively thickened.
i. Measurements of the left ventricle free wall, internal diameter and interventricular
septum should be taken and compared to the reference range. These measurements
should be performed via right parasternal echocardiography of the left ventricle in short
axis view. Ideally, M-mode (motion mode), which allows the user to place a cursor line
though the left ventricle at the level of the chordae tendinae, is used to make these
measurements. This produces a trace of the movement of the section of the heart
transected by the cursor fy axis) against time (x axis). The trace is frozen and measure-
ments are recorded. Diastole is measured at the onset of the QRS complex on a
simultaneously recorded ECG trace; systole is taken as the point when the septal wall
motion is at its na dir.
Parameter
Normal range (mm)
Left ventricle free wall systole
4-9
Left ventricle free wall diastole
2.5-5
Left ventricle internal diameter systole
6-10
Left ventricle internal diameter diastole
11-16
Interventricular septum systole
5-9
Interventricular septum diastole
2.5-5
128
121, 122: Questions
121 A 3-year-old neutered female DSH
121
presents with ventral alopecia (121) of
4 months' duration, which the owner
reports is non-pruritic. What would be
your major differential diagnoses and
 approach to investigation?
122 An entire male stray cat (122) is
122
presented for a general health check prior
to rehoming. The cat seems healthy other
than some evidence that he has been a
fighter in the past. A patient-side FeLV
and FIV test gives a positive FIV anti-
body result.
i. What is the significance of this result to
the stray cat?
ii. The client has three other cats. What is
the risk of transmission of infection to
these?
129
121, I22: Answers
121 The absence of owner-observed pruritus would not rule out a pruritic skin
disease, and thus both pruritic and non-pruritic causes of ventral alopecia should be
considered. These would include:
Flea bite hypersensitivity.
Atopy.
Dermatophytosis.
Food hypersensitivity.
Paraneoplastic alopecia.
Telogen effluvium.
Self-induced alopecia due to behavioural causes ('stress-induced').
Ectoparasites (Cheyletiella, Otodectes, Demodex, Felicola).
 Pertinent facts relate to lifestyle and background, current and previous diet, systemic
illness, progression of signs, previous signs, and signs on other animals and/or the owner.
A trichogram (microscopic examination of 20-30 plucked hairs) is important to
determine if the alopecia is self-induced fevidenced by fractured hairs/damaged hair
shaft and a normal telogen:anagen ratio). Flea hypersensitivity would be the most
common cause of self-induced alopecia, and examination for fleas fexamination of
the coat, flea combing, and a "wet paper test on coat brushings) should be performed
and appropriate treatment given if there is any evidence of infestation.
Additional diagnostic procedures would include a 'sticky tape test' and skin
scraping to look for ectoparasites (Cheyletiella, Otodectes, Demodex); and Wood's
lamp illumination, hair microscopy, and culture to look for dermatophytes. Intra-
dermal skin testing (or blood testing) may be indicated if atopy is suspected and a food
trial with a hypoallergenic (e.g. hydrolysed protein) or restricted (and ideally novel)
protein diet would be indicated to rule out food hypersensitivity. A skin biopsy ffor
histology and culture) may be valua ble, especially if the alopecia is not self-induced.
122 i. Anti-FIV antibodies are associated with persistent infection with this virus.
False-positive test results can occur, although the prevalence of FIV infection is higher
in free-roaming, entire male stray cats so this is likely to be a genuine result. Since this
cat is clinically healthy, it may be advisable to submit blood for confirmatory testing
at a commercial laboratory (PCR or western blot techniques can be used in addition
to routine antibody tests).
i. The prime mode of transmission is via a bite from an infected cat. Other modes of
transmission that are less efficient at spreading infection include vertical transmission,
sexual intercourse, mutual grooming, sharing food bowls, and possibly via blood-
sucking arthropods such as fleas. The risk of transmission via benign social contact is
considered to be very low so many owners elect to keep the household as it is if the
cats do not fight.
130
123, 124: Questions
123
123 The lateral thoracic radiograph (123) is from a 9-year-old neutered female DSH
cat that presented with progressive inspiratory dyspnoea over a 3-month period.
i. What radiographic features can be seen and what are the major differential
diagnoses?
i. What findings would be expected on clinical examination of this cat?
in. How readily could you distinguish between the two major differential diagnoses
in this case? How would you do this?
124 A 10-year-old neutered male DSH
124
cat presents with a 2-month progres-
sive history of predominantly inspira-
tory dyspnoea, lethargy, inappetence,
and weight loss. Radiographic exam-
ination reveals a large, well circum-
scribed homogenous soft tissue density
occupying the left caudal lung lobe
with obliteration of the bronchus
supplying this lobe. Ultrasonography
confirms the presence of homogenous
 consolidation of the left caudal lung
lobe. Tracheoscopy is performed (124).
i. What is evident on tracheoscopy?
ii. What is the likely diagnosis/
differential diagnosis?
i. What other changes are sometimes
seen with this condition?
131
I23, I24: Answers
123 i. The lateral radiograph shows a large soft-tissue density in the cranial thorax.
This is causing marked dorsal displacement of the trachea, caudal displacement of the
carina, and is obscuring the cranial lung fields. There is evidence of a pleural effusion
and the cardiac silhouette is obscured.
The radiographic appearance is consistent with a large cranial mediastinal mass.
The major differential diagnoses are anterior mediastinal lymphoma or thymoma
(benign epithelial tumour). Other possibilities include extension/metastatic/ectopic
thyroid adenocarcinoma, a mediastinal abscess, or a branchial cyst.
ii. Clinical examination would show reduced 'rib-spring' or compliance of the cranial
thorax, an absence of lung sounds cranially, and dullness on percussion of the thorax
cranially. There would also be caudal displacement of the normal cardiac sounds.
. Differentiating malignant lymphoma from thymoma is not always easy. Cytologi-
cal examination of fine needle aspirates from the mass for cytology of pleural fluid if
present) can sometimes be diagnostic. Lymphomas often have large numbers of
lymphoblasts and lymphocytes with evidence of malignancy, whereas thymomas may
reveal atypical or neoplastic epithelial cells. However, atypical epithelial cells are not
always present in aspirates from thymomas, and the predominant cell type is usually
small lymphocytes. Some thymomas contain a very large proportion of lymphocytes
(lymphocytic thymomas), and as some lymphomas are well differentiated lymphocytic
forms, distinguishing these two tumours can be problematic. Even needle biopsies do
not always give a definitive diagnosis and, where doubt exists, surgical biopsies may
be required.
124 i. A pale pink mass is evident in the left main-stem bronchus and it appears to be
completely obliterating the lumen.
i. It is not clear from the picture whether this is a soft tissue mass {inflammation,
neoplasia), a foreign body, or fluid {e.g- pus). However, given the radiographic and
ultrasonographic findings, and the site of the lesion (caudal lung lobe), this is most
woo isow au noui e go uoisuedxa Aq pasn sseu anss yos e aq on kie
tumour at this site is bronchial/pulmonary adenocarcinoma. This diagnosis was
confirmed (poorly differentiated carcinoma) by biopsy of the visible mass.
m. Pulmonary and bronchial adenocarcinomas are aggressive tumours. Lameness has
been reported in 5-2s% of cases, most of these probably arising from
musculoskeletal metastases. Digital metastases are well described often causing firm
swelling of multiple digits (the so-called lung-digit syndrome'), but metastasis to
muscle is also seen quite commonly. In a significant number of cases, lameness rather
than respiratory signs is the presenting complaint, while other cases may present with
vague clinical signs. Metastases can occur to the eyes, liver, kidneys, skin, and CNS
and occasional cases of paraneoplastic neuropathy, paraneoplastic hypercalcaemia,
and hypertrophic osteopathy secondary to the lung mass have been reported.
132
125, 126: Questions
125
125 A client brings in a cat which has had several generalized seizures in the last
hour. Clinical examination reveals a subdued cat but no further abnormalities are
evident (125).
i. What initial laboratory work is most important?
i. While the laboratory samples are being processed, the cat has another seizure in the
hospital. What emergency treatment is most appropriate?
126 A 7-month-old Burmese
126
cat is brought in with a 2-
month  history  of poor
growth, reduced appetite,
and lethargy (126). The
owner reports that the kitten
does not play much and
seems generally depressed.
On previous occasions the
 kitten has been pyrexic when
examined.
i. One of the differential
diagnoses under considera-
tion is FIP. Which of the
following laboratory tests, on its own, is likely to be least helpful in diagnosing this
condition and why?
Haematology.
Serum biochemistry.
Feline corona virus antibody test ('FIP' titre).
i. What other investigations might be helpful in diagnosing this condition?
133
125, I26: Answers
125 i Metabolic causes of seizures should be investigated before the cat has another
seizure since specific treatment may be indicated. Causes include hypoglycaemia,
hypocalcaemia, marked azotaemia, hepatic encephalopathy and, rarely, causes such
as hyperviscosity syndrome (due to polycythaemia or marked hyperproteinaemia) and
severe electrolyte disturbances such as hypernatraemia. Therefore an essential
minimum database for a seizure patient includes blood glucose, urea, calcium, PCV,
total protein, ammonia and, where possible, sodium, potassium, liver enzymes, and
bile acids. Where available, arterial blood gas analysis may be indicated as hypoxia is
another important cause of seizures. Inflammatory disease is a common cause of
seizures in cats so samples should be submitted for infectious disease screening (FIV,
FeLV, coronavirus serology, Toxoplasma gondli titres).
il. Ideally the cause of the seizure is treated specifically, e.g. calcium in hypocalcaemic
 patients. If the cause of the seizure is not known then a bolus injection of 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
diazepam is indicated. If intravenous access is not possible then the diazepam can be
 administered per rectum. Repeated doses of diazepam may be required if seizures
continue; alternatively a diazepam infusion can be provided. Other therapeutic agents
include phenobarbitone (phenobarbital) injection (1.0-2.5 mg/kg IV twice daily)
although this has a slower onset of action {10-30 minutes). Pentobarbitoné
(pentobarbital) can be used IV to control seizures but has several disadvantages.
Anaesthesia is induced, which increases monitoring requirements, and it is a less
effective anticonvulsant than diazepam or phenobarbitone (phenobarbital).
126 i. Coronavirus antibody testing is least helpful. A positive result confirms ex-
posure to a corona virus but is not specific for FIP. Corona virus titres are common in
pedigree cats and cats from multi-cat households, so it is likely that this cat will have
a positive titre. Negative coronavirus antibody titres can be obtained from cats with
confirmed FIP so a negative result does not rule out the possibility of this disease.
i. A thorough clinical examination including complete neurological and ophthalmo-
logical examination is important in order to look for evidence of inflammatory disease
which can be associated with dry (non-effusive) FIP. Imaging of the brain and/or spinal
cord by MRI or CT and CSF sampling and analysis may be indicated in those cats with
neurological disease. Survey radiography and ultrasonography of the chest and abdomen
may identify free pleural and/or abdominal fluid which can be sampled for cytology and
biochemistry. Ultrasonography may also identify lymphadenopathy or serosal lesions
(FIP granulomas) which can be aspirated for cytology. Routine serum biochemistry and
haematology may also give some clues of FIP (e.g. hyperglobulinaemia,
hyperbilirubinaemia, mild non-regenerative anaemia, lymphopenia, mature neutrophilia).
Unfortunately, no laboratory tests are specific for FIP and histology of affected organ
tissue remains the only definitive way to confirm the suspicion of FIP.
134
127, 128: Questions
127
127 A lateral abdominal radiograph (127) from a cat with recurrent dyschezia and
constipation is shown.
i. What does the radiograph reveal?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. How should the case be investigated?
128
128 The lateral thoracic radiograph (128) is from a 15-month-old Siamese cat that,
according to the owner, has been persistently 'throwing up'.
i. How should vomiting be distinguished from regurgitation in such a case?
ii. What a bnormalityfies) can be seen on the ra diograph?
13.5
127, 128: Answers
127 i. The radiograph demonstrates severe constipation/obstipation with a dilated
and faeces-filled colon. The descending colon is clearly grossly distended with faeces.
 i. These findings are consistent with severe constipation and megacolon, but the
cause of this is unclear. Major causes of severe constipation include idiopathic
megacolon, pelvic canal stenosis, and pelvic nerve injury. Other potential causes or
contributory factors to consider with chronic constipation include dysautonomia,
neoplasia, hypothyroidism, pain when posturing to defecate, electrolyte disturbances
(hypokalaemia, hypercalcaemia), rectal diverticulae, rectal strictures, rectal masses/
foreign bodies, other painful anorectal disorders, inappropriate diet, environmental
changes, and inappropriate or soiled litter trays (i.e. psychological factors). Excessive
ingestion of hair, especially in longhaired cats, can be a significant factor.
ji. Routine evaluation of constipation should include radiography {two views) to
assess the severity of the constipation and the integrity of the pelvic canal. A
neurological assessment is important to rule out potential neuromuscular diseases,
spinal cord disease, or dysautonomia. The dietary history and environment should be
reviewed, and consideration should be given to assessment of thyroid status in young
cats (congenital hypothyroidism commonly results in constipation).
If necessary following resolution of the constipation, further imaging, radiography
(± barium contrast), ultrasonography, and/or endoscopy can be used to rule out
structural changes to the rectum and colon.
128 i. Distinguishing true vomiting from regurgitation can be difficult (see table
below), especially if owners do not observe the cat during the process. In some
circumstances fluoroscopy may be needed to make a diagnosis.
i. The radiograph shows a widely dilated oesophagus throughout the thorax. This
appearance is typical of severe megaoesophagus.
 Differentiation of regurgitation and vomiting
Signs
Regurgitation
Vomiting
Appetite
Usually good ± eating 
Variable. often reduced
regurgitated food
Dysphagia/pain on swallowing
Variable
Uncommon
Signs of nausea
Absent
± Present 
Observed activity
Passive
Active (retching) ±
abdominal contractions
Tme after feeding
Usually within minutes
Variable minutes-hours
(occasionally delayed)
Appearance of food
± Tubular, digested or
Variable, digested or
undigested
undigested
Fresence of blood
± Fresh blood
± Fresh or digested blood
FPresence of bile
No
Variable
136
129, 130: Questions
129
129 This right lateral thoracic radiograph {129) is of a 9-year-old male neutered DSH
cat presented as an emergency with a history of acute onset dyspnoea and lethargy.
When examined the cat was found to be very depressed and moist rales were audible
throughout the lung fields. No sedation was required for radiography.
i. What abnormalities are evident?
ii. What action should be taken?
130 A 4-year-old Maine Coon cat
130
presents with recent anorexia,
marked weight loss, lethargy, and
vomiting. There is severe jaundice
 and elevation of serum liver enzyme
concentrations. Ultrasonography
shows hepatomegaly with a diffuse
increase in liver echogenicity.
Cytology of a fine needle aspirate
from the liver is shown {stained
with "Diff-Quick') (130).
i. What is the likely diagnosis in
this case?
ii. What is known concerning
the
pathogenesis of this condition?
ii. How should the cat be treated?
137
129, I30: Answers
129 i. The heart is tall with an increased cranial to caudal diameter. An intense
alveolar lung pattern is visible in the caudodorsal and, to a lesser extent, cranioventral
lung fields. Air bronchograms are evident in the caudodorsal thorax. This lung
pattern is consistent with severe oedema, haemorrhage, or infiltration. Given the
cardiac enlargement, cardiogenic pulmonary oedema is the most likely possibility.
i. Cage rest and oxygen therapy (e.g. oxygen cage) are indicated in addition to more
aggressive treatment. Diuretic therapy, for example, using intravenous furosemide at
2-4 mg/kg given up to every 6 hours can be used to reduce the oedema. If intravenous
access is not possible then this agent can be given IM. Serum potassium levels should
be monitored as furosemide can precipitate hypokalaemia.
Glyceryl trinitrate cream can be applied every 6-12 hours as an emergency
vasodilator. A 0.6-1.2 cm (0.25-0.5 inches) line of cream should be applied to the skin
of the pinna or onto a clipped area of skin then covered with tape to prevent iatrogenic
human dosing. Oral therapy, with agents such as furosemide and spironolactone,
should be instituted as soon as the cat is more stable and further cardiac assessment
{e.g. echocardiography) performed in order to characterize the specific cause of the
cardiac disease which will allow choice of further appropriate treatment.
saiel yim uoelonoea mous ieaus aui ui sao aul jo uouodoid jeiueisqns v 'loe
accumulations of non-staining material (likely to be lipid accumulation). This
cytology is typical of hepatic lipidosis. Although care must be taken with inter-
pretation of hepatic fine needle aspirate cytology as samples may not be represen-
tative, the degree of vacuolation observed and the consistent history, signs, and
ultrasonography would all be strongly supportive of this diagnosis.
i. Hepatic lipidosis can either be primary (often associated with recent anorexia and
weight loss) or can be secondary to other diseases such as diabetes mellitus. Hepatic
lipidosis also occurs with inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, and cholan-
giohepatitis, although the pathogenesis in these conditions may be similar to
idiopathic cases. Thorough investigation to identify concurrent diseases is important.
Idiopathic hepatic lipidosis is characterized by massive triglyceride accumulation
within hepatocytes. This results from either increased production of triglyceride (e.g.
due to lipolysis associated with anorexia) and/or a decreased ability of the liver to
oxidize or excrete them in the form of VLDLs. Relative carnitine deficiency has been
 proposed to be involved, possi bly causing reduced hepatic oxidation of fatty acids.
m. Despite uncertainties over the precise pathogenesis, treatment is usually successful,
but involves aggressive nutritional support fusually initially via an oesophagostomy
or PEG tube) without protein restriction except if hepatic encephalopathy develops.
Supplementation with carnitine and taurine (both at 250-500 mg/cat/day) has been
recommended but objective data on efficacy is lacking. The prognosis depends on the
 severity, response to therapy, and any underlying/concurrent diseases.
138
131, 132: Questions
131
131 A 4-year-old neutered male domestic longhaired cat presents with a 2-month
history of inguinal swelling and discharge. On clinical examination, subcutaneous
swelling is palpable. The area is clipped (131).
i. What abnormalities are evident in the picture?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What investigations are required to confirm the cause of the disease?
iv. How should the patient be handled while awaiting results?
v. What is the most probable diagnosis and how is this likely to have been caused?
132 A 10-year-old female
32
neutered DSH cat is
brought in with a history
of being found in the
owner's garden with
sudden onset hindlimb
paralysis (132).
i. What are the main
differential diagnoses that
should be considered
initially?
ii.
What is a possible
diagnostic plan?
139
131, I32: Answers
131 i. Irregular swelling/nodules are visible over the ventral abdomen, inguinal area
and prepuce. Some of these areas are ulcerated.
i. Major differential diagnoses are:
Opportunistic mycobacterial infection.
Other {less likely) infectious causes, e.g. fungal {e.g. Cryptococcus, subcutaneous
dermatophyte infection), viral (e.g. poxvirus), bacterial (e.g. Rbodococcus equi,
Actinomyces). The severity of signs would make pox and dermatophytosis unlikely.
Foreign body, ca using a secondary panniculitis.
Underlying disease causing immunosuppression, e.g. FeLV, FIV.
Concurrent therapy affecting wound healing or ability to eliminate opportunistic
infections, e.g. corticosteroids, progestagens, cytotoxic agents.
 Pansteatitis, e.g. related to pancreatitis, vitamin E deficiency.
Neoplasia.
m. A skin biopsy should be taken. Impression smears should be stained with Gram,
ZN, PAS and examined for infectious organisms. Biopsy material should be submitted
for histopathology (including specialist stains for bacteria and fungi) and bacterial
culture. If possible, a portion of tissue should be frozen at -20°C {-4°F) in case future
mycobacterial culture or PCR is required following histology results.
iv. Some of the differential diagnoses are potentially zoonotic although the risk is
generally low. Gloves, protective clothing and eyeglasses should be worn when handling
the cat and the minimum number of staff possible should be involved in its care.
Immunosuppressed, pregnant, very young and very elderly people should avoid contact
with the cat.
v. Opportunistic mycobacterial infection. This is likely to have been acquired follow-
ing opportunistic infection of a minor skin wound.
132 i. Spinal trauma and distal aortic thromboembolic disease are the two main
differential diagnoses that should be considered initially.
ii. Thorough clinical examination should pay particular attention to cardiac
auscultation since cardiac disease is the most common cause of feline thromboembolic
disease. Evaluation of hindlimb circulation may include palpation or use of a Doppler
probe to detect presence of peripheral pulses, assessment of hindlimb warmth and
colour of non-pigmented pads. Blood flow can be assessed by pin pricking a pad. Tissue
necrosis in thromboembolic cases may result in dramatic elevation of creatinine
phosphokinase and a reperfusion hyperkalaemia which can become life threatening.
Radiography may aid diagnosis of spinal fracture/luxation as well as evidence of cardiac
disease such as cardiomegaly. Further cardiac investigation, where indicated, should
include echocardiography. In cats with thromboembolic disease caused by cardiac
disease, left atrial dilatation, spontaneous contrast ('smoke’ in the left atrium) and a
thrombus may be visible in addition to other evidence of the primary cardiac disease.
140
133, 134: Questions
133 A 3-year-old neutered female cat
133
 presents with firm non-painful roughly
 symmetrical swelling of the mammary
glands (133). The cat is systemically well
and showing no other signs.
i. What is the likely cause of the swelling
and how can the diagnosis be confirmed?
ii. What is known about the cause(s) of
this disease, and how can such cases be
managed?
134 What is evident on
134
this lateral abdominal
radiograph (134) from a
15-year-old
neutered
female Burmese cat with
weight loss and inap-
petence? Explain why an
ACE inhibitor such as
benazepril
might
be
recommended for this
individual.
141
I33, 134: Answers
133 i. This is most likely to be a case of mammary hyperplasia (fibroadenomatous/
fbroepithelial hyperplasia). It occurs in both male and female cats, but is more
common in the latter. There is usually a very marked increase in the size of one or,
more usually, multiple mammary glands. The swelling can get to such a size that it
causes overlying cutaneous ulceration. The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy and this
differentiates it from other conditions such as neoplasia and mastitis.
i. Most affected cats are young entire females, and it is assumed that the hyperplasia
develops in response to excessive progesterone production (although serum concen-
trations are not necessarily abnormal). In other cats, there is a history of exogenous
 progestagen use (oral, or depo-injectable drugs) which has been clearly linked to
mammary fibroepithelial hyperplasia in cats. In a small proportion of cases, the
disease occurs in neutered females or male cats with no exogenous progestagens
ha ving been administered. It is not clear if these cats also have excessive endogenous
 progesterone from another source.
Spontaneous resolution of the condition typically (but not always) follows removal
of the presumed source of progesterone (withdrawing drug therapy, neutering an
entire female) but this can be very slow. If response is inadequate, or if there is not an
obvious source of progestagens, administration of the progesterone receptor
antagonist, aglepristone, has recently been reported to be highly successful. Doses
used have been 10 mg/kg SC twice weekly or 20 mg/kg SC once weekly for 1-4
weeks, 0r 10 mg/kg SC daily for 4-5 days.
134 This radiograph demonstrates bilateral small kidneys {<2x the length of L2), both
appearing to have irregular margins. There is proba ble nephrocalcification or (more
likely) a nephrolith in the left kidney. These findings suggest probable CRF.
In humans, both hypertension and proteinuria are well recognized risk factors for
progression of CRF, and ACE inhibitor therapy is well established. Patients with
moderate to severe proteinuria (a marker of glomerular damage) benefit most, and
ACE inhibitors have demonstrated renoprotective effects over and above simple
control of blood pressure. This is thought to be mediated through reduced
intraglomerular pressure, caused by greater dilation of the efferent glomerular
arteriole than the afferent arteriole. Other potential benefits include reduced oxidative
stress, and reduced mesangial and glomerular hypertrophy. However, not all types of
 nephropathy necessarily benefit from ACE inhibitor therapy.
ACE inhibitor therapy in feline CRF is still controversial. Based on human studies 
there is good rationale for their use, but ACE inhibitors alone do not control systemic
hypertension well in cats, and there is little knowledge of the role of proteinuria in
progression of CRF. Nevertheless, initial studies of natural and experimental CRF do
suggest potential benefit, although further studies are required.
142
135, 136: Questions
135 A 9-year-old neutered
135
female domestic longhaired cat
is presented with a 3-week
history of progressively worsen-
ing neurological signs which
include restlessness, constant
pacing, excessive vocalization,
and mild ataxia. The cat is
euthanased at the owner's
request and a post-mortem
examination is performed.
i. What abnormality is evident
on cross-section of this brain
{135)?
ii. What are the causes of this as an acquired abnormality?
. How can the diagnosis be made ante-mortem?
136 A Siamese cat is presented that has a
136
4-week history of circling to the right
and a right-sided head tilt (136).
i. Assuming that the disease is not multi-
focal, what are the differential diagnoses?
il. What is a possible diagnostic plan?
143
135, I36: Answers
135 i. The lateral ventricles are markedly dilated which is diagnostic of internal
hydrocephalus.
i. Ca uses of obstructed CSF drainage include:
Inflammatory disease, e.g. FIP, fungal (Cryptococcus), foreign body granuloma,
or haematoma following trauma.
Neoplastic causes, e.g. choroid plexus neoplasia, lymphoma.
i. Specialist imaging techniques (MRI, CT) are required to make this diagnosis and will
help to establish the severity of hydrocephalus as well as potential causes of the disease.
136 i. The cat has a right-sided head tilt which is most commonly caused by
ipsilateral vestibular disease. Other commonly seen signs would include nystagmus
with the slow phase towards the side of the lesion (the right side in this case), circling,
ataxia, and rolling. Differential diagnoses can be separated into:
Central vestibular disease: lesion affecting the vestibular nuclei or cerebellum.
Causes include inflammatory or neoplastic disease, thiamine deficiency, infectious 
causes {e-g. FIP, toxoplasmosis), lead toxicity, spread from otitis media/interna,
trauma. Cerebellar lesions can result in paradoxical vestibular syndrome where
the head tilt, circling, and nystagmus are in the opposite direction to that seen
with classic vestibular syndrome.
Peripheral vestibular disease: lesion affecting the vestibular nerve or inner ear.
Causes include polyps, neoplasia involving temporal bone or vestibulocochlear
nerve, otitis media/interna, idiopathic vestibular syndrome, aminoglycoside
toxicity, trauma.
i. The most important initial step is to determine whether the cat has central or
peripheral vestibular signs. Clinical and neurological examination usually make this
possible using the table below. Further investigations depending on the results of this
assessment may include otoscopy, radiography of the skull (pharynx and bullae),
examination of the nasopharynx, CSF collection and analysis, and MRI.
Distinguishing central and peripheral vestibular disease
 Qinical sign
Central disease
Peripheral disease
Vestibular signs
X
 Proprioceptive deficits
± (ipsilateral)
Weakness
± (ipsilateral)
Facial (Vi) paralysis
士
Other neurological deficits 
± other cranial nerve
± Homer's syndrome
deficits (especially V.
Vl and vill), central
depression
144
137, 138: Questions
137 A cat presented with 'spongy"
137
swollen metacarpal and metatarsal
pads, some of which were ulcer-
ated (137). What are these lesions
characteristic of, and how should
this be managed?
138
138 A breeder presents the two remaining kittens of a litter of 6-week-old Birmans
{138). He has recently lost three of the kittens to *fading kitten syndrome'. This has
happened to several litters previously with different queens. The kittens are dying at
between 2 and 6 weeks of age. What differential diagnoses should be considered for
this and what investigations should be undertaken?
14.5
137, 138: Answers
137 This cat has ulcerative pododermatitis. Differential diagnoses could include
metastatic pulmonary carcinoma, vasculitis, EGC, contact dermatitis, and toxic
epidermal necrolysis. However, the appearance and distribution of the lesions is typical
of plasma cell pododermatitis. The diagnosis can be confirmed by biopsy of the pads.
Plasma cell pododermatitis is an uncommon disease in cats, but usually results in
spongy swelling of multiple (metacarpal and metatarsal) pads. The swelling is
ul 'ssauawl oi sueal ued uayo sl aiaui pue ahuods, pue os Aeonsuanereuo
pain is significantly exacerbated by any ulceration that occurs.
Secondary infections occur after ulceration and it is important to keep the pads
clean and treat infections promptly with appropriate antibiotics. Systemic signs seen
in a minority of cats include pyrexia, lymphadenopathy, lethargy, and anaemia. Some
recent studies have suggested a link between FIV infection and the development of
plasma cell pododermatitis (which may account for the systemic signs in some), but
the aetiology of the lesions has not been determined. The intense plasma cell
infiltration has led to speculation that this is an autoimmune or immune-mediated
condition, and affected cats frequently have a polyclonal gammopathy.
The lesions often regress spontaneously, and efficacy of therapy is uncertain.
Immunosuppression is commonly recommended. Where ulceration occurs, surgical
debulking and closure of the wound may be attempted.
138 It is estimated that approximately 50% of kitten mortalities are within the first
week of life when environmental, nutritional, and congenital factors are the most
likely causes. These include low birth weight, failure to suck, birth defects, maternal
neglect, failure of milk let-down, neonatal isoerythrolysis, and hypothermia.
From 1 week of age onwards, environmental and congenital diseases can still be
important, but infectious diseases become more important, and often an entire litter 
of kittens may be affected. Kittens that have failed to suck adequately in the first 24
hours of life are most susceptible due to poor maternally-derived immunity.
Overwhelming septicaemia may occur (most commonly with streptococci or Gram-
negative enteropathogens), and this may cause peracute death, which is sometimes
only diagnosed at post-mortem. Bordetellosis can be a cause of pneumonia. As kittens
get older (typically 4-7 weeks old) parasitic diseases (e.g. coccidiosis, flea infestation,
and ascaridiasis), and viral infections {e.g. FCV, FHV, feline panleucopenia virus,
feline coronavirus) can also be a common and significant cause of disease. Again,
severe or overwhelming infections may cause acute death with little or no preceding
signs. Toxin exposure should also be considered.
A repeated problem with different queens suggests an environmental or infectious
ca use of the problem. Most information is likely to be gained from a thorough review
of husbandry policies, complete post-mortem examination of kittens that die, and
appropriate clinical investigations of any sick kittens.
146
139, 140: Questions
139 An 18-month-old neutered
139
male Siamese cat (139) presents
with a history of progressively
worsening ataxia and dysmetria.
i. What clinical abnormality is
apparent?
i. What is the most likely cause of
the cat's clinical signs?
mi. How can a diagnosis be con-
firmed?
iv. What treatment is recommended?
140 This cat (140) is suspected of
140
having an infectious disease. An
FeLV test is performed. What is
meant by the following terms?
i. Sensitivity.
ii. Specificity.
ii. Prevalence.
iv. Positive predictive value.
v. Negative predictive value.
147
139, 140: Answers
139 i. The cat has a very domed skull.
 i. This appearance is most consistent with a diagnosis of hydrocephalus. Congenital
hydrocephalus has been reported as an autosomal recessive trait in Siamese cats and
given the age and breed of this cat, this is a likely possibility. Other causes of
hydrocephalus in kittens include exposure to toxins such as griseofulvin in gestation
and feline panleucopenia virus in late gestation or early life. Idiopathic congenital
hydrocephalus would be another possibility. Clinical signs vary and include forebrain
signs such as behavioural changes (disorientation, inability to learn), gait
abnormalities {dysmetria, ataxia), and seizures. Affected cats may have a domed skull
with ventrolateral deviation of eye position and an open fontanelle.
ii. In some cases, ultrasonography can be performed via the open fontanelle
confirming this diagnosis. Plain skull radiographs show a large domed calvarium with
a ground glass appearance, thinning of the cortical bone, open suture lines, and
persistence of the fontanelle. Specialist imaging techniques such as MRI and CT can
also be used to confirm the diagnosis.
iv. Medical management is aimed at reducing CSF production and includes
prednisolone (0.25-0.5 mg/kg once to twice a day) and furosemide (0.5-2.0 mg/kg
once to twice a day). Oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as methazolamide have
also been used to reduce CSF production although these agents may be associated
with side effects (e.g. sedation, bone marrow suppression, electrolyte disturbances; the
latter are more severe in patients receiving glucocorticoids). Where appropriate,
seizure control using anticonvulsants should be instituted. Methazolamide can affect
the absorption and excretion of anticonvulsants and can cause osteomalacia when
given with primidone or phenytoin. Surgical management of hydrocephalus is also an
option via placement of a shunt from the ventricles to the abdominal cavity
(ventriculoperitoneal shunt).
140 i. The sensitivity of a test is the probability that the test result is positive in an
animal which has the disease (i.e. the proportion of diseased animals that test positive).
ii. The specificity is the proba bility that the result is negative in an animal which does
not have the disease fi.e. the proportion of non-diseased animals which test negative ).
m. The prevalence of a disease is the total number of cases of that disease which are
present in a defined population at a certain time.
iv. The positive predictive value of a test is the probability that an animal with a
'0f paisa1 auiaq aseasip aul seu 1nsa1 isal aa uisod
v. The negative predictive value of a test is the probability that an animal with a
negative test result does not have the disease being tested for.
Predictive values of a test take into account both the sensitivity and specificity of
the test, and the prevalence of disease.
148
141, 142: Questions
141
141 The picture {141) shows urine sediment microscopy from a 3-year-old neutered
 male Persian with recurrent signs of lower urinary tract disease and an owner history
of "probable' polyuria/polydipsia. The cat is being fed a commercial dry cat food.
i. What is present in the picture?
i. What potential significance should be placed on this finding and what further
investigations should be carried out as a priority?
142
142 An 8-year-old neutered female DSH (142) presents with depression and a history
of antifreeze {ethylene glycol) ingestion.
i. What are the consequences of ethylene glycol intoxication?
ii. What specific therapy should be considered for this cat?
149
I41, 142: Answers
141 i. The picture demonstrates the presence of calcium oxalate crystals.
i. Crystalluria alone is a non-specific finding, often unrelated to signs of lower
urinary tract disease. However, its presence can indicate significant disease {e.g.
urolithiasis) or serve as an indicator of other disease processes.
The feeding of dry food often leads to lower overall water consumption that may
favour the production of crystalluria. However, while calcium oxalate crystals can be
seen in the urine sediment of healthy cats, they are less commonly observed than
struvite crystals and, additionally, this cat is displaying features of polyuria/
 polydipsia. There may, therefore, be other factors predisposing to their appearance. It
would be helpful to know the pH of the urine of this cat, as acidic urine is known to
favour calcium oxalate crystal formation. Additionally diets designed to minimize
struvite crystal formation appear to predispose to calcium oxalate crystals, probably
oisau wnisauaew qnoiui led u! pue Hd aui suiamoi qanouul hed u!
(magnesium is an inhibitor of oxalate crystal formation). It would be important to
ascertain the calcium status of this cat. Hypercalcaemia and hypercalciuresis are
recognized risk factors for calcium oxalate crystal formation, and hypercalcaemia
could also explain the apparent polyuria/polydipsia.
Radiography of this cat to detect any uroliths would also be a high priority
(calcium oxalate uroliths are radiodense and would be evident on plain radiography).
142 i. Ethylene glycol is an alcohol and a potent toxin, being one of the most
common causes of ARF in cats.
Ethylene glycol itself is relatively non-toxic {although it causes hyperosmolality). As
 a result of liver metabolism via alcohol- and aldehyde-dehydrogenase enzymes, toxic
metabolites (glycoaldehyde and glycolic acid) are produced, which are directly toxic to
renal tubular cells. Glycolic acid produces a profound acidosis and is also transformed
to glyoxylate and oxalate, which may be deposited as calcium oxalate crystals in the
kidney (causing further damage), urine, and other tissues. Ethylene glycol ingestion can
 also result in hypocalcaemia and acidosis which may need treatment.
Initial signs {1-12 hours following ingestion} are due to CNS toxic effects with
depression, nausea, vomiting, nystagmus, ataxia, and seizures. These can be followed
by cardiopulmonary signs before renotoxic effects which occur within 24-72 hours.
i. Immediate treatment (within 1 hour of ingestion) involves inducing vomiting,
 gastric aspiration, and gastric lavage. If cats are presented within 3 hours of ingestion
then ethanol therapy is recommended as this saturates the alcohol dehydrogenase
enzyme system which is the rate-limiting step for ethylene glycol metabolism. Ethanol
A1aaa uoalu1 [eauo1ade111 1o shouaa gul Aq uo1nlos %oz jo y/[u S 1e uaag s1
6 hours for five treatments then every 8 hours for a further four treatments.
1.50
143, 144: Questions
143 Hyperthyroidism is suspected in a 9-
143a
year-old neutered female DSH cat. The
total T4 was 61 nmol/l (reference range
19-65 nmol/l).
i. How would technetium scintigraphy be
performed in a cat?
i. What is the interpretation of the scan
obtained (143a)?
ji. What other tests may be helpful in
diagnosing hyperthyroidism in this case?
144 What major inherited diseases have
144
been described in Devon Rex cats (144)?
1.51
143, I44: Answers
143 i. Radioactive technetium 99m (99mTc,
143b
 pertechnate) is injected IV. Twenty minutes later, the
cat is sedated and placed on a gamma camera which
allows radionuclide thyroid imaging.
ii. Pertechnate is concentrated in the salivary glands,
thyroid tissue, gastric mucosa, and choroid plexus.
The quantity and ratio of uptake of pertechnate by
thyroid compared to salivary tissue is equal in normal
cats but increased in hyperthyroidism. In this case,
unilateral hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed with a
large uptake of technetium on the left side. The
unaffected thyroid lobe appears atrophied and has reduced uptake of pertechnate
{143b; arrow, salivary gland; arrowhead, atrophied right thyroid; short arrow, left
thyroid adenoma).
mi. Further tests for hyperthyroidism include:
T3 suppression test: blood is collected for basal total T4 and T3. The cat is dosed
with exogenous T3 (20-30 μg per cat three times daily for seven doses). A second
blood sample is collected for total T4 and T3 2-4 hours after the last pill is given.
In normal cats, administration of T3 inhibits TSH secretion via negative feedback
and therefore inhibits production and release of thyroid hormones. Total T4
levels fall by at least 30% and are <20 nmol/l (<1.6 μg/dl). In hyperthyroid cats,
there is resistance to the negative feedback therefore there is little or no reduction
in the T4 which remains >20 nmol/l (>1.6 μg/dl). Serum T3 levels are measured to
confirm that exogenous dosing with T3 has been successful.
The TRH stimulation test has been used in the past but recent studies suggest that
this is an unreliable way of diagnosing hyperthyroidism.
 Free T4 (equilibrium dialysis technique). False positive results are seen in
Suuaauos auunou B se asn ioy aiqeins iou si isat siut os sieo jo %L Ajaieuixoudde
test, although 98-99% of hyperthyroid cats have elevated free T4.
144 Devon Rex cats suffer from a number of inherited diseases:
 Spasticity associated with an inherited myopathy. Affected cats have severe paresis,
ventroflexion of the neck, and are unable to jump normally. These cats often die at
a young age as a result of suffocation resulting from aspiration of food.
Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy. Affected cats suffer from a coagulopathy
caused by deficiency of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors {Factors II, VlIl, IX,
and X) in the absence of either liver disease, gastrointestinal disease, fat
malassimilation, or exposure to rodenticide poisons. Liver biopsies collected from
affected cats show a defective gamma-glutamyl-carboxylase enzyme which has
reduced affinity for vitamin K. Treatment with vitamin K normalizes the clotting
times and can be used as a long-term treatment in these cats.
 The characteristic curly coat of the Rex cat is due to a mutant gene.
1.52
145, 146: Questions
145 A 5-year-old neutered female Balinese
145
cat presents with progressive inspiratory
dyspnoea with stertorous breathing.
Retraction of the soft palate reveals a
mass in the nasopharynx (145).
i. What is the likely diagnosis in this case?
ii. What is the underlying cause and what
further investigations are indicated?
ii. How should this case be managed?
146
146 i. What procedure is being performed in this cat {146)?
ii. What are the indications for this and how should it be performed?
1.53
145, 146: Answers
145 i. The clinical signs and appearance of the mass are typical of a nasopharyngeal
 polyp. These are usually pink and smooth, but can be irregular (as in this case).
i. Nasopharyngeal polyps are relatively common and occur in cats of all ages. They
are benign and slowly enlarge, eventually causing nasopharyngeal obstruction. They
arise from the mucosal lining of either the tympanic bulla or the Eustachian tube and
a 'stalk' can usually be seen on the polyp where it originated from {or passed through)
the Eustachian tube, as can be seen in this case. Occasionally, polyps expand into the
external auditory canal rather than the nasopharynx, or can be present at both sites.
Investigations should include bulla radiographs as the presence or absence of middle
ear disease may affect the treatment and/or likelihood of recurrence.
m. The simplest treatment is to retract the soft palate rostrally and remove the polyp
by gentle traction. Only rarely is it necessary to split the soft palate. Histology should
be performed and typically reveals fibrous connective/granulation tissue often with a
lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory infiltrate, and an epithelial surface. Although
inflammatory in nature, the cause of these polyps is unknown, and studies have failed
to show an association with respiratory virus infections.
As most polyps do not recur, traction alone can be used, but bulla osteotomy
should be considered if there is evidence of middle ear disease and certainly for those 
cases where there is recurrence. There is some evidence that corticosteroids (1-2 mg/kg
 prednisolone for 4-6 weeks) after traction may reduce the likelihood of recurrence.
146 i. This cat is having either tracheal lavage or bronchoalveolar lavage performed;
it is impossible to tell which from the picture.
i. These techniques are indicated for the investigation of tracheobronchial or
 parenchymal lung disease of undetermined aetiology.
Tracheobronchial washing is easily achieved through a sterile endotracheal tube
{as shown) under light general anaesthesia. A sterile small diameter catheter {e-g.
urinary catheter) is passed into the distal trachea {carina) where direct aspiration of
mucus may be attempted. Following this, one or two aliquots of warm sterile saline
(approximately 0.5 ml/kg, or 2-3 ml total) are instilled and immediately aspirated.
Bronchoalveolar lavage involves collection of samples from the lower respiratory
tract, including alveoli. Bronchoalveolar lavage can be performed in lateral or sternal
recumbency as appropriate. A long flexible catheter is passed through the sterile
endotracheal tube until it lodges in a small bronchus in the affected area of the lung.
Warmed sterile saline is infused at 2-3 ml/kg, or 10 ml total volume for a cat. The
saline is aspirated and the procedure repeated once or twice if necessary. The gross
appearance of the lavage fluid is noted and aliquots should be submitted for bacterial
culture (PCR assay if appropriate) and cytological examination (in EDTA), along
with direct smears. Both procedures can also be performed through a bronchoscope.
1.54
147, 148: Questions
147 This is a T1-weighted abdominal
147a
MRI scan picture (147a) from a 7-year-
old DSH cat in which HAC has been
diagnosed. The cat also has insulin-
resistant diabetes mellitus as a result of
its HAC.
i. What does this scan reveal about this
case?
ii. How should this patient be managed?
148
148 i. What are the features of a regenerative anaemia that may be evident on exam-
ination of a Romanowsky-stained blood smear?
i. The blood smear {148) was made using blood collected from a severely anaemic
cat. Is the anaemia regenerati ve?
1.5.5
147, I48: Answers
147 In T1-weighted MRI scans, fat appears
147b
bright, whereas water, air, and bone appear
da rk.
i. Bilateral adrenomegaly is evident in this cat
with both adrenals being clearly visible in the
fat cranial to the kidneys (147b), making a
diagnosis of pituitary HAC likely. Further
imaging in this case revealed a pituitary mass
confirming the diagnosis.
ii. A variety of different agents, including
mitotane, trilostane, ketoconazole, and metyrapone have been used with variable
success reported and adverse effects in some cases. Bilateral adrenalectomy is the
preferred treatment, if the patient is considered a good surgical candidate, in
situations where appropriate facilities are available to perform the surgery and
support the patient. Hypophysectomy and radiation therapy of the pituitary have also
been performed successfully in a small number of cases. Insulin-resistant cats need
high doses of insulin to stabilize their disease and are best treated using a twice daily
regime of intermediate-acting preparations (e.g. lente insulin) which are often more
effective at lowering blood glucose levels than longer-acting insulin preparations since
they are potent and have a rapid onset of action. Very high doses of insulin should be
avoided as some HAC cats have variable secretion of cortisol which can result in
hypoglycaemic episodes. An improvement in the diabetes is often seen with successful
ma nagement of the HAC.
148 i. Features of regenerative anaemia evident on a Romanowsky-stained blood
smear aret
Anisocytosis: variation in the size of the RBCs.
Polychromasia: variation in the colour of the RBCs. Residual RNA present in
immature RBCs stains blue. When these cells are stained with supravital stains
such as new methylene blue, they can be identified as reticulocytes.
Macrocytosis: larger RBCs. When present in significant numbers, the mean cell
volume is raised.
Increased numbers of immature RBCs including nucleated RBCs, RBCs with
nuclear remnants (e.g. Howell-Jolly bodies).
A very regenerative bone marrow response to anaemia may also result in an
increase in other cell types such as the leucocytes and platelets due to non-specific
stimulation of the bone marrow.
 i. Yes. There is evidence of anisocytosis and polychromasia on the blood smear.
1.56
149, 150: Questions
149 Dietary management is
149
one of the main aspects of
management of CRF (149).
Explain the most important
aspects of dietary control, the
rationale for their recommen-
dation, and their likely benefit.
150
150 A 21/2-year-old neutered male DSH cat presents with a 7-month history of
recurrent bouts of coughing and wheezing/dyspnoea. There are five other unaffected
cats in the household. The clinical signs are getting gradually worse. Routine blood
tests are unremarkable, but thoracic radiographs show widespread changes through-
out the lung fields (150).
i. What changes are evident in the radiograph?
i. What are the major differential diagnoses for these changes and how should this
case be investigated?
1.57
149, 150: Answers
149 The most important aspect of dietary management of CRF is maintaining fluid
balance. Dehydration is common in CRF, and can contribute both to the clinical signs
and, if severe, to progression of CRF through poor renal perfusion. Feeding of moist 
(canned) rather than dry foods is recommended, and adding water to the food, if
tolerated, can be helpful. Other methods include intermittent intravenous or subcu-
taneous administration of fluids or giving fluids via an oesophagostomy or PEG tube.
Recently, phosphate restriction has emerged as an important goal of dietary
management. There is good evidence that this is able to reverse and control renal
secondary hyperparathyroidism, may minimize some of the histological changes seen
with progressive renal failure, and recent studies suggest that phosphate restriction
apprecia bly slows progression of renal failure and prolongs survival of affected cats.
The evidence for a beneficial effect of protein restriction is less compelling. It is
recommended to help alleviate some of the uraemic manifestations and therefore
clinical signs of the disease, but whether it has any effect on progression of disease is
debatable. Any effect is likely to be very small, and some cats find low protein diets
very unpalatable; a normal diet with a phosphate binder is a good alternative.
Ensuring adequate potassium and water-soluble vitamins in the diet and avoiding
urinary acidifying diets (which exacerbate kaliuresis and metabolic acidosis) are also
important in CRF. There may be a role for omega-3 fatty acid supplementation
(support of glomerular filtration rate and reduced renal inflammation) and soluble
fibre supplementation (intestinal nitrogen trapping) but further studies are needed.
150 i. There is a severe, generalized, peribronchial infiltrate, and a mild interstitial
infiltrate. There are areas of bronchiectasis suggesting chronic damage.
i. This is a non-specific radiographic change, but the diffuse bronchial or broncho-
interstitial pattern is typical of cats with chronic bronchial disease. Other common
changes that can be seen with chronic bronchial disease include collapse of the right
middle lung lobe {or more rarely other lung lobes such as the left cranial),
hyperinflation of the lungs due to air trapping and, in severe cases, flattening of the
diaphragm and a barrel-shaped chest again due to air trapping. Occasionally, a
patchy alveolar pattern, patchy or diffuse interstitial patterns, and emphysema are
reported and, if there is severe dyspnoea, there may be aerophagia and increased gas
in the gastrointestinal tract. There is little correlation between the severity of the
 radiogra phic changes and the severity of the clinical signs.
Major differential diagnoses for these changes would be chronic bronchitis, feline
asthma, or parasitism (e.g. Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, Dirofilaria immitis). Other
differentials may include neoplasia and infectious bronchitis (viral, bacterial, mycoplasma).
Further investigations would be required to determine the aetiopathogenesis
including bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage for cytology and culture, faecal
examination for parasites, serology for Dirofilaria, and ideally lung function tests.
1.58
151, 152: Questions
151
151 A cat that was vaccinated 2 months ago {151) is returned because the owner can
feel a 2 cm diameter lump at the site of vaccination.
i. What are the possible causes of this lump?
ii. What is the most appropriate diagnostic plan?
152 This ECG recording (152a)
152a
was taken from a 10-year-old
neutered female DSH cat. The ECG
machine has been calibrated so that
1 cm = 1 mV on the y axis and
25 mm = 1 second on the x axis
fseconds marked with a dash at the
top of the trace). An enlarged
section of the lead 2 trace is also
shown (152b).
i. What information can be
gathered from an ECG?
ii. Describe, step by step, the inter-
 pretation of this ECG.
152b
1.59
151, 152 Answers
151 i. The lump could be inflammatory, for example, a granuloma caused by an
inflammatory reaction to the vaccine constituents. The main alternative concern
would be that this represents a vaccine site-associated sarcoma. Other causes,
unrelated to vaccination, would include a cat bite abscess.
i. One option would be to monitor the lump for a further month by which time most
inflammatory reactions will have disappeared or reduced in size. However, at
2 months post-injection, because of the concern over potential vaccine site-associated
sarcoma, an incisional or needle biopsy should ideally be performed feither of these
would be far preferable to a fine needle aspirate, results of which would be more
difficult to interpret). The lump should not be completely excised as this usually
makes further radical surgery (such as that required for treatment of vaccine site-
 associated sarcoma) much more difficult and less successful.
152 i. An ECG uses positive and negative electrodes to record the electrical activity of
the heart over a period of time and describes the heart rate and rhythm for the period
recorded. Evaluating the characteristics of the complexes seen on an ECG trace is
helpful in diagnosing arrhythmias and evidence of chamber enlargement.
i. Six seconds of leads I, Il, and Ill are shown. The trace is of adequate quality to
interpret (see table below). The heart rate is approximately 170 beats per minute 
(17 complexes in 6 seconds), is regular and all complexes have PQRS morphology:
there is a P wave for every QRS and a QRS for every P (no ectopic beats).
Measurement of the complexes themselves reveals that the P waves are tall and wide,
the R waves are tall and the S waves are deep. Tall P waves are indicative of right
atrial enlargement (*P-pulmonale'), wide P waves indicate left atrial enlargement (*P-
mitrale'), tall R waves are suggestive of left ventricular enlargement, deep S waves are
branch block. These findings indicate that generalized cardiomegaly is likely to be
present.
hterpretation of the feline EcG
Parameter
Normal range
This ECG
Heart rate
120-200
170
Pwave amplitude (mV)
<0.2
0.45
P wave duration (s)
<0.04
0.06
FR interval (s)
0.05-0.09
0.08
 R wave amplitude (mV)
<0.9
1.3
S-T segment
No depression/elevation
Normal
T wave (mV)
<0.3
0. 1
QT interval (s)
0.12-0.18
0.18
Mean electrical axis
0° to +160°
Not determined
160
153, 154: Questions
153 The lateral abdominal
153
radiograph (153) is from a 12-
year-old neutered male DSH cat,
with recurrent signs of polla-
kiuria and haematuria. The cat
has been treated with a com-
mercial dry urine-acidifying diet
 for 9 months for signs of cystitis
and the presence of 'struvite"
urine crystals. The urine has a
pH of 6.2, and sediment analysis
reveals evidence of inflamma-
tion, many calcium oxalate
crystals but no bacteria.
i. What can be seen on the
radiograph?
i. What is the likely diagnosis?
. What treatment and manage-
ment should be recommended?
154 Feline blood contains two
154
types of reticulocytes {immature
RBCs) which can be identified
 on new methylene blue staining
(154).
i. Identify the two types of
reticulocytes present, indicated
by the arrows and arrowheads.
ii. Which type of reticulocytes
should be counted
1when
assessing whether an anaemia is
regenerative or not?
161
153, I54: Answers
153 i. The radiograph shows the presence of multiple small radiodense objects within
the urinary bladder, consistent with cystic calculi, and the bladder wall is thickened
{consistent with inflammation secondary to the calculi).
i. The presence of large numbers of oxalate crystals in the urine, and the radiodense
nature of the calculi suggest they are probably calcium oxalate uroliths. Feeding a
dry, acidifying, magnesium-restricted diet may ha ve predisposed to their formation.
iil. Calcium oxalate uroliths cannot be dissolved medically and their physical size
together with this being a male cat would preclude attempting urohydropropulsion.
Surgical removal of the uroliths via cystotomy is therefore required, and their
 composition should be confirmed using X-ray diffraction.
Irrespective of the uroliths’ composition, encouraging fluid intake ('wet' rather
than dry food, and encouraging drinking with flavoured waters) will help to reduce
the likelihood of recurrence. Acidifying diets should be avoided in the future with the
aim of producing a more neutral urine pH {around 6.s-7.5) and this should be
checked intermittently. If the urine remains too acid, addition of potassium citrate
{S0-75 mg orally twice daily) may help. Additionally, the cat should be monitored for
hypercalcaemia, and this should be investigated and treated if found.
154 i. The arrows are pointing to punctate reticulocytes; the arrowheads are pointing
to aggregate reticulocytes.
i. The aggregate form is the more immature form of reticulocyte which contains
clumps of medium to large dark-staining precipitated ribosomes. Normal feline blood
smears contain <0.s% aggregate reticulocytes as this form is retained in the marrow
until most of the ribosomal RNA has been eliminated. The punctate form is the
mature form of reticulocyte which remains in the circulation for several weeks before
maturing to a normal RBC. Punctate reticulocytes contain smaller clumps of
precipitated ribosomes. Since they last for so long in this form, normal feline blood
can contain up to 10% punctate reticulocytes. In anaemic cats, only aggregate
reticulocytes should be counted to assess the response to anaemia. The "corrected'
reticulocyte percentage accounts for the severity of the anaemia.
Corrected reticulocyte count (%) = observed reticulocyte % x {observed PCV + 37)
In normal cats, the corrected reticulocyte count is <0.4%. The magnitude of the
reticulocyte count indicates how strongly regenerative the anaemia is fsee table
below).
Alternatively, the absolute reticulocyte count (cells/μl) can be calculated by multi-
plying the red cell count (cells/ul) by the percentage of aggregate reticulocytes.
Normal cats have <30,000 aggregate reticulocytes/μl; numbers >60,000 indicate
that the anaemia is regenerative.
Corrected reticulocyte count (%)
Slightly regenerative
0.5-2.0
Moderately regenerative
2.0-4.0
Very regenerative
>4.0
162
155, 156: Questions
155 A 2-year-old entire male DSH cat is
155
presented beca use the owner has noticed
 some discharge at the prepuce (155). On
examination, the tip of the penis has a
blue appearance. No other lesions are
evident on thorough clinical examination.
i. What differential diagnoses could
account for these signs?
ii. What further tests could be helpful?
156
156 An 11-year-old neutered male DSH cat was presented with a 3 month history of
 progressive dysphagia and ptyalism. Oral examination under anaesthesia revealed the
lesion pictured (156). What are the differential diagnoses? Suggest treatment options
for these.
163
155, 156: Answers
155 i. Differential diagnoses for bruising/ischaemia to the penis include:
Trauma to the penis, e.g. associated with mating.
Ischaemia caused by thrombosis of the ca vernous sinuses.
Bruising associated with bleeding or clotting disorders.
Balanoposthitis (inflammation of the penis and prepuce) caused by trauma,
lacerations, foreign body, neoplasia, a bscessation.
i. Further investigations that may be of help include obtaining a reproductive history,
haematology (platelet count), and clotting times {APTT, PT, fibrin degradation
products).
156 Major differential diagnoses for a proliferative sublingual lesion would be:
Oral squamous cell carcinoma.
EGC lesion.
Bacterial granuloma {e.g. Dermatop biius spp, actinomycotic mycetoma).
Mycotic granuloma fe.g. Cryptococcus neoformans, or mycetomas caused by
opportunistic fungal infections).
Foreign body reaction.
FIP granuloma.
Biopsy with or without culture would be required to differentiate these conditions.
Bacterial and fungal granulomas often arise following a penetrating wound, but they are
rare causes of oral mass lesions in cats. Treatment may include local excision/debulking
of infected tissue. Actinomyces and Dermatopbiius infections respond to penicillins,
whereas sulphonamides (sulfonamides) are recommended for Nocardia mycetomas.
Cryptococcosis more commonly affects the nasal cavity {via inhalation) although spread
or penetration to the mouth can occur. Treatment is with debulking and systemic
antifungal agents {itraconazole, fluconazole, amphotericin B). Rarely, FIP has been
reported to cause oral granulomas; biopsies (possibly with immunohistochemistry)
would be diagnostic and no treatment is successful.
The major differential diagnoses for this cat would be EGC and squamous cell
carcinoma (sublingual tissue, especially caudal to the frenulum is a predilection site
for the latter). Squamous cell carcinoma is difficult to treat: surgery is usually not
possible without loss of lingual function. Radiation and photodynamic therapy may
be palliative, but the prognosis is very poor. Palliative treatment may also be tried
with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (COX-2 inhibitors).
Biopsy in this cat revealed the lesion to be an eosinophilic granuloma. Treatment
involved searching for an underlying allergen {unsuccessful in this case) and
symptomatic therapy. The cat failed to show any response to antibiotic therapy but
there was rapid regression with oral prednisolone.
164
157, 158: Questions
157 The intra-oral nasal
157
radiograph (157) is from
a 9-year-old neutered
male DSH cat with pro-
 gressive signs of sneezing
and mucopurulent nasal
discharge. The discharge
is bilateral but more
marked on the left side.
i. From the radiograph, is
it possible to determine
whether this is a tumour
 or chronic rhinitis?
ii. Briefly, how would
material be obtained from
the nasal cavity to diag-
nose neoplasia?
158
158 A lateral thoracic and abdominal radiograph (158) is taken of a 1-year-old
neutered male DSH cat with a 4-5 month history of lethargy, weight loss, and mild
inspiratory dyspnoea. These signs are non-progressive.
i. What abnormalities are evident on the radiograph?
ii. What is the diagnosis?
m. Are there any other diagnostic tests which can be performed for confirmation?
16.5
157, 158: Answers
157 i. From clinical and radiographic signs it is impossible to differentiate tumour
from lateralized chronic rhinitis in this cat. There is an increase in the soft tissue
density in the nasal cavity (much more marked on the left than the right), there is
evidence of loss of turbinates on the left, and deviation of the septum to the right.
Retrospective studies have shown that “aggressive' radiological findings including an
increase in soft tissue density, lysis of the turbinates and/or facial bones, and lysis or
deviation of the nasal septum can be seen with both chronic rhinitis and neoplasia
and do not help in their differentiation radiographically. However, entirely or
predominantly unilateral aggressive signs are more likely to be due to neoplasia. In
this case, subsequent investigations revealed chronic rhinitis and not a neoplasm.
i. Tissue can be obtained for cytology/histology by a number of means. Nasal
flushings are least likely to yield representative material. Traumatic nasal flushings
using a catheter with nicks cut along the length to “rasp' the nasal mucosa while
flushing through sterile saline have been recommended and, if there is a large mass,
"core' biopsies can sometimes be obtained using an open-ended rigid catheter that is
inserted into the mass while gentle suction is applied via a syringe. However,
generally the use of endoscopic grab biopsy forceps yields a good tissue harvest with
minimal trauma and a good diagnostic yield. These can be inserted "blind’ via the
nares to obtain grab biopsies fensuring they are not inserted beyond the level of the
medial canthus), or can be inserted alongside a small rigid endoscope for guided
biopsy if required. Forced nasal flushings (with the pharynx packed, the nozzle of a
10-20 ml syringe filled with sterile saline is placed in one nares, the other is occluded
and the saline flushed through under pressure) or retroflexed nasopharyngoscopy can
be useful for obtaining tissue from caudal nasal masses.
158 i. The radiograph reveals an increase in soft tissue density in the ventral thorax
possibly with some retraction of the caudal lung lobes consistent with the presence of
pleural fluid. The trachea is elevated and the cardiac silhouette is obscured. The
outline of the diaphragm is obscured and there is a suggestion of a loss of integrity of
the diaphragm ventrally. There is poor abdominal contrast consistent with a thin cat
but the abdomen also appears 'empty' consistent with loss of some of the viscera.
il. Diaphragmatic rupture with abdominal contents present in the thoracic cavity.
m. Ultrasound examination of the chest and abdomen is likely to be most helpful in
confirming this suspicion and ruling out other possibilities such as neoplasia and
cardiac disease. If ultrasound is not available, a barium contrast study may be helpful.
In this case, ultrasound examination confirmed diaphragmatic rupture as the cause
of the radiographic abnormalities and surgical correction was performed. Careful
postoperative monitoring is important {for at least 48 hours following surgery) as,
with chronic lung lobe atelectasis, post-inflation oedema can be a severe complication.
166
159, 160: Questions
159
R
159 The lateral abdominal contrast cystogram (159) is taken from an 8-year-old
neutered female DSH cat with recurrent signs of dysuria and pollakiuria.
i. What is revealed on the ra diograph?
ii. What are the differential diagnoses and what further investigations should be per-
formed?
jii. Assuming this is a case of idiopathic cystitis what treatment options should be
considered?
160 Microscopic examina-
160
tion of mucosal brushings
from the stomach of a 4-
year-old Abyssinian cat
with persistent vomiting
revealed the spiral bacteria
shown (160).
i. What are these most
likely to be, and what is
their significa nce?
i拉i. How should treatment
be attempted?
10 μm
167
159, I60: Answers
159 i. The cystogram demonstrates a generalized increased bladder wall thickness.
i. The thickening is uniform and smooth suggesting it is a result of inflammation
rather than neoplasia. There are no filling defects indicative of cystic calculi, but a
 plain and double-contrast radiograph (and/or ultrasonography) would be necessary to
exclude this completely. Additionally, a catheter or cystocentesis urine sample should
be analysed and submitted for culture. If the findings suggested sterile cystitis, a
diagnosis of idiopathic cystitis can be made by exclusion.
m. Treatment of idiopathic cystitis is controversial. There may be multiple underlying
aetiologies explaining some of the variability in observed responses. Encouraging the
production of large volumes of more dilute urine, and more frequent urination appears
to be consistently helpful. This is achieved by feeding moist {canned) rather than dry
food, by adding additional fluid to the diet and by encouraging the cat to drink fe.g.
provide running water or rain water). Preventing obesity, encouraging exercise, and
providing adequate clean litter trays may also encourage more frequent urination.
Unless there is very heavy crystalluria or a risk of urethral blockage (male cats), the use
of diets specifically to prevent crystal formation is generally not indicated.
 Few drugs have been demonstrated to have any effcacy in the long-term management of
refractory cases of idiopathic cystitis. Amitriptyline (2.5-10 mg/cat orally daily) may help to
reduce the frequency and severity of clinical signs in some cats. Glycosaminoglycan replacers
such as pentosan polysulphate and N-acetyl gluoosamine anecdotally help some cats.
160 i. This picture shows a typical GHLO. As with most GHLO recovered from cats
it is relatively large (S-10 μm), suggesting it is most likely to be Helicobacter
beilmannii or a H. beitmanni-like organism.
Helicobacter spp. are Gram-negative spiral organisms found in the stomach,
intestines, and liver of various species. Studies have shown widespread gastric
colonization of cats with GHLO, irrespective of whether there is gastric disease.
In humans, H. pylori is a well recognized cause of gastritis and gastric ulceration, but
the relationship of other Helicobacter species to disease is often less clear. Cats
experimentally infected with H. pylori develop chronic gastritis with moderate to marked
inflammation, but H. pylori is a small Helicobacter (measuring 1.5-3 μm) and infection
al saoads aaiel e si saf aaonqoa 'sieo ul auei Aiaa aq oi sieadde saoads sui y
H. beilmarni), and this can induce gastritis in cats following experimental infection, but
again natural infection with this species appears to be rare. Currently, there is little or no
evidence that infection with H. belmanni or H. belmanni-like organisms causes
appreciable gastric pathology in cats and these are the species most commonly found.
il. Although most infections are probably asymptomatic, the difficulty in identifying
the Helicobacter species involved can make trial therapy justified where the organism
is identified in association with significant gastric inflammation. Combination thera py
with metronidazole {20 mg/kg/day), amoxicillin {20 mg/kg twice daily), and
omeprazole (0.5-1.0 mg/kg twice daily) has been recommended.
168
161, I162: Questions
161 A 3-year-old neutered male DSH cat developed
161
pollakiuria and dysuria; the owner collected a urine
sample (161). Within 2 days the cat developed
repeated unproductive attempts to urinate. Physical
examination revealed a distended bladder.
i. What does the urine sample show?
ii. What is the most common cause of the signs
shown by the cat, and what differential diagnoses
should be considered?
iii. Describe how immediate relief of this cat's
problem should be attempted.
AINO3
gland
162
3
162 The picture (162) shows a kidney removed from a cat at post mortem.
i. Comment on the size of this kidney and how renal size is normally assessed ante
mortem.
ii. Is speculation on the diagnosis possible from the gross appearance in this case?
ii. In general, what are the indications and preca utions for renal biopsy?
169
161, 162: Answers
161 i. The urine sample shows macroscopic evidence of haematuria or haemoglobi-
nuria for even potentially myoglobinuria}.
i. Additional testing, and in particular urine sediment analysis would be needed to
characterize the changes further, but haematuria and cystitis would be highly likely.
Major differential diagnoses for the initial clinical signs would be idiopathic
{sterile) cystitis, urolithiasis, infectious cystitis, and lower urinary tract neoplasia. Of
these, in a young adult cat, idiopathic sterile cystitis would be most common. The
Obstruction can occur for various reasons (uroliths, neoplasia) but it is most com-
monly due to a relatively soft urethral 'plug', composed of a proteinaceous matrix
with various cellular debris and crystals trapped within it.
m. If the cat is meta bolically stable, relief of the urethral obstruction is the first treat-
ment objective, but prior diagnostic imaging (radiography and/or ultrasonography)
will help to establish if a urolith is present. Gentle digital massage of the penile and
pelvic urethra followed by gentle bladder compression occasionally results in
extrusion of the urethral plug. If this is unsuccessful, sedation or anaesthesia may be
needed to allow catheterization with a soft, atraumatic, open-ended, lubricated
catheter. Flushing of the urethral lumen with large volumes of sterile saline may allow
softening, removal, or retropulsion of the plug. If this is unsuccessful, decompressive 
cystocentesis should be performed to prevent complications associated with ARF.
162 i. The kidney pictured is close to 60 mm in length and thus clearly enlarged.
Renal size can be determined subjectively by abdominal palpation, but is better
determined by radiography or ultrasonography.
On a VD radiograph, the normal renal size varies between 2.0 and 3.0 times the
length of L2. Ultrasonographically, normal renal size in cats varies between 30 and
44mm.
 i. The kidney pictured is grossly enlarged and multiple pale lesions varying in size
lesions are slightly raised giving an uneven surface to the kidney.
The lesions suggest a multifocal infiltrative or inflammatory disease. Major
differential diagnoses would be lymphoma, FIP, and mycobacterial infection. In this
case histology confirmed the diagnosis of FIP.
m. A fine needle aspirate is usually sufficient to diagnose lymphoma; renal biopsy is
 indicated to confirm suspected FIP or other focal infilrative/inflammatory diseases. Renal
biopsy (for histology and culture) can also be valuable in investigation of significant
proteinuria and in other cases of renal disease where the results could lead to significantly
improved therapy (e.g. pyelonephritis). Renal biopsy should only be performed after
careful patient evaluation and assessment of the risk:benefit ratio. A coagulation profile is
essential prior to renal biopsy. Ultrasound-guided or surgical needle biopsy, ensuring that
the needle stays within the renal cortex, is likely to be the safest method.
170
163, I64: Questions
163 The haematology
一
®
163
results are received from a
7-year-old DSH cat that is
presented with a 3-week
®
history of lethargy and
 poor appetite. The blood
smear is illustrated (163).
00
i. What is the assessment
of this haemogram?
ii. What differential diag-
noses should be considered?
Parameter
Value
Reference range
Haemoglobin (g/dl)
11.8
8.0-15.0
HCT (%)
37.4
25.0-45.0
RBC (10/2/)
7.8
5.5-10.0
MCV (0)
47.6
40-55
Platelets (109/)
97
200-700
WBC (10%/)
3.21
4.9-19.0
Neutrophils (10°/)
2.05
2.412.5
Lymphocytes (10*/)
1.00
1.4-6.0
Monocytes (109/1)
0.13
0.1-0.7
Eosinophils (109/)
0.03
0.1-1.6
Smear comment: platelet clumps seen. platelets plentiful.
164 A 10-year-old neutered
164
 male DSH cat presents with
jaundice, inappetence, and
weight loss. A lateral
 abdominal radiograph is
taken (164).
i. What abnormalities can
be seen?
ii.
What are the major
differential diagnoses?
. Briefly, how would liver
tissue be obtained for fur-
ther investigations and what are the advantages/disadvantages of the possible methods?
171
163, 164: Answers
163 i. A leucopenia comprising a neutropenia, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia is
present. Although the machine platelet count is low, platelet clumping and adequate
numbers of platelets were noted on the blood smear. Platelet clumping is a common
phenomenon with feline blood that accounts for falsely low machine platelet counts.
i. Differential diagnoses for leucopenia include:
Toxic bone marrow suppression caused by, for example, exposure to drugs (e.g.
chemotherapy agents such as cyclophosphamide, antibiotics including
chloramphenicol, idiosyncratic drug reactions), hea vy metals, or other chemicals.
Viral infections, e.g. FeLV, FIV, feline panleucopenia virus infections.
Increased removal, e.g. immune-mediated destruction, overwhelming sepsis.
Endotoxaemia.
Bone marrow disease resulting in reduced production of WBCs, e.g. myelodysplasia,
myeloproliferative disease, lymphoproliferative disease, myelophthisis.
Artefact ca using leucopenia, e.g. clot in sample or WBC clumping.
164 i. The most obvious abnormality on the radiograph is a marked increase in soft
tissue density in the cranial abdomen consistent with hepatomegaly. There is good
abdominal contrast and thus no evidence of ascites.
il. Major differential diagnoses for jaundice and marked hepatomegaly would be:
Non-suppurative cholangiohepatitis (lymphocytic cholangitis).
Hepatic lipidosis.
Primary or secondary hepatic neoplasia.
Hepatic amyloidosis.
Suppurative cholangiohepatitis (less likely given hepatomegaly).
ii. Diagnostic samples of liver tissue are most commonly obtained by fine needle
aspiration, needle biopsy, or surgical biopsy. Other available techniques include
laparoscopy. Before obtaining tissue samples a clotting profile should always be run
as liver disease is frequently associated with clotting abnormalities. Prolonged clotting
times may respond to vitamin K supplementation.
Fine needle aspirates are potentially the most misleading of the tissue samples
obtaina ble. Although they may be diagnostic for diffuse, generalized disease such
as lipidosis or lymphoma, they can also be misleading and may miss the presence
of other significant disease (e.g. cholangiohepatitis associated with lipidosis).
 Needle biopsies (ideally performed with ultrasound guidance to obtain representative
tissue) are more reliable than fine needle aspirates and are suitable for diagnosis
of most hepatic pathologies. However, a substantial proportion of needle biopsy
diagnoses are at variance with wedge biopsy or post-mortem diagnoses.
Wedge biopsies collected at surgery are the most reliable method of obtaining
diagnostic material and should be considered when equivocal, unexpected, or
non-diagnostic samples are obtained by other means.
172
165, 166: Questions
165
165 i. What type of tube is being placed for nutritional support in this cat {165)?
ii. Briefly, how would this tube be placed and what are its advantages and
disa dvantages?
166
166 The lateral thoracic radiograph (166) is from a 7-year-old neutered male Burmese
cat with dyspnoea.
i. What changes can be seen on this radiograph?
ii. What type of dyspnoea would be expected with this cat?
ii. What differential diagnoses should be considered and what is likely to be the
single most useful diagnostic test?
173
165, I66: Answers
165 i. An oesophagostomy tube is being placed.
i. Intubation requires a short general anaesthetic, with the cat in right lateral
recumbency. The left cervical region is prepared for surgery. Curved Carmalt forceps
are passed into the oesophagus via the mouth, turned outwards and opened to allow
sharp and blunt dissection from the skin into the oesophageal lumen via a small skin
incision. The distance from the incision to the ninth rib is measured and marked on
the tube, so that the tube tip is placed in the distal oesophagus. The tip of the tube is
 grasped with the forceps and drawn into the mouth (as shown). The tube is then
repositioned and pushed into the distal oesophagus past the ostomy site to the pre-
marked position, and then secured to the skin using a Chinese finger-trap suture.
Oesophagostomy tubes are suitable for long-term (several weeks) nutritional
support and have proved to be remarkably valuable with very few complications. The
larger tube diameter {typically a 10 or 12fg) allows administration of a liquidized
regular diet (although some need blending with water and sieving to remove large
particles). Rarely, infection at the ostomy site occurs, so careful and regular cleaning is
important, and the area should be dressed and protected by a neck bandage. When the
tube is removed, the ostomy site heals within 2 weeks and oesophageal strictures have
not been reported. If vomiting occurs, correct placement of the tube should be checked
(ra diography) before feeding is continued.
166 i. The radiograph demonstrates the presence of a pleural effusion. The diaphragm
appears to be intact, the liver is in a normal position, and the stomach can also be
 seen in a normal position and contains ingesta. The trachea appears elevated dorsally
- this can be seen as a result of cardiomegaly or an anterior mediastinal mass, but can
also occur simply as a result of pleural effusion. The cardiac silhouette and the
 anterior mediastinum are partly obscured due to the pleural effusion. Additional
investigations {ultrasonography or repeat radiography post drainage) would be
 necessary to evaluate the heart and anterior mediastinum.
ii. A pleural effusion will produce inspiratory dyspnoea, often with tachypnoea.
m. Major differential diagnoses for pleural effusion in the cat are:
Congestive heart failure.
FIP.
Pyothorax.
Neoplasia (lymphoma, thymoma, pulmonary carcinoma).
Haemothorax (trauma, coagulopathy).
Chylothorax.
Ruptured diaphragm (no evidence in this case).
Iatrogenic (fluid overloading).
Thoracocentesis with biochemical, cytological and possibly bacterial culture of the
fluid is the single most useful test to narrow down further the differential diagnoses.
174
167, 168: Questions
167
167 A 7-year-old neutered male Siamese cat {167) presents with unilateral muco-
purulent nasal discharge that has been present for 3-4 months. The cat has been
sneezing and the signs have been getting gradually worse. There is now some mild
epistaxis accompanying the discharge.
i. Which side is the nasal discharge and why?
ii. What are the major differential diagnoses for this presentation?
168 An ACTH-stimulation test and
168a
a T1-weighted MRI brain scan
{168a) were performed in a cat
with severe insulin-resistant dia-
betes mellitus. The ACTH stimula-
tion test protocol involved
 administering 0.125 mg synthetic
ACTH IV and taking blood
 samples at the time points stated in
the table.
i. What is the assessment of these
res ults?
ii. What alternative tests can be
done to diagnose
HAC in cats?
Cortisol nmol/l (ng/ml)
Time post-ACTH (mins)
Result
Reference range
0
450 (163)
250 (<90)
60
760 (275)
650 (<235)
120
1027 (372)
<650 (<235)
17.5
167, I68: Answers
167 i. The discharge is from the right side. Examining the picture there is a marked
difference in the hair colouration beneath the eyes on the two sides of the face, the
known to be temperature-dependent. More melanin is produced at lower tempera-
tures accounting for the darker markings of the extremities. Conversely, less melanin
is deposited at higher temperatures and the reduced pigmentation over the right nasal
area is consistent with chronic inflammation in the right side of the nose causing a
slight rise in temperature locally.
il. Major differential diagnoses for a unilateral nasal discharge would be: inflammation
(nasal polyps, rare); infection: fungal (e.g. aspergillosis, cryptococcosis); bacterial
rhinitis (often bilateral); post-viral rhinitis (often bilateral); foreign body rhinitis, e.g.
blade of grass; neoplasia, e.g. lymphoma, adenocarcinoma; chronic dental disease, e.g.
tooth root abscess; trauma, e.g. oronasal fistula.
The fact that the discharge is unilateral, progressive, and that there is now some
 associated bleeding suggests possible invasion/erosion of tissues and would be typical
of neoplasia or a fungal infection. However, on further examination this cat was
found to ha ve a tooth root abscess ca using the nasal discharge.
168 i. The ACTH results are consistent with HAC {Cushing's disease). The MRI scan
(on a T1 scan the CSF appears dark) shows that the pituitary is asymmetrically
enlarged (168b, arrowed) consistent with the presence of a pituitary macroadenoma.
i. Alternative tests include:
 Dexamethasone screening tests are preferred by some clinicians: blood samples 
are assayed for cortisol levels before, and 4 and 8 hours after administration of
0.1 mg/kg dexamethasone IV. Normal basal cortisol values are <2s0 nmol/l
(<90 ng/ml), and <30 nmol/l (<11 ng/ml) after dexamethasone.
Imaging by ultrasonography which may reveal uni- or bilateral adrenomegaly.
Adrenal calcification can be seen as an incidental radiographic finding in up to
30% of normal cats and is not indicative of adrenal neoplasia in cats.
Measurement of endogenous ACTH has recently been used in confirmed cases of
HAC in order to distinguish between pituitary and adrenal forms. Low levels of
ACTH are found in adrenal HAC; high or high-normal levels are found in
pituitary HAC cases.
UCCR: this is only useful in ruling
168b
out HAC where normal results are
obtained (normal UCCR is <30).
Stress and non-adrenal diseases may
falsely elevate the UCCR.
176
169, 170: Questions
169
169 A 2-year-old neutered female DSH cat from the UK is brought in with nodular/
crusted lesions on the face (169) and right forelimb, 2 weeks after the owners noticed
that the cat had been bitten on the leg. An impression smear reveals eosinophilic intra-
cytopla smic inclusion bodies.
i. What are the differential diagnoses and likely diagnosis?
ii. How would a definitive diagnosis be achieved?
i. How should this cat be treated?
170 An owner brings in a 9-year-old
170
neutered female domestic longhaired
cat for evaluation. A small lesion is
evident on the left nares (170).
i. What are the differential diagnoses?
ii. What is the most appropriate diag-
nostic plan?
177
169, I70: Answers
169 i. Major differential diagnoses for crusting/ulcerative nodular cutaneous lesions are:
Infectious:
Cutaneous fungal infection.
Feline leprosy.
Poxvirus.
Parapoxvirus.
Inflammatory, e.g. EGC.
Neoplasia, e.g. mast cell tumour, fibrosarcoma.
Given the presenting history and clinical and laboratory findings, poxvirus (cowpox)
infection is most likely. This is most commonly diagnosed in the autumn in cats that
enjoy hunting. Infection is usually transmitted via a bite from an infected small
mammal and causes an initial scab at the site of the bite fmost commonly face and
forelimbs). Secondary skin lesions develop over the whole body 10-20 days later.
 i. Scabs or biopsy material can be submitted for virus isolation or electron microscopy
{electron microscopy is particularly useful in identifying feline parapoxvirus which is
difficult to culture). Serology confirms exposure to this agent: high titres are strongly
supportive of the diagnosis. Histology (including immunostaining) of skin biopsies can
be used to identify virus localized in characteristic lesions.
m. In most cases, no specific treatment is required and the cat recovers. In cases where
secondary bacterial infection is present, broad-spectrum antibiotics and topical
antibacterial washes (e.g. chlorhexidine) can be used. Immunosuppression can lead to
viral dissemination and systemic disease which may be fatal to the cat. Gluco-
corticoids, progestagens, and immunosuppressive agents are therefore contra-
indicated. Feline poxvirus {cowpox) can be spread to people {usually via pre-existing
skin wounds) although this is uncommon. Infection of healthy humans can cause skin
lesions and mild systemic signs. In babies, ill, elderly, or immunosuppressed people,
systemic signs can be particularly severe and may rarely be fatal. Careful hygiene,
ideally including wearing of disposable gloves when handling the cat, should be
sufficient to prevent the spread of infection to healthy humans. Occasional cat-to-cat
transmission can occur although this is rare.
170 i. Differential diagnoses for a nasal proliferative lesion include:
 Neoplasia, e.g. basal cell tumour, squamous cell carcinoma.
Inflammatory lesions, e.g. EGC.
Infectious causes, e.g. fungal granuloma.
i. A biopsy is indicated. Tissue collected should be submitted for histology and
possibly fungal and bacterial culture. Where feasible, a portion of biopsy material
should be stored at -20°C (-4°F) in case mycobacterial culture is indicated following
histological studies. In this case, basal cell tumour was diagnosed.
178
171, 172: Questions
171
171 The picture shows a 12-year-old neutered male DSH cat with a crusting ulcerated
nasal lesion (171). Biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma.
i. What is the natural course of this disease?
i. What treatment options should be considered and what is the prognosis?
172
172 This is a patient-side FeLV test kit {172).
i. What is the kit detecting in the cat's serum?
i. How relia ble is a positive test result?
179
171, I72: Answers
171 i. Squamous cell carcinoma is a common malignant tumour of keratinocytes.
Exposure to sunlight is considered an important risk factor for the development of
these tumours and there is a precancerous stage of “actinic dermatitis' characterized
by hyperplasia, abnormal keratinocytes, erythema, and scaling. The lesions are far
more common on non-pigmented skin.
Actinic dermatitis progresses to squamous cell carcinoma in situ; i.e. squamous cell 
(otherwise referred to as non-invasive squamous cell carcinoma). This may progress to
invasive squamous cell carcinoma where the tumour breaks through the epidermal
basement membrane and invades the underlying dermis. Once this occurs, there is the
potential for metastatic spread to occur, although the tumours tend to be locally
invasive but slow to spread. Occasional cases of paraneoplastic hypercalcaemia have
been associated with squamous cell carcinoma in cats.
i. Treatment modalities include surgery and cryosurgery, radiotherapy, and photo-
dynamic therapy. External beam radiotherapy can be successful, and for superficial
lesions 90strontium plesiotherapy (a form of superficial radiotherapy) is highly
successful and causes little disfiguration. Similarly, photodynamic therapy carries a
good success rate for superficial tumours {several treatments are usually needed for
these therapies). Chemotherapy is not a succesful option.
The prognosis varies markedly with tumour stage; for squamous cell carcinoma in
situ and for small superficial tumours (<2 mm diameter), the prognosis is excellent.
172 i. FeLV patient-side test kits detect FeLV antigen (core p27 antigen) present in
serum samples.
i. No diagnostic test kit is 100% perfect. Patient-side test kits vary in their sensitivity
and specificity although many have values between 98% and 100% for both of these.
Since FeLV has a very low prevalence in the healthy cat population of most countries
(<2%), there is a real risk that a positive test result received from a healthy cat is a
false-positive result. For example:
If a test kit used has a specificity of 98% there will be two false-positive results
for every 100 cats tested.
Prevalence of true infection is 2% giving two genuinely positive results per 100
healthy cats tested.
Therefore, if 100 healthy cats are tested, two will be genuine positive and two will
be false-positive results, i.e. there is a S0% chance of a false-positive test result.
Therefore, if a healthy cat is tested and found to be positive, euthanasia should
not be undertaken. The result should be confirmed by virus isolation, PCR, or
IFA at a commercial laboratory. Since the prevalence of infection is much higher
in sick cats, false-positive results are less of an issue in this situation.
180
173, 174: Questions
173
173 A 4-year-old neutered female DSH presents with severe, recent-onset dyspnoea
(173). On clinical presentation the cat is in considerable distress, persistently breath-
ing with an open mouth and demonstrating orthopnoea. What emergency procedures
 and/or treatments should be considered to sta bilize such a patient?
174
174 i. Comment on the appearance of this kidney (length = 32 mm) (174) removed at
 post mortem from a cat with renal failure.
i. What common serum biochemical abnormalities are associated with this disease,
and what are the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of these changes?
181
I73, I74: Answers
173 Minimizing stress is essential and restraint for diagnostic imaging, even for
ultrasonography, may not be practical in some cases, necessitating symptomatic and
supportive therapy.
Oxygen therapy is usually the first priority as virtually all dyspnoeic cats will benefit
from this. If a pleural effusion or pneumothorax is suspected and diagnostic imaging
contraindicated, trial thoracocentesis is justified and can rapidly stabilize a patient.
Historical and/or clinical features may help narrow down the likely cause of the
dyspnoea, and attempts should be made to distinguish upper respiratory, pleural
space, lower respiratory, and non-respiratory disorders {e.g. anaemia) as causes of the
dyspnoea.
Although drugs should not be used indiscriminately, severe dyspnoea may be life
Sl eaoudsap aul f aieuudoudde aq Aeu adeiaul leiul, Aouaaiawa pue suuaieaiu
thought to be due to pulmonary oedema, diuresis with furosemide is recommended
and can be given by intravenous injection (typically 2-4 mg/kg). Contraindications 
would be extreme dehydration or the presence of hypokalaemia. Additionally, if
congestive heart failure is considered likely, glyceryl trinitrate {nitroglycerine)
ointment (0.2s-0.5 cm) can be applied to the inner surface of the pinna. Blood
pressure should be monitored as glyceryl trinitrate is a potent vasodilator.
If bronchoconstriction is suspected {e.g. asthmatic attack) β2-agonists can be given,
t.g. terbutaline at 10 μg/kg IV or salbutamol/albuterol by inhalation. Soluble gluco-
corticoids, e.g. prednisolone sodium succinate at 50-100 mg/cat IV, may also be useful.
174 i. This kidney shows typical changes of end-stage chronic interstitial nephritis with
extensive scarring and fibrosis causing marked distortion with little normal cortex and
medulla remaining. The size is at the bottom end of the normal range for cats.
i. CRF is characterized by azotaemia - elevation of serum urea and/or creatinine,
which are products of protein catabolism. Urea is synthesized by the liver from
ammonia, and creatinine is derived from spontaneous breakdown of phosphocreatine
in myocytes. Both are excreted by glomerular filtration and a reducing glomerular
filtration rate {nephron loss) results in their accumulation. Hyperphosphataemia is
also commonly encountered for the same reason, although compensatory
hyperparathyroidism may increase renal excretion of phosphate and maintain
normophosphataemia until later in the disease. A metabolic acidosis is common: the
kidneys excrete acid derived from metabolism of proteins and other compounds,
partly in the form of ammonium ions produced by the tubules. In CRF, increased
ammoniagenesis within remaining tubules may fail to compensate for the loss of
nephrons and thus acidosis develops. Hypokalaemia is seen in some cats and appears
to result from inappropriate kaliuresis. Hyperproteinaemia may be seen as a result of
uncompensated polyuria resulting from reduced concentrating ability of the kidneys.
182
175, 176: Questions
175 The picture shows the typical
175
appearance of Microsporum canis
colonies grown on a Sabouraud's
dextrose agar plate when viewed
from beneath (17s). This plate
was inoculated with hairs from a
cat showing alopecic/crusting
lesions around the face and one
forelimb. What systemic drugs
should be considered for use in
this cat and what are their advan-
tages/disadvantages?
176 Urinalysis (176) forms an important
176
part of the investigation of cats with
CRF. What specific aspects of urinalysis
urTest
 are of major importance and why?
183
175, I76: Answers
175 Traditionally griseofulvin {10-200 mg/kg/day orally) has been the treatment of
choice for feline dermatophytosis. However, it is fungistatic not fungicidal, it is a
recognized teratogen, and therapeutic concentrations will be maintained for
<72 hours in the stratum corneum after administration is stopped, resulting in the
requirement for long courses of treatment (many weeks). Drug-induced
myelosuppression and neutropenia have been recognized in some treated cats.
Itraconazole {10 mg/kg/day orally) has been widely used for the treatment of
dermatophytosis in cats. It is a triazole antifungal drug with a greater inherent activity
against dermatophytes than griseofulvin. Although it is still regarded as fungistatic, it
concentrates in the stratum corneum and therapeutic concentrations may be
 maintained for 2-4 weeks after cessation of therapy.
Terbinafine is an allylamine antifungal, regarded as fungicidal and having high
efficacy against dermatophytes. It has not been used as extensively in cats, but studies
suggest good efficacy with a dose of 30-40 mg/kg/day orally. As with itraconazole, the
drug concentrates well in the stratum corneum and therapeutic concentrations persist
for 2-4 weeks beyond cessation of therapy, allowing for shorter duration of treatment.
Recent interest has surrounded the use of lufenuron in dermatophytosis, but,
despite some promising initial reports, controlled trials have failed to show any
clinically valua ble efficacy with this agent.
176 Evaluation of USG fwhich must be performed with a refractometer as urine
"dipsticks" are inaccurate) is the most important analysis. To interpret serum urea and
creatinine concentrations it is essential to have a concomitant urine sample.
Generally, the presence of azotaemia with a USG <1.035 implies intrinsic renal
failure. Exceptions to this would be the administration of any drugs that might
 interfere with urine concentrating ability (e.g. diuretics, glucocorticoids) and the
presence of other diseases that may affect urine concentrating ability (e.g. hyper- and
hypoadrenocorticism, hypercalcaemia, hyperthyroidism). If these factors are
eliminated, the USG can confirm the presence of renal failure. However, a USG
>1.035 does not necessarily rule out renal failure as, unlike dogs, occasionally cats do
manage to concentrate urine quite well in the presence of renal failure.
Microscopic examination of urine sediment (± culture) is also important, as this
may provide evidence of the underlying aetiology of the renal disease or the presence
of complicating factors/disease. Inflammatory sediments may be present with
infections, and bacteria may be seen (e.g. pyelonephritis). There may also be tubular
casts of various types {fatty, waxy, hyaline) giving evidence of underlying renal
disease/pathology. Although crystalluria can b
be a normal finding, some types of
crystals may also be indicative of potential underlying disease fe.g. calcium oxalate
with nephroliths, ureteroliths, or ethylene glycol toxicity).
Quantitative assessment of proteinuria {UPC) is valuable to assess glomerular
disease, but little is known about its value in CRF per se in cats.
184
177, 178: Questions
177
177 UDCA and SAMe (177) are two drugs commonly used in the treatment of
hepatic disease, particularly inflammatory liver disease. What are these drugs and
what are their purported benefits? Are any precautions necessary with their use?
178
Feline Aerosol Chamber
178 i. What is illustrated in this picture (178)?
ii. What are the indications for its use and what drugs are commonly administered
with this?
18.5
I77, I78: Answers
177 UDCA {ursodeoxycholic acid) is a synthetic bile acid, and is unusual in that it is
hydrophilic, whereas most bile acids are lipophilic (ha ving a role in fat emulsification).
UDCA has a number of potential benefits documented in humans and other species,
principally through altering the bile acid pool. In cholestatic diseases, bile acids
accumulate in the liver and can cause cell membrane damage and cell necrosis. By
competitively replacing endogenous bile acids, the lipophobic UDCA reduces damage to
cell membranes, has a choleretic action and a potential immunomodulating role. In cats,
UDCA {15 mg/kg/day) has been demonstrated to be safe, although there may be some
increase in serum bile acid concentrations following its administration. Although
commonly used in liver disease, to date no controlled studies have assessed its efficacy.
Due to its choleretic action, its use is contraindicated if there is biliary obstruction.
SAMe {S-adenosyl methionine) is derived from methionine and ATP, and
approximately S0% of the daily methionine intake is normally used for this purpose.
SAMe plays a major role in many cellular biochemical processes and is involved in the
production of glutathione, a major cellular antioxidant. In liver disease, levels of both
SAMe and glutathione are commonly depleted. Depletion of both can be reversed by
SAMe supplementation, which may result in amelioration of various toxic and
inflammatory liver diseases. A dose of 1s-20 mg/kg/day is commonly recommended.
178 i. The picture illustrates a 'spacer' device for administration of medications via a MDI.
i. A MDI delivers an aerosol containing a specified dose of medication and is widely
used for treatment of chronic bronchitis and asthma. MDIs are typically designed for
use in adult humans where actuation of the MDI {aerosolization of a dose) can be
timed to coincide with a deep intake of breath. This, however, is impractical in animals 
{and neonatal/paediatric humans). The alternative is to use a spacer with a breathing
mask that incorporates a one-way valve. The MDI is actuated, delivering the aerosol
into the spacer, and the cat can then inhale the medication by placement of the nose
and mouth in the close-fitting face mask and allowing normal respiration for 15-30
seconds. The device pictured ('Aerokat') has been specifically designed for feline use.
The two most common drugs administered via this route are β2-adrenergics and
glucocorticoids. The β2-adrenergics are bronchodilators. The two commonly used
 agents are salbutamol/albuterol (onset of action S-10 minutes, maximum duration
2-4 hours) which can be used as required; and salmeterol (slower onset, but duration
of action of around 12 hours) which may be prefera ble for long-term use.
Fluticasone propionate given twice daily is a commonly recommended gluco-
corticoid, having high potency but virtually no systemic absorption and therefore no
uo (aieuoidoidip auoseuawoioaq dra) spioouosoona iadeauo soae apis siuaisas
also be used, but at high doses they may have systemic effects. High-strength MDIs of
these products (generally 200-250 μg/actuation) have been used in cats.
186
179, 180: Questions
179 The oral cavity of a
6L1
cat {179) and the accom-
panying blood results are
presented.
i. What is the assessment
of this haemogram?
i. What diagnostic test is
appropriate next?
Parameter
Value
Reference range
Haemoglobin (g/dl)
4.4
8-15
HCT (%)
14
25-45
RBC (10/2/)
5.5-10.0
MCV (m)
42.2
40-55
Platelets (10°/)
7
200-700
WBC (10*/)
3.80
5-19
Neutrophils (109/)
2.28
2.5-12.5
Lymphocytes (109/)
1.14
1.5-6.0
Monocytes (109/)
0.15
0.1-0.7
Eosinophils (10*/)
0.23
1.5
Smear: Platelets sparse, thrombocytopenia.
180 This cestode (180) was recovered
180
from the small intestine of an adult
cat in the UK.
i. What is the most likely species and
what is its intermediate host?
ii. What other common cestodes
affect cats and what are their inter-
mediate hosts?
ii. What treatment(s) should be recom-
mended for cestode infections?
187
179, I80: Answers
179 i. The cat has a marked pancytopenia - reduced levels of all cells produced by the
bone marrow {RBCs, WBCs, and platelets) and there is evidence of petechial
haemorrhage in the mouth. Causes of pancytopenia include:
Toxic insults to the bone marrow caused by exposure to drugs such as griseo-
fulvin and chloramphenicol, or hea vy metals such as thallium.
Bone marrow disorders such as myeloproliferative and lymphoproliferative
disorders, myelophthisis, myelofibrosis, immune-mediated destruction, idiopathic
marrow hypoplasia.
Infectious causes, e.g. FeLV, FIV, FIP, histoplasmosis (Histoplasma capsulatum),
tularaemia (Francisella tularensis).
i. A bone marrow aspirate is indicated and consideration given to blood transfusion.
180 i. This cestode is most likely to be Taenia taeniaformis; the characteristic
appearance and location in the cat would strongly suggest this. It has a worldwide
distribution, with cats being the definitive host. As with all Taenia species, there is a
mammalian intermediate host which in this case is a rodent (mouse, rat) or occasion-
ally rabbit. Infected cats are asymptomatic, but motile proglottids may be seen in the
faeces or on the perineal fur.
il. Dipylidium caninum is the most common cestode infection of cats, but the adults
are narower and shorter than Taenia species. Flea larvae ingest the Dipylidiu eggs,
and cats are infected when they ingest adult fleas during grooming.
Other geographically widespread cestodes of cats include Mescestoides lineatus;
the first intermediate host of this parasite is unknown, but presumed to be an
arthropod, with numerous animals {amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals) acting as
the second intermediate host.
Other cestodes with more limited geographical distribution include:
Dipbyllobotbrium latum (mainly northern and eastern Europe and Japan,
intermediate host is fish}.
Spirometra erinaceieuropaei (mainly in Europe, South America, Asia, and
Australia; intermediate hosts are amphibians, reptiles, and rodents).
Spirometra mansonoides (mainly in America; intermediate hosts are amphibians
reptiles, and rodents).
Diplopylidium acanthotetra, D. nolleri, and foyeuxiella pasqualei (mainly
southern Europe and Middle East; intermediate hosts are lizards).
Joyeuxiella fubrmanni and J. ecbinorbyncoides (mainly Africa; intermediate hosts
are lizards).
ini. Praziquantel is the most useful drug for cestodes in general. Some species
(Dipbyllobothrium, Spirometra, Diplopylidium, Joyeuxiella) require a higher dose
(30-35 mg/kg) than the standard one (5-10 mg/kg).
188
181, 182: Questions
181
182
182 A 6-year-old neutered male DSH cat
 presents with lethargy, inappetence, and
intermittent vomiting.
i. What is the most obvious abnormality
illustrated (182)?
181 Laboratory results are shown
ii. What are the two most common forms
(below) for a 10-year-old DSH (181) that
of inflammatory liver disease in cats, and
has been presented with a history of
how should these be treated?
chronic weight loss in spite of a good
appetite.
i. What is the interpretation of these
res ults?
ii. What further tests would be helpful?
Serum biochemistry
Parameter
Result
Reference range
Urea mmol/l (mg/dl)
8.9 (24.9)
6.0-10.5 (17.0-29.0)
Creatinine μmoll (mg/dl)
112 (1.6)
<175 (<2.0)
 Phosphate mmol/l (mg/dl)
1.6 (5.0)
0.95-1.95 (2.9-6.0)
Glucose mmoll (mg/dl)
15.6 (281)
3.5-7.5 (60-135)
Total protein g/l (g/dl)
77 (7.7)
55-80 (5.5-8.0)
Albumin g/l (g/dl)
34 (3.4)
24-35 (2.4-3.5)
Globulin g/l (g/d)
43 (4.3)
2 1-50 (2.1-5.0)
Alanine aminotransferase (IU/)
178
15-45
Alkaline phosphatase (IU/l)
124
15-60
189
181, 182: Answers
181 i. Renal function appears normal on the basis of these results; however, the liver
enzymes {ALT, ALP) are elevated and there is a hyperglycaemia. Causes of raised liver
enzymes would include a primary hepatopathy or these changes could be secondary
to another disease such as hyperthyroidism or diabetes mellitus. The raised blood
glucose result is consistent with either stress or diabetes mellitus.
i. Repeating the blood glucose test may be helpful in assessing if the elevation is due
to stress or diabetes mellitus. Another option would be to send the cat home and ask
the owner to try to collect a urine sample in a few days' time when the cat will
presumably be less stressed. Another useful test would be serum fructosamine levels.
An elevation in serum fructosamine indicates that there has been significant hyper-
glycaemia during the previous 2-3 weeks and therefore helps to discriminate between
stress -induced hyperglycaemia and diabetes mellitus.
Serum total thyroxine levels should be measured to rule out hyperthyroidism
before investigations of liver function which might include pre- and post-prandial bile 
 acid measurement, radiography, ultrasonography, and liver biopsy.
182 i. This cat is showing marked icterus fjaundice). The mucous membranes and
sclera are the easiest sites to detect icterus.
i. The common inflammatory hepatopathies in cats can be broadly divided into
suppurative and non-suppurative cholangiohepatitis.
Suppurative cholangiohepatitis is characterized by a neutrophilic portal/periportal
infiltrate, often containing degenerate neutrophils within dilated bile ducts. This
usually results from a bacterial infection ascending from the duodenum. Escberichid
coli is the most common organism isolated, but others include Stapbylococcus,
Streptococcus, Clostridia, and Bacteroides spp. Antibiotics should ideally be based on
culture and sensitivity results. Antibiotics that are concentrated/excreted in bile
 include penicillins, cephalosporins, and fluoroquinolones. Metronidazole can be
valua ble if anaerobes are suspected/cultured.
Non-suppurative cholangiohepatitis probably encompasses a number of disease
syndromes. A mixed inflammatory infiltrate is seen in some, whereas there is a
predominance of lymphocytes and plasma cells in the portal/periportal areas of others
(lymphocytic cholangitis' or lymphocytic portal hepatitis'). The inflammation can be
accompanied by marked bridging fi brosis. An immune-mediated pathogenesis is often
suspected in cases with marked lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, and these are
frequently treated initially with immunosuppressive doses of glucocorticoids. Other
sl asuodsau aul jl pasn aie (aiexaouaw 1o jonqweouo s'a) saaissauddnsounwul
poor. Cases characterized by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate are commonly treated
with anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids initially. Additional therapy may
include antifibrotic agents {e.g. colchicine), UDCA, SAMe and, dietary manipulation.
190
183, 184: Questions
183
183 The fluid (183) has been aspirated from the pleural space of a cat presented for
dyspnoea. The fluid has a total protein content of 32 g/l {3.2 g/dl) and an albumin
content of 19 g/l {1.9 g/dl). There are 3.8 x 10*/l nucleated cells, and numerous
erythrocytes (PCV 2.2%).
i. What are the three classical categories of pleural/ascitic fluid and how should this
fluid be characterized?
i. How does this type of characterization help in narrowing down differential
diagnoses of pleural or ascitic effusions?
184
184 A 6-year-old neutered male DSH cat presents with crusting lesions around the
mouth (184), ears, ventral abdomen, and nail beds. Histopathology reveals
subcorneal pustules with acantholytic keratinocytes.
i. What is this disease?
ii. What is its cause and how should it be treated?
mi. What is the prognosis for the cat?
191
183, I84: Answers
183 i. Fluids are typically classified as transudates, modified transudates, and
exudates. Approximate values for these are:
Transudates: these are usually clear fluids with a low total protein {<10 g/l
[1 g/dll} and nucleated cell count {<1.0 x 1o*/l] in which mesothelial cells are
usually dominant.
Modified transudates: these have variable appearance {clear or cloudy, and
usually yellow or pink) and have moderate amounts of protein (10-s0 g/l
[1-5 g/dl]) and nucleated cells (1-5 x 109/l). The predominant cell type varies
according to the aetiology. The fluid in the question falls into this category.
Exudates: these have a high total protein (>35 g/l [3.5 g/d]} and nucleated cell
count {usually >5 x 109/l). They can be clear, cloudy, or opaque and vary in
colour from yellow to brown.
 i. Although such a classification scheme is arbitrary, it can be helpful in narrowing
down differential diagnoses. A pure transudate suggests passive loss of fluid from
vessels into the pleural/peritoneal space through lack of oncotic pressure
(hypoalbuminaemia). The higher cell and protein content of modified transudates
suggest loss of fluid at least in part by raised intracapillary pressure fe.g. congestive
heart failure or vascular occlusion secondary to neoplasia or ruptured diaphragm).
The high cell and protein content of exudates suggests loss of integrity of blood
vessels such as may occur with vasculitis {e.g. FIP) or secondary to infection {e.g.
pyothora x, bacterial peritonitis).
184 i. The clinical signs and histopathology in this cat are typical of pemphigus foliaceous.
ii. Pemphigus foliaceous is an autoimmune skin disease with deposition of
autoantibodies in the epidermis targeted against intercellular adhesion molecules
(ca dherin desmosomal glycoproteins) ca using loss of cellular adhesion.
Pemphigus foliaceous lesions most commonly affect the nose and ears, but lesions
may be more generalized and affect the nail beds and foot pads. The primary lesions are
vesicles, bullae, or pustules. However, these are relatively superficial in the epidermis
and are very fragile, so are rarely seen. Erosions and ulcers with crusting and exudation
are therefore the common signs. Cytology of exudate may be helpful diagnostically as it
may reveal the rounded acantholytic keratinocytes typical of the disease, and immuno-
fluorescence can be used to demonstrate the deposition of antibodies in the lesions.
m. The prognosis for pemphigus foliaceous is good with most cases responding well
to immunosuppressive therapy, although prolonged and sometimes life-long therapy
may be required. Glucocorticoids are the treatment of choice (e.g. 2-4 mg/kg/day oral
prednisolone, followed by a reducing dose when in remission). If glucocorticoid-
sparing therapy is needed, chlorambucil often produces good results.
192
185, 186: Questions
185
185 This 10-year-old neutered female DSH cat (185) has a history of polydipsia/polyuria,
weight loss, and intermittent vomiting.
i. What is the most obvious feature this cat is displaying?
ii. What differential diagnoses should be considered?
ifi. What are the priorities for further investigation?
186
186 An owner brings in a 6-year-old neutered male DSH cat (186, right) for a routine
booster vaccination and check-up. The cat weighs 11 kg and is noticeably obese.
How can obesity be assessed in a clinical situation?
193
185, I86: Answers
185 i. This cat is showing ventroflexion of the neck, a classic sign of neuromuscular
weakness.
'sauiedoru snouaunu Aq pasneo aq ueo pue uais leou syioads e iou si siul 'H
ne uropathies, or 'junctionopathies'.
Neuropathies: chronic organophosphate poisoning, thiamine deficiency, chronic re-
lapsing polyradiculoneuropathy, toxoplasmosis, paraneoplastic disease, botulism.
Polymyopathies: inflammatory/infectious (toxoplasmosis, immune-mediated,
possibly retrovirus-associated), metabolic (hypokalaemia, hypernatraemia), para-
neoplastic, hyperthyroid-associated, HAC.
Junctionopathies: myasthenia gravis {congenital, acquired, paraneoplastic),
 Orga nophosphate intoxication.
Hypokalaemia is probably the single most common cause of this type of presentation.
In this cat, the accompanying clinical signs fpolydipsia, polyuria, weight loss, and
intermittent vomiting) would be strongly suggestive of hypokalaemia secondary to
CRF. However, hyperthyroidism would also be an important differential, as would
paraneoplastic disease fe.g. with hypercalcaemia causing polyuria and polydipsia ).
fi. Priorities for further investigation would be a thorough history, physical and
neurological examination. A neurological examination should aim to detect any
specific deficits, and distinguish muscle weakness from neurological disease (e.g. by
careful assessment of proprioceptive responses). Initial screening blood tests should
include serum biochemistry (including CK, urea, creatinine, calcium, phosphate,
sodium, potassium, thyroxine) and urinalysis.
186 Several methods are available for the assessment of obesity:
Relative bodyweight can be calculated by dividing the cat's actual weight by its
estimated optimum weight. Obese animals weigh >120% of their optimum
weight although it has been suggested that health concerns do not exist until the
cat has a relative bodyweight >140%. Most domestic cats have optimal body
weights between 3.2 and 4.5 kg, and cats weighing >6.5 kg are likely to be obese
unless they have a very large body frame.
Body condition scoring is a subjective scoring system. Systems with five categories
(1-5) are used to give the cat a score which describes its condition, 3.0 being
normal condition. Intervention is advised in cats with a body condition score >4.0.
Morphometric techniques have been described as a way of assessing obesity.
Specific measurements are taken and used with the cat's bodyweight in kg to
equations. Individual measurements fe.g. the pelvic circumference which is the
abdominal circumference in front of the hindlimbs) can be used to monitor
progress of obese cats on a weight reduction regime, although reproducibility of
these measurements can be difficult to guarantee.
194
187, 188: Questions
187
187 i. What is demonstrated in these kidneys (187) removed from a cat with CRF at
post mortem?
i. What is the current optimal way to detect the disease ante mortem, and at what
age can this be done?
mi. How is the disease inherited and how could it be controlled?
188
188 A 6-year-old neutered male Birman is presented with acute onset of depression,
lethargy, weakness, and vomiting. The owner has observed the cat chewing on leaves
of a plant (188).
i. What is this plant and the likely result following ingestion of it?
ii. What general supportive treatment should be provided for this toxicity and how
should the likely major complications be addressed?
19.5
187, 188: Answers
187 i. These kidneys demonstrate the classic changes of PKD, an inherited disease in
pedigree Longhair and related breeds.
. Currently the responsible gene has not been identified, and routine diagnosis is
based on renal ultrasonography. With appropriate expertise and equipment (high-
definition ultrasound machine with a minimum 7.5 MHz transducer), ultrasonography
can be very reliable. With an experienced ultrasonographer, its accuracy has been
reported to be around 98% in cats aged 10 months or older. Screening younger cats is
possible, but if found to be negative they should be re-screened at 10 months due to
the greater sensitivity and reliability (presence of larger cysts) at this age.
m. The disease is inherited as an autosomal dominant gene. Breeding studies suggest
the homozygote state is lethal (PKD homozygotes die in utero), and that affected cats
are all heterozygotes, thus:
Every cat with the abnormal gene will have PKD (there are no unaffected carriers).
Only one parent needs to be affected with PKD in order to pass the condition on.
Every breeding cat with PKD will pass the disease on to a proportion of its kittens.
Cats should not be bred from until scanned as above and, to eliminate the disease,
affected cats should not be bred. Approved registration schemes are available in some
countries (e.g. the Feline Advisory Bureau PKD scheme in the UK).
188 i. The plant is a Tiger Lily and both the leaves and flowers are known to be toxic
to cats causing severe ARF, although the precise toxin is unknown. Although highly
toxic, recovery is possible in many cases with adequate supportive care.
il. Aggressive treatment of ARF involves intravenous fluid administration, with mild
volume overload to promote urine production and diuresis. If oliguria persists
(<1-2 ml/kg/hr) then furosemide {2-6 mg/kg IV) and/or mannitol (0.25-0.5 g/kg IV)
can be administered to promote urine production. Other supportive care such as H2-
antagonists, antiemetics, and nutritional support may be required.
The major metabolic consequences of ARF are hyperkalaemia and acidosis which
can be profound. Mild changes may respond to intravenous fluid therapy but severe
changes need prompt therapy. Severe hyperkalaemia (>8 mmol/l [>8 mEq/l]) requires
0.5-1.0 ml/kg 10% calcium gluconate slowly IV to provide cardioprotection. Sodium
acidosis and hyperkalaemia. Additionally 1 g/kg 20% glucose can be given IV with or
without approximately 0.2 U/kg soluble insulin to cause cellular uptake of potassium.
Careful monitoring of response (potassium, glucose, and acid-base status) is required.
Severe acidosis (pH <7.15) requires bicarbonate therapy using 1-2 mmol or mEq per
kg slowly IV or calculated from: 0.3 x bodyweight (kg) x (desired bicarbonate -
measured bicarbonate). Half of the calculated dose is given IV over 20-30 minutes
and the remainder added to the intravenous fluids. The dose required varies between
cases though, and should be adjusted according to response.
196
189, 190: Questions
189
189 i. What are the main health concerns in obese cats {189)?
ii. How should obese cats be managed?
190
190 A breeder is worried about one of her 2-day-old kittens, which is depressed and
passing bloody urine. She has brought in the blood-stained bed {190). The breeder is
concerned that the kitten may have neonatal isoerythrolysis.
i. What is neonatal isoerythrolysis?
i. How can this be prevented?
197
189, I90: Answers
189 i. In man, obesity is associated with increased mortality related to cardiovascular
disease, diabetes mellitus, and cancer. Obese cats are at an increased risk of a range of
problems including:
Metabolic problems, e.g. insulin resistance, hyperlipidaemia, glucose intolerance,
hepatic lipidosis.
Endocrine diseases, e.g. diabetes mellitus.
Physical problems caused by the obesity, e.g. reduced mobility, joint pain,
dyspnoea, dystocia, exercise intolerance, heat intolerance.
eul Areuun iamol aual apou Aiisaqo oi payul saseasi paisasans rauio
disease and hypertension.
 i. The first important step will be in persuading the owner that their cat is obese and
that this is increasing its risk of health problems. A weight reduction strategy that
involves achievable targets for slow, sustained weight loss is recommended. Options
for this include dietary management (altering the amount and types of food that the
cat is offered and how it is fed) as well as increasing the amount of exercise that the
cat is receiving. Restricting the amount of the cat's normal diet that is fed is one
option, although this may result in deficiency of some nutrients since commercial cat
foods are formulated to provide maintenance requirements of all nutrients when fed
at a normal energy requirement. Feeding specific "weight loss" diets eliminates this
problem. A target bodyweight is calculated (initially this should not involve >15%
weight loss) and the cat is fed 60% of its maintenance requirements. In severely obese
cats a second target weight may need to be calculated once the first target is reached.
Re-weighing at fortnightly intervals is important to monitor the patient.
190 i. Blood type B cats have high levels of naturally occurring antibodies directed at
the blood type A antigen. Prior exposure to type A blood is not required to trigger
antibody production. Neonatal isoerythrolysis occurs when a queen with blood type
B is mated to a tom with blood type A. The kittens born will be mostly or entirely
blood type A since the gene for type A is dominant. Type B queens pass high levels of
anti-A antibodies to the kittens via the colostrum in the first 24 hours, and this causes
severe haemolysis, haemoglobinaemia, and haemoglobinuria. Neonatal isoerythrolysis
can also occur when type AB kittens are born to a type B queen. It is not a problem in
aonpoid Alleiauas iou op sies y adki se suany g adki ot yuq Suiaia suaanb y adki
naturally occurring antibodies to other blood type antigens.
i. Breeds of cats with a high prevalence of blood type B (e.g. British Shorthairs,
 Birmans, Rex, Persians) are at particular risk of neonatatal isoerythrolysis, and blood
typing prior to mating is recommended so that type B queens can be mated only to
type B toms. If this is not possible then the kittens' cord blood can be typed at the
aui iof paueai-iaisoy aq Pinous suaanb g adki oi uuoq suauy v adAi yiu jo au
first 24 hours while colostral antibodies can be absorbed across their bowel.
198
191, 192: Questions
161
191 Potassium supplementation (191) is commonly recommended in cats with CRF.
What is the relationship between potassium and CRF in the cat, and what is the
rationale for potassium supplementation?
192 An 18-month-old neutered male
192
DSH cat is presented soon after being hit
by a car. Clinical examination reveals
paralysis of the tail. The cat is admitted
for observation and given intravenous
fluids and analgesia. Over the following
12 hours, although relatively bright, the
cat fails to make any attempts to urinate
and the bladder is palpably distended. A
VD pelvic radiograph is taken (192).
i. What abnormality is evident on this
radiograph?
ii. How should this case be managed?
i. What is the long-term prognosis in
this case?
199
191, 192: Answers
191 Potassium depletion has been recognized as a complicating feature of feline CRF
for many years. Some cats develop excessive urinary loss of potassium as part of their
nephropathy, but the precise mechanism(s) involved is uncertain. CRF has been
identified as the single most common cause of significant hypokalaemia in cats.
Additionally, studies have shown that feeding an acidifying, potassium-depleted diet
to healthy cats can induce renal disease and histological changes of chronic interstitial
nephritis.
Moderate to severe hypokalaemia (serum potassium <3 mmol/l [<3 mEq/l]) is
relatively common in feline CRF, and at this level will often result in a polymyopathy
characterized by generalized weakness, neck ventroflexion, and elevated serum CK con-
centrations. However, the hypokalaemia appears also to contribute to the progression
of renal failure through a variety of mechanisms including renal vasoconstriction,
reducing the renal responsiveness to vasopressin, and causing increased renal
ammoniagenesis, thus potentially contributing to further renal structural damage.
Severe hypokalaemia should initially be managed by administration of potassium-
supplemented intravenous fluids, whereas less severe cases can be managed by oral
supplementation alone (potassium gluconate dosed to effect, but typically
1-3 mmol/cat [1-3 mEq/cat] twice daily). In many cats there is an apparent improve-
ment in renal function (reduction in azotaemia) following potassium supple-
mentation. Studies suggest that in normokalaemic cats with CRF there is no overt
benefit from potassium supplementation.
192 i. There is a displaced sacral fracture consistent with a 'tail pull injury.
i. The cat's failure to urinate following its injury is most likely to be a result of
trauma to or around the spinal nerves innervating the bladder. The cat is showing no
 awareness of bladder distension and is therefore suffering from urinary retention. If left
untreated, overflow urinary incontinence will result and chronic distension of the
bladder is in danger of causing detrusor atony which can leave the bladder muscle
 permanently non-functional. Short-term management includes emptying the bladder to
prevent development of long-term consequences. Bladder expression is preferable to
catheterization {which carries a risk of iatrogenic infection) and in most cases of tail
pull injuries the bladder is relatively easy to express. In those cases where this does
cause difficulties, drugs which help to relax the bladder sphincter and urethral smooth
muscle (e.g. phenoxybenzamine 2.5-7.5 mg/cat one to two times daily, with diazepam
2-5 mg/cat two to three times daily, or dantrolene 2-10 mg/cat three times daily with
prazosin O.5 mg/cat one to three times daily) may be helpful in addition to analgesics.
m. It is difficult to predict the outcome in individual cases at the time of diagnosis. In
those cats where no improvement is seen within a month of the injury, the prognosis 
for complete recovery is significantly diminished. However, some owners are
comforta ble to take on bladder expression and can manage their cat at home.
200
193, 194: Questions
193 This picture (193) was taken
193
of a 14-year-old neutered female
DSH cat that had recently received
radioactive iodine therapy for
treatment of hyperthyroidism.
i. What abnormalities are evident
in the picture?
ii. What has caused these?
iii. How can the cause of the
problem be confirmed?
194
194 A cat requiring nutritional support has a gastrostomy tube (194).
i. What is the importance of nutritional support in sick cats?
i. What adverse effects does malnutrition have?
i. What guidelines should be employed in deciding whether nutritional support is
needed?
201
193, I94: Answers
193 i. The cat has lost the fur over the pinnae and has evidence of seborrhoea sicca.
ii. Iatrogenic hypothyroidism is the most likely possi bility.
m. A basal total T4 can be measured but a TRH stimulation test is needed to confirm
the hypothyroidism. Serum T4 is measured before and 4 hours after administration of
100 μg TRH IV. In normal and sick euthyroid cats administration of TRH causes an
increase in T4 levels of between 50-100%. Clinically hypothyroid cats can be treated
with L-thyroxine at 10-20 μg/kg daily. The dose is adjusted according to the clinical
res ponse which is generally good in acquired cases of hypothyroidism.
194 i. In normal individuals, food deprivation (starvation) produces an adaptive
down-regulation of the basal metabolic rate, which results in a decreased caloric
requirement. However, in disease the metabolic effects of illness increase production
of *catabolic' hormones (such as glucagon, catecholamines, and cortisol), resulting in
abrogation of the normal adaptive responses, and an increase in energy requirements
proportional to the severity of the disease process. The increased need for calories and
protein in a diseased anorexic/inappetent individual causes protein energy malnutri-
tion. However, even healthy cats have less ability to adapt to a reduced dietary intake,
and thus an increased susceptibility to protein energy malnutrition, as they are unable
to down-regulate the activity of their liver transaminases in response to reduced
protein intake. If their protein requirement is not met by dietary intake, endogenous
 protein sources will be utilized.
i. The adverse effects of protein energy malnutrition can be profound and are well
documented, varying according to the severity and duration of the protein energy
malnutrition. They include:
Lymphopenia, specifically T-cells, with impaired immune responses.
Impaired humoral immune response.
Impaired neutrophil function.
Reduced serum complement levels.
Hypoproteinaemia.
Anaemia.
 Delayed wound and fracture healing.
Muscle weakness.
An increased incidence of sepsis.
Increased mortality.
m. Nutritional support should be considered for any cat with
Anorexia or marked inappetence of z3 days duration.
The presence of cachexia or inadequate body fat/muscle mass.
Patients with direct protein/energy loss {e.g. exudative peritonitis/pleuritis).
202
195, 196: Questions
195
195 This impression smear {195) is from the nasal exudate of a 6-year-old Siamese
cat with chronic sneezing and nasal discharge.
i. What does this indicate as the likely cause of the nasal discharge?
ii. How should this cat be treated?
196
196 The ultrasound image {196) is of the left kidney of a S-year-old neutered female
Havana cat with irregular and small kidneys on abdominal palpation.
i. What abnormalities can be seen?
ii. What potential historical features and abnormalities on clinical examination would
there be?
203
195, 196: Answers
195 i. The picture shows the typical appearance of Cryptococcus neoformans. The
large non-staining capsule around the yeast gives a *halo-liker appearance.
i. Optimal treatment should be based on culture so that the variety of C. neoformans
is determined, and if possible in vitro antifungal sensiti vity performed. Experience has
suggested that C. neoformans var. gattii infections may be more susceptible to
itraconazole than fluconazole.
Surgical removal of infected tissue will aid in the recovery and thus curettage
and/or forced nasal flushing may be a very valuable first step in the treatment.
Treatment of choice for cats with severe or widespread cryptococcosis is a combi-
nation of amphotericin B and flucytosine. However, amphotericin B is nephrotoxic
and has to be administered with fluid loading to minimize this potential.
For cats with mild to moderate disease, the recommendations are to treat with
itraconazole {50-100 mg/cat daily with food) or fluconazole {25-100 mg/cat twice
daily). Therapy is typically required for 2-6 months and should be continued until
complete clinical and microbiological resolution is achieved. A four- to five-fold
 decline in serum antigen titre supports successful therapy, although continuing therapy
until titres are zero is advised. Fluconazole can be used instead of itraconazole, but it is
considerably more expensive, and some isolates of C. neoformans var. gatti appear to
be relatively resistant. Fluconazole is water soluble and has very good tissue penetra-
tion, including the CNS.
196 i. The ultrasound image shows virtually no recognizable renal architecture at all The 
renal outline can be seen and appears somewhat irregular, but there is a lack of internal
relatively echogenic suggesting possible fibrosis (possible “end-stage' changes). It is
 impossible to assess renal size as there is no scale, although the kidney was in fact small.
i. Assuming that these changes are bilateral, this cat is likely to be in renal failure. The
 most common clinical signs associated with renal failure in the cat are vague and non-
specific: dehydration, lethargy, inappetence, and weight loss. Polyuria and polydipsia
are not as frequently reported in cats with CRF as in dogs {where it is a common and
early sign). This may be because cats retain a greater urine concentrating ability than
dogs in the face of CRF, but also because polyuria and polydipsia may be more
difficult to recognize as a result of the lifestyle of cats. Vomiting also occurs less
commonly in cats with renal failure than dogs but is seen in up to one-third of cases.
Other posible historical and clinical findings in CRF, depending on the stage and
severity, include pale mucosae {due to anaemia), depression and weakness (malnutrition,
cachexia, hypokalaemia), oral ulceration and halitosis, poor coat, diarrhoea, and sudden
onset blindness or hypertensive retinopathy due to systemic hypertension. Other features 
 may also be present depending on the underlying cause of the renal failure.
204
197, 198: Questions
197a
197b
197 Right parasternal long
axis and left ventricular M
Diastole
Systole
mode echocardiograms
VS thickness (cm)
0.5 (0.25-0.5)
0.7 (0.5-0.9)
{197a and b) have been
LV free wall thickness (cm)
0.4 (0.25-0.5)
0.5 (0.4-0.9)
obtained from a 3-year-old
LV internal diameter (cm)
1.7 (1.1-1.6)
1.5 (0.6- 1.0)
neutered male cat. The
 Fractional shortening (%)
12 (29-55)
table shows measurements
obtained from the M mode
echo (reference range in brackets).
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What questions should the owner be asked relevant to this condition?
ii. Are there any other tests that should be done?
iv. What treatment is indicated?
198 i. Identify these ova
198
{198) found on faecal flota-
tion from a cat. What are
their characteristic features?
ii. What is the life cycle of
the organism invol ved?
70 μm
ii. What is the potential
clinical significance of the
organism?
iv. What treatment should
be recommended?
20.5
197, 198: Answers
197 i. Dilated cardiomyopathy - this is characterized by an increase in the left
ventricular diameter in systole and diastole, thinning of the left ventricular free wall in
systole, reduced fractional shortening, and an increase in the end point to septal
separation {E-septal separation).
i. The owner should be questioned as to the cat's diet since taurine deficiency is a
known nutritional cause of dilated cardiomyopathy.
m. Fundic examination should be performed in order to look for evidence of central
retinal degenerative changes which can also be seen in taurine-deficient cats. Whole
blood taurine levels should be measured.
le aunei yim uoeiuawagddns 'suaiyap aq oi paioadsns o umouy sieo ul 'a
250-500 mg/cat/day is indicated. Other agents which may be of benefit include:
 Positive inotropes to improve contractility, e.g. digoxin, pimobendan.
Reduction of preload using diuretics such as furosemide and spironolactone.
Improved forward flow by use of vasodilators such as the ACE inhibitors.
Management of dysrhythmias where needed, e.g. propranolol.
Aspirin at up to 20 mg/kg two to three times a week may be of benefit in reducing
 platelet aggregation and hence the risk of thromboembolic disease.
198 i. These are Toxocara cati ova. Characteristic features include their size
{approximately 70 μm), they are almost round, and they have a thick, pitted wall.
Toxascaris leonina ova are a similar size but more oval, and have a smooth wall.
i. Toxocara cati is a common nematode parasite. Adult worms (8-15 cm long) are
found in the small intestine. The life cycle is either direct or indirect. Developing
larvae moult twice within the ova. Infective third stage larvae are released following
ingestion of the ova, penetrate through the gastrointestinal tract and undergo a
liver-lung migration path, returning to the gastrointestinal tract via the trachea fbeing
coughed up and swallowed). Larvae then complete development into adults in the
intestine. Larvae are also present in tissues of paratenic hosts (mice, chickens, earth-
worms, cockroaches) that have eaten ova. This is a common source of infection for
cats (via ingestion), following which the larvae usually develop to adults within the
gastrointestinal tract without further migration. A third route of infection is via the
milk in suckling kittens. Larvae released from ingested ova migrate to many tissues
where they remain dormant, but can subsequently be recovered from the mammary
tissue and milk of suckling queens. There is no transplacental migration.
m. Patent infections occur in kittens as young as 6 weeks of age, but clinical signs are
uncommon. Heavy infections can cause unthriftiness, weight loss and vomiting/diarr-
hoea in kittens. Toxocara cati is a rare zoonosis (visceral/ocular larva migrans), most
human disease being caused by T. canis.
iv. Treatments include fenbendazole, milbemycin, pyrantel, febantel, and selamectin.
206
199, 200: Questions
661
199 Anorexia and inappetence (199) can be caused by a wide variety of disorders in
cats. What is understood by the term “food aversion' and what measures should be
taken to prevent or overcome this phenomenon?
200
200 A 4-year-old neutered female DSH cat is presented with a 5-month history of
lethargy, poor appetite, facial crusting, and ulceration (200). In the initial few weeks
of illness, the owner also reported additional signs of sneezing and nasal and ocular 
discharges.
i. What differential diagnoses should be considered in cats with ulcerative skin disease?
i. What is the most likely cause in this case, and how can this suspicion be confirmed?
207
199, 200: Answers
199 Food aversion is increasingly recognized as a potentially significant cause of
anorexia in cats. Food aversion can happen when cats are offered food at the same
time as they are vomiting or feeling nauseous or in pain. Cats that refuse food offered
at this time may continue to refuse to eat the same food even when the feeling of
nausea or pain has subsided, due to the continued association between the two.
Avoiding food aversion is important where possible, and this means considering
adequate antiemetic therapy, in particular, and attempting to identify and treat
nausea and vomiting as rapidly and effectively as possible.
If food aversion occurs or is suspected, tube feeding may be needed for a period of
time, and initially food should not be offered at all. For less severe cases, appetite stimu-
lation can be employed. Consideration should be given to the cat's environment (noise,
temperature, ability to hide), adequate analgesia, the use of pheromone sprays (e.g.
"Felifriend') for cats in unfamiliar surroundings, and petting/stroking to encourage the
cat to eat. Offering a variety of foods and textures (small amounts frequently), warm-
ing food, and offering high fat/protein content foods with a strong odour may all help.
Pharmacological appetite stimulation may be a valuable alternative to tube feeding
although potential side effects of the drugs should be considered:
Cyproheptadine: 2 mg/cat orally twice daily.
Diazepam: 0.05-0.2 mg/kg IV two to three times daily.
Oxazepam: 0.2s-0.5 mg/kg orally twice daily.
Megoestrol acetate: 1 mg/kg orally twice daily.
 Intravenous diazepam and oral cyproheptadine are the most commonly used agents.
200 i. Important causes of ulceration of the skin include:
 Infection, e.g. bacterial, mycotic, viral (FHV).
Autoimmune skin disease.
Cuta neous neoplasia.
Self-tra uma.
 Inflammatory disease.
ii. In this case, the preceding history of upper respiratory tract signs is most suggestive
of FHV infection. FHV infection can be diagnosed by submitting skin biopsy material
for virus isolation, histology (including immunostaining where available), electron
microscopy, and PCR. Oropharyngeal swabs can also be submitted for FHV isolation
and PCR. Fungal and bacterial culture should be performed on biopsy samples in
order to rule out other infectious causes. In unvaccinated cats, FHV serology may
support diagnosis of recent infection.
FHV infection was confirmed in this case. The cat was treated supportively in
response was seen, eventually necessitating euthanasia on humane grounds.
208
201, 202: Questions
20la
 201 A 3-year-old neutered female DSH cat presents with a history of being missing
for 36 hours, 3 weeks previously. On return it had left hindlimb pain and lameness.
 The cat responded to conservative management and was assumed to have been hit by
a car. Around a week later the cat developed a cough and progressive inspiratory
dyspnoea, which is marked on presentation. There is no dysphonia.
i. What does the radiograph (taken under general anaesthesia) (201a) suggest is the
cause of the dyspnoea?
. What other signs might the cat show and what, if any, additional diagnostic tests 
should be undertaken?
道. What treatment is recommended?
202 A 6-month-old kitten,
202
has recently died of con-
firmed FIP. The client still
owns two litter mates (202)
and another 8-year-old cat.
i. What is the best advice
regarding the care of the re-
maining cats?
ii. How soon is it safe for the
owner to consider getting a
new kitten?
209
201, 202: Answers
201 i. The radiograph shows a flaccid, air-
20lb
filled oesophagus, which is presumably a
result of anaesthesia. The intrathoracic
trachea appears dilated cranially but
 and 5. The normal diameter is seen again
just cranial to the carina (201b). These
changes could reflect tracheal stenosis or
stricture, or an inflammatory or neoplastic
lesion, but given the recent clinical history
this would be highly suggestive of tracheal
avulsion. Tracheal necrosis can also be iatrogenic from prolonged use of an over-inflated
cuff around an endotracheal tube.
i. Tracheal avulsion is an unusual condition that typically follows blunt trauma to the
chest. Commonly, but not invariably, the avulsion will result in significant pneumo-
mediastinum with subsequent pneumothorax and/or subcutaneous emphysema which
may take several days/weeks to resolve.
Tracheoscopy is helpful in confirming the diagnosis and in this case revealed the
tracheal tear, and a narrow tubular pseudomembrane that had formed.
m. Treatment is surgical with resection and anastamosis of tracheal rings as neces-
sary. The prognosis is good and this cat made a complete recovery.
202 i. FIP most commonly only affects one cat in the household but there is a possibility
that other cats may develop disease. The litter mates are most vulnerable. Young cats
have immature immune systems which make them vulnerable to FIP and it is also
thought that genetic factors influence susceptibility. No specific treatment is indicated
and no diagnostic tests will be able to identify whether the kittens are likely to develop
FIP in the near future. The cats should be treated as normal and stress should be
minimized by avoiding any changes fe.g. new cats, going to cat shows, elective
veterinary procedures). If possible signs of disease develop, the cats should be returned
for examination and investigation as appropriate. The incubation time for this disease is 
variable and there are reports of incubation times as long as 1 year or more, although in
most cases it is considerably shorter than this (2-4 months).
i. FIP is a fairly labile virus, although in the optimum conditions of temperature and
humidity it can survive for as long as 7 weeks in the environment. Infected cats may shed
coronavirus for several months or longer. The virus is destroyed by bleach (sodium
hypochlorite) mixed with water at a ratio of 1:32. The owners should avoid getting a new
cat for at least 6 months. If the remaining cats are well at this point, then it will probably
be safe to introduce a new kitten. Measures which reduce the stress of rehoming in the
new kitten, such as delaying this until after it is fully vaccinated, are worth considering.
210
203, 204: Questions
203
203 Endoscopy {203) is commonly used in the investigation of gastrointestinal
diseases in cats. How should a patient be prepared for gastroduodenoscopy and for
colonoscopy?
204
204 Examine the radiograph (204) from a 7-year-old neutered male DSH cat.
i. What changes can be seen?
ii. What are the possible differential diagnoses and which of these is most likley?
ii. How should this diagnosis be investigated further?
211
203, 204: Answers
203 For gastroduodenoscopy, the stomach must be empty of food and fluid to allow
good visualization of the mucosal and anatomical structures. In most cats this can be
achieved by withholding food for 12-18 hours prior to endoscopy and by
withholding water/fluids for 3-4 hours. However, if there is evidence of partial
obstruction or functional disturbance causing delayed gastric emptying, these times
may have to be prolonged. If a barium meal has been administered, a minimum of 24
hours should be allowed before endoscopy, as barium will coat and adhere to the
mucosa. Similarly, mucosal protectants such as sucralfate should be discontinued for
at least 24 hours. General anaesthesia is required, but where possible atropine and
opioids should be avoided, as they increase pyloric tone making duodenoscopy more
difficult. Gastroduodenoscopy is routinely performed with the cat in left lateral
recumbency; it is important to have the patient intubated and to use a mouth gag.
[eoael jo aau pue uealp Ajaienbape aq oi spaau uoios aul "4doosouoios 10m
material. Food should preferably be withheld for 36-48 hours. Bowel cleansing
solutions {e.g. "Klean-Prep', *GoLytely') should be used to ensure the colon is free of
solid material. These are typically given at a dose of 25-30 ml/kg, and administered
via a nasogastric tube. Two doses, 1-2 hours apart, are given the night before the
procedure and, if necessary, a further dose is given on the morning of the procedure.
An enema fe.g. 50-75 ml warm water) should also be given prior to the procedure.
204 i. The radiograph demonstrates marked bilateral renomegaly along with a
 moderately full bladder which may suggest concurrent polyuria.
i. Possible causes of marked renomegaly would be perinephric pseudocysts, renal
lymphoma, and hydronephrosis falthough bilateral disease would cause ARF before
the kidneys enlarged to this extent). The kidneys have a smooth outline suggesting
polycystic kidney disease is unlikely. FIP, amyloidosis, glomerulonephritis, and ARF
{various causes) can cause renomegaly, but none are likely to give such marked
changes. The smooth outline and marked changes suggest renal lymphoma is most
likely.
m. Priorities for initial investigation would be:
Evaluation of renal function and complications potentially arising from renal
failure (haematology, serum chemistry, urinalysis with urine culture).
Confirming lymphoma as the cause, most readily achieved by fine needle
aspiration cytology from the renal cortex.
Staging the lymphoma by determining the FeLV and FIV status of the cat and
looking for presence of lymphoma elsewhere (physical examination, further
radiography, ultrasonography, haematology ± bone marrow aspiration cytologyl.
Lymphoma was confirmed in this cat, which was retrovirus negative. Successful
chemotherapy resulted in improvement in renal function and normalization of renal
size. The cat remained in remission for S months.
212
205, 206: Questions
205 A cat is receiving combination chemotherapy for treatment of lymphoma.
i. How should the patient be cared for within the hospital: what are the implications
from a health and safety point of view?
ii. The cat's owner is concerned about her safety in handling the cat and its cytotoxic
pills. Are her concerns well founded?
206 A 6-month-old Birman cat (206)
206
presents with poor growth, intermittent
ataxia, disorientation, and lethargy.
Examine the laboratory results.
i. What is your assessment of these results?
ii. How would you approach treatment
of this cat?
 Serum biochemistry
Parameter
Result
Refererence range
Lrea mmol/l (mg/dl)
6.4 (17.9)
6.0-10.5 (17.0-29.0)
Creatinine μmoll (mg/dl) 
98 (1.1)
<175 (<2.0)
 Phosphate mmol/l (mg/dl)
2.2 (6.8)
0.95-1.95 (2.9-6.0)
Glucose mmoll (mg/dl)
4.4 (79)
3.5-7.5 (60-135)
Total protein g/l (g/dl)
66 (6.6)
55-80 (5.5-8.0)
Albumin g/l (g/dl)
26 (2.6)
24-35 (2.4-3.5)
Globulin g/l (g/dl)
40 (4.0)
21-50 (2.1-5.0)
Alanine aminotransferase (IU/l)
117
15-45
Alkaline phosphatase (IU/l)
95
15-60
Fasting bile acids (umol/)
32
<15
 Postprandial bile acids (umoll) 
178
30
213
205, 206: Answers
205 i. Local health and safety regulations
205
vary but, in general, measures should be
taken to avoid any contact with cyto-
toxic drugs. Tablets should never be split
or crushed. Animals and contaminated
items should be handled with the
minimum of contact. Workers should
wear gloves, plastic disposable aprons,
and safety glasses when handling drugs
and body fluids. Where possible
disposable bedding, food bowls, and
litter trays should be used. In the case of
contamination or spills, it is possible to inactivate some chemotherapeutic agents; for
example, doxorubicin is inactivated by sodium hypochlorite. All soiled litter, urine,
and faeces should be double bagged and incinerated. If possible, an area of the ward
can be dedicated to care of chemotherapy patients (205).
i. Contact with cytotoxic agents carries a risk of gene mutation, hepatotoxicity, and
reproductive problems. The main risks are associated with handling the drugs prior to
administration, equipment used for administration of the drugs, and excreta from
treated patients. Contact with cytotoxic agents can occur directly across the skin, or
via inhalation or ingestion. Gloves should be worn when handling cytotoxic tablets
 and litter or body fluids {urine, faeces, vomit). Most cytotoxic agents are excreted in
the urine and/or faeces for up to 4 days following treatment. Owners should be ad-
vised as to the duration and route of excretion of the agents that their cat is receiving.
206 i. The dramatically elevated postprandial bile acids are suggestive of a
hepatopathy. Given the clinical signs and background, the most likely diagnosis is of
a congenital portosystemic shunt. The low-normal urea is consistent with this diag-
nosis. The serum phosphate is mildly elevated; this is normal in a growing young cat.
i. Initial medical management should be aimed at controlling the hepatic
encephalopathy that accounts for the cat's clinical signs. In cats with congenital
portosystemic shunts, an anomalous vessel takes blood from the hepatic portal vein
into the systemic circulation without delivering this to the liver first. Feeding a low
protein diet limits the amount of protein breakdown products which contribute
towards hepatic encephalopathy. Oral dosing of antibiotics (e.g. metronidazole,
ampicillin) reduces ammonia absorption by reducing the numbers of urease-
producing bacteria in the intestine. Oral lactulose produces an acidic environment
which helps to bind ammonia in the bowel, and reduces gastrointestinal transit time.
When sta ble, portovenography and shunt ligation can be attempted.
214
207, 208: Questions
207
207 An exploratory laparotomy is performed in a 10-year-old neutered male DSH cat
with a history of progressively worsening vomiting over 4-6 months, severe weight
loss, and polyphagia. The distal small intestine, mesentery, and areas of the ileocaeco-
colic junction are displa yed (207).
i. What a bnormalities can be seen?
ii. What is the most likely cause for these changes?
m. How should this condition be treated?
208
208 A 3-year-old neutered male DSH cat has been investigated for a 10-month
history of generalized seizures which are reported to be occurring approximately
every 4 weeks (208). The cat is clinically normal between seizures and all of the
clinical, neurological, and laboratory tests performed are normal. Based on a
provisional diagnosis of idiopathic epilepsy:
i. When should anti-seizure medication be instigated in this cat?
ii. What are the treatment options and how should this cat be managed?
21.5
207, 208: Answers
207 i. The picture shows a large irregular mass at the ileocaecocolic junction, there is
significant enlargement of mesenteric lymph nodes, and there is also at least one, and
possibly more, smaller masses in the distal small intestine.
 i. This has a typical appearance of neoplasia. Lymphoma and adenocarcinoma are the
two most common intestinal tumours of the cat and the long history, multiple lesions,
and proliferative nature of the lesions would be strongly suggestive of lymphoma.
Histology or fine needle aspiration cytology would be needed to confirm the diagnosis.
ii. Prior to treatment, staging of the disease, retrovirus testing, and screening for
secondary or concomitant disease would be prudent as this could affect treatment and
prognosis. Surgical debulking of the tumour burden by removal of the gut-associated
masses could be attempted and would be valuable for the immediate relief of any
 gastrointestinal obstruction. Following healing of the surgical wounds, chemotherapy
would be required. Various treatment protocols have been used in cats with lym-
phoma. The most widely used protocol would involve administration of cyclo-
phosphamide, vincristine (*Oncovin'), and prednisolone {the so-called COP protocol)
and this has been used successfully to manage intestinal lymphoma. More recently, a
protocol using just chlorambucil and prednisolone has been reported to give very
 good results in well differentiated lymphocytic intestinal lymphoma in cats.
208 i. Anti-seizure medication is generally recommended in cats when:
Seizures are occurring more frequently than every 6-8 weeks.
The seizure frequency is increasing.
Indi vidual seizures last more than S minutes.
Clusters of seizures or status epilepticus occur.
The seizure frequency in this case warrants treatment. Repeated seizures damage the
brain and increase the likelihood of future seizures.
 i. Long-term maintenance management is usually safely and effectively achieved using
phenobarbitone (phenobarbital) at 2-3 mg/kg every 12 hours. Sedation may be seen in
the first few days of therapy and other potential side effects include polyuria/polydipsia,
polyphagia, and weight gain. Serum levels should be checked 7-14 days after starting
therapy or modifying the dose, and levels of 20-40 μg/ml are generally required for
effective control. Alternative anti-seizure medication includes diazepam (0.2-2 mg/kg
two to three times a day) used alone or in combination with phenobarbitone
(phenobarbital), although idiosyncratic hepatic necrosis has been reported with this
drug. In refractory cases, potassium bromide at 30-40 mg/kg once a day can be used
alone or in combination with phenobarbitone (phenobarbital). The 11-22 day half-life
of this agent means that it takes a long time for steady blood levels to be reached
(8-15 weeks). Bronchitis has been reported as a side-effect in some cats. Phenytoin is
generally not recommended in cats as accumulation and hepatotoxicity can occur.
216
209, 210: Questions
209
209 A 5-year-old neutered female DSH cat presents with recent onset of depression,
lethargy, anorexia, adipsia, vomiting, and ptyalism (209). There is a distinct
"uraemic' smell to the breath and there is oral ulceration present. ARF is suspected.
How can ARF be differentiated from CRF?
210
面
SQUIBB
1vial
50,0001.U.
FUNGIZONE"
INTRAVENOUS
50,0001.U.
Amphotericln 50mg
FUNGIZONE"
Forinravenousinfusion.
NTRAVENOUS
210 The picture shows a preparation of the drug amphotericin B (210).
i. What are the indications for use of this drug?
ii. What important side effects are there with this agent?
m. How is it used in clinical practice?
217
209, 210: Answers
209 Differentiating ARF from CRF is important as the former is potentially
reversible. Distinction between the two is not always easy, and is complicated by the
fact that ARF may occur superimposed on existing CRF in some cases.
Typically with ARF the onset of signs is very rapid (hours to days) and the
progression of azotaemia is also rapid if this is monitored, at least in the early stages.
In CRF the onset of clinical signs is usually insidious, with stable or slowly
progressing azotaemia. However, in some cases of CRF, the overt clinical signs may
appear to be fairly rapid in onset as a result of decompensation of a stable state of
renal failure. On careful questioning there are often other preceding signs of uraemia
in cases of CRF, such as gradual weight loss, polyuria and polydipsia, and poor
appetite, whereas in uncomplicated ARF the recent history will be unremarkable.
Osteodystrophy is sometimes evident with CRF but is not a feature of ARF. Kidney
size is of little help in the differentiation: it can be normal or increased in ARF, and is
normal, increased, or decreased with CRF.
Haematology and serum biochemistry may help to distinguish the two:
hyperkalaemia is common in ARF, whereas potassium is usually normal or low in
CRF. Anaemia may be present with CRF but is usually absent with ARF.
210 i. Amphotericin B is a polyene macrolide antifungal agent that binds to ergosterol
(and other sterols) in fungal cell membranes altering cell membrane permeability and
causing cellular damage. Amphotericin has activity against many fungi, including
Cryptococcts fprobably its most common use), Coccidioides, Histoplasma, and
ood s! smtadsy isuia Aiaoe on u aui sosroisuig
i. The major side effect is nephrotoxicity, with induction of ARF due to renal tubular
toxicity and vasoconstriction. Hypomagnesaemia and hypokalaemia are also
commonly seen and close monitoring of patients is required. The high potential for
toxicity suggests other safer drugs should be tried first.
m. Amphotericin is traditionally administered by intra venous infusion. Various doses
have been used; typically around 0.25 mg/kg is given three times weekly to a maximum
cumulative dose of 9-12 mg/kg, or until toxicity occurs. Combined therapy with
flucytosine (250 mg/cat/day orally in divided doses) is usually used for cryptococcosis.
The calculated dose of amphotericin is usually diluted in 30 ml 5% dextrose and
infused over 15 minutes, but further dilution and prolonged infusion may reduce
nephrotoxicity. An alternative regime is to administer 0.s-0.8 mg/kg in a warmed bag
of 350-400 ml glucose-saline (2.5% glucose, 0.45% saline) which is infused SC. This is
repeated two to three times weekly (maximum dose of 1.6 mg/kg weekly). Typically
6-12 weeks therapy is required for cryptococcosis but side effects may be lower.
Lipid emulsions of amphotericin have less nephrotoxicity and are given at
approximately 1 mg/kg IV (diluted in 5% dextrose) three times weekly.
218
211, 212: Questions
211 A 7-month-old Persian cat is
211
presented (211). The owner reports that
for some time now the cat has been
behaving strangely with episodes of
mania/aggression and a wobbly gait,
interspersed with times when the cat is
very lethargic. The cat is very small
compared to its litter mates. On further
questioning the owner reports excessive
salivation (ptyalism) and pupil dilation
 as being commonly present.
i. What are the differential diagnoses for
this combination of clinical signs?
ii. What laboratory tests should be
performed next?
212 A 4-year-old female
212
Chinchilla presents (212).
She has had two previous
litters of kittens, but now,
despite showing signs of
oestrus and being mated
with different proven toms,
she has failed to produce
any kittens during the past
12 months. What are the
major differential diagnoses
for this problem and which
further investigations should
be performed?
219
211, 212: Answers
211 i. Differential diagnoses for poor growth, neurological signs, ptyalism, and pupil
dilatation need to be considered. Possibilities which would potentially produce all of
these clinical signs include:
A congenital portosystemic vascular anomaly.
Exposure to toxins including lead.
Congenital lysosomal storage disease.
Infectious neurological disease including Toxoplasma gondii, FIP, FeLV, and FIV.
Given the age of cat and combination of clinical signs, a congenital portosystemic
vascular anomaly is the most likely of these possibilities.
i. Initial diagnostic tests should be performed to evaluate the possibility of a
portosystemic shunt. Routine haematology, biochemistry, and urinalysis evaluation
may give some clues of this (microcytosis, low urea, mildly raised liver enzymes,
hyperammonaemia, and urate crystalluria may be present) but a dynamic bile acid
test is the most useful test. Further tests to evaluate some of the other differential
diagnoses (e.g. Toxoplasma IgG and IgM serology) may be necessary.
212 For a queen that is accepting a proven, fertile tom and being mated, there are
three possible causes of infertility: failure to ovulate, failure to implant, and preg-
 na ncy loss following implantation.
Ovulation failure can occur because cats are induced ovulators. Some queens will
apparently spontaneously ovulate but up to four or more matings are required for
optimal LH secretion and ovulatory stimulation. Ovulation can be determined by
measuring serum progesterone 1-2 weeks after mating. It should exceed 6 nmol/l
if ovulation has occurred. Failure to ovulate is usually treated by ensuring
multiple matings, although 25 μg GnRH can be given IM at the time of mating.
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (± bacterial endometritis) is the most common
cause of failure to conceive/implant in a queen that has previously been bred
from. Definitive diagnosis is made by biopsy, but if other causes are ruled out,
antibiotic therapy may allow conception at the next mating. Anatomical defects
can be a ca use in nulliparous queens.
Early pregnancy loss can be caused by cystic endometrial hyperplasia, metritis,
systemic infections {viral, bacterial, mycoplasmal, parasitic and, possibly,
chlamydophilosis), foetal defects, inadequate progesterone production to
maintain pregnancy (serum concentrations <6 nmol/l).
Investigation is aimed at demonstrating ovulation (serum progesterone assay), and
evaluating the uterus for abnormalities by ultrasonography. Following mating regular
repeat ultrasound investigations are needed to determine if foetal implantation occurs 
and, if so, to determine at what stage foetal death and resorption is occurring.
Hysterotomy may be required to obtain tissues to determine the cause of foetal death.
220
213, 214: Questions
213 A 16-year-old neutered male DSH cat
213
(213) is presented with a 6-month history of
severe weight loss. On clinical examination,
the cat is noted to be extremely thin,
weighing only 2.7 kg, and has bilateral
thyroid nodules palpable in the neck.
Examine the laboratory results which were
obtained using blood collected after an 8-
hour fast.
i. What is the assessment of these results?
i. What are the treatment options for this
cat?
iii. Which of these options should be
recommended to the owner and why?
Serum biochemistry
Parameter
Result
Reference range
Lrea mmol/l (mg/dl)
16.7 (46.8)
6.0- 10.5 (17.0-29.0)
Creatinine μmol/l (mg/dl)
161 (1.8)
<175 (<2.0)
Fhosphate mmol/l (mg/dl)
2.1 (6.5)
0.95-1.95 (2.9-6.0)
Total protein g/l (g/dl)
67 (6.7)
55-80 (5.5-8.0)
Abumin g/l (g/dl)
28 (2.8)
24-35 (2.4-3.5)
Globulin g/l (g/dl)
39 (3.9)
21-50 (2.1-5.0)
Alanine aminotransferase (IU/l)
681
15-45
Alkaline phosphatase (ll/l)
156
15-60
Total T4 nmol/l (μg/dl)
129 (10.0)
19-65 (1.5-5.0)
Urinalysis
Specific gravity
1.023
Dip stick
normal
Sediment examination
normal
214 A 6-year-old DSH cat is presented in
214
acute respiratory 
distress, mouth
breathing (214).
i. How can the cat be stabilized with
oxygen therapy prior to further assess-
ment?
ii. How would thoracic radiographs of a
severely dyspnoeic cat be taken?
221
213, 214: Answers
213 i. Several abnormalities are present. The cat is hyperthyroid and other laboratory
changes (increased liver enzymes, hyperphosphataemia) are likely to be secondary to
this disease. The cat is also azotaemic. Creatinine levels are normal but this may be
because of reduced muscle mass since the cat is very thin. The reduced USG suggests
intrinsic renal disease rather than a prerenal problem, although polydipsia associated
with hyperthyroidism could also account for this value.
i. The treatment options available for this patient include surgical thyroidectomy,
medical management (e.g. carbimazole or methimazole), and radioactive iodine.
ii. There is a concern that this cat has renal failure which is being masked to an
extent by its poor muscle mass and concurrent thyroid disease. Hyperthyroidism
increases the glomerular filtration rate which can 'mask' pre-existing renal disease
and it is a worry that treatment of the hyperthyroidism could result in precipitation of
overt renal failure. The safest treatment option is, therefore, one of the medical
agents, since these are reversible. The cat should be started on a low dose of
carbimazole or methimazole and monitored closely (clinically and biochemically).
Should any worsening of the azotaemia be seen, treatment can be reduced or stopped.
If the cat remains stable, treatments such as thyroidectomy can be considered.
214 i. The cat can be placed in an oxygen-enriched environment using one of several
techniques which include:
Oxygen can be piped into a paediatric incubator into which the cat is placed.
*Flow by': an anaesthetic circuit is held close to the cat's nostrils so that oxygen
can flow by' creating a locally oxygen-enriched environment.
Face mask: the head is held in a face mask attached to an anaesthetic circuit.
 Buster (Elizabethan) collar oxygen tent: cling film is placed loosely over the front
"uoesuapuoo pue suueauq-au pioae 0i dot aul ie aoeds suaeal 1ehloo 1aisnq e jo
Oxygen is piped in via a catheter under the collar.
Nasal prongs: special plastic tubing with two short ends designed for inserting
into the nostrils is attached to an oxygen supply.
Nasal catheter: placement of a catheter, attached to an oxygen line, into the naso-
pharynx via a nostril.
 In general, oxygen cage techniques are best tolerated with the minimum of stress.
Low flow rates (0.5-1.0 l/minute) should be used for the other techniques.
i. For radiography, sternal positioning with minimal restraint is likely to be best
tolerated by the patient and this can be used to take conventional dorsoventral
radiographs. If horizontal beam radiography is possible, a lateral thoracic radiograph
can be taken with the cat sitting in sternal recumbency. It is useful to have a non-
radiodense cat carrier in which to place the unrestrained cat for radiographic studies.
222
215, 216: Questions
215 A 3-year-old DSH cat
215
presents with a 10-day
history of inappetence,
lethargy, and yellowing of
the mucous membranes.
There is marked jaundice
 on examination and pyrexia
(39.8°C or 104°F). Blo0d
samples show a neutro-
philic leucocytosis with a
left shift and elevated liver
enzymes, bilirubin, and bile
acids.  Hepatic ultra-
 sonography is performed:
the view shown (215) is a
 section through the liver with the gall bladder in the centre.
i. What is the most striking abnormality visible?
i. What are the major differential diagnoses for this cat?
道. How should this cat be further investigated and treated?
216 A patient with longstanding CRF has
216
come in for a routine check-up. SBP
measured using the Doppler technique is
182 mmHg (216).
i. Comment on this result.
i. What should be done next?
△CE
223
215, 216: Answers
215 i. Hepatic architecture is difficult to assess from the picture, but a mass is evident
within the lumen of the gall bladder which appears to be causing some 'shadow"
effect. The gall bladder does not appear excessively dilated.
ii. The mass could be a cholelith (most likely), inspissated bile, an inflammatory mass,
or a neoplastic lesion.
The history and clinical findings in this cat suggest a hepatic cause for the jaundice
 and the blood findings and pyrexia suggest an infectious cause. Important differential
diagnoses include:
Suppurative cholangiohepatitis.
FIP.
Platynosomum concinnum.
Toxoplasma gondi.
Cytauxzoon felis.
Systemic fungal infections.
Suppurative cholangiohepatitis {usually caused by an ascending bacterial infection
from the small intestine) is the most common infectious cause of liver disease in cats,
and there is a recognized association between this and cholelithia sis.
m. Further investigations should include hepatic biopsy {e.g. ultrasound-guided needle
biopsy, after assessment of clotting times) for histology and culture, and aspiration of bile
for culture. Eschericbia coli is the most common organism causing suppurative cholangio-
hepatitis, but infection can occur with a wide variety of organisms including anaerobes.
Empirical therapy should be with broad-spectrum antibiotics that achieve high
concentrations in bile {e.g. cla vulanate/amoxicillin, cephalosporins, fluoroquinolone, ±
metronidazole) pending culture results. Progression should be monitored with ultra-
 sonography, and the cholelith removed if there is evidence that it is causing obstruction.
216 i. Reported reference ranges for SBP in conscious cats generally consider readings
above 170-180 mmHg to be abnormally high. Stress or genuine hypertension could
account for this result.
ii. The first step would be to repeat the blood pressure readings causing as little stress as
possible. This should be done with the cat in a quiet room allowing it at least 10
minutes to acclimatize to the environment before the blood pressure is measured. A
detailed ophthalmic examination should also be performed to look for ocular mani-
festations of hypertension such as haemorrhage, retinal oedema, and detachment.
Although CRF can be a cause of hypertension, other causes, such as hyperthyroidism,
should also be considered. If the SBP readings remain persistently above
170-180 mmHg then treatment with anti-hypertensive agents is warranted. Doppler
SBP should be kept below 170 mmHg in cats with CRF.
224
217, 218: Questions
217
217 A 4-year-old neutered male Siamese is presented with a 6-month history of
recurrent constipation and persistent perineal licking. On clinical examination the
anal ring appeared swollen and there was a swelling to the left of the anus. Examine
the lateral radiograph (217).
i. What abnormality can be seen?
ii. What is the diagnosis and treatment for this cat?
218 This Wright-Giemsa stained
218
blood smear (218) was obtained
 from a 6-year-old neutered female
DSH cat with a 10-day history of
 lethargy and inappetence.
i. Identify the structures indi-
cated by the arrows and arrow-
hea ds.
i. What additional information
is evident on the blood smear?
i. What is the likely diagnosis
and how should it be confirmed?
iv. What treatment is recom-
mended?
22.5
217, 218: Answers
217 i. The radiograph shows the presence of faecal boluses in the descending colon
and in the rectum. The rectum is occupying an abnormally caudal position, which is
also displacing the anus caudally. It would appear that a faecal bolus within the
rectum is responsible for the swelling around the anal region.
i. These findings are consistent with a diagnosis of perineal hernia, and rectal
palpation under general anaesthesia confirmed the diagnosis in this case.
Although common in dogs, perineal hernias are relatively rare in cats. The normal
pelvic diaphragm is composed of the anal sphincter, which is apposed to the
coccygeus and levator ani muscles laterally and dorsally, and the internal obturator
muscle ventrally. In this case, the anal sphincter had become completely separated
from the other muscles allowing the rectal deviation and perineal hernia.
Initial treatment is surgical correction of the defect to restore the normal anatomy.
Persistent straining due to constipation, or in some cases lower urinary tract disease,
appears to be a predisposing factor for perineal hernia formation, thus long-term
control involves the use of laxatives such as lactulose and/or fibre added to the diet
{e.g. sterkulia; ispaghula husk) to promote regular passage of soft faeces.
218 i. The arrows are pointing to red blood cells containing densely staining nuclear
remnants {Howell-Jolly bodies) indicating that these are immature red cells. The
arrowheads are pointing to small densely staining structures on the surface of red cells
which are most likely to represent feline haemoplasmas ( Mycoplasma baemofelis or
Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum, formerly known as Haemobartonella felis,
H. felis). Alternative possibilities would include artefacts such as stain precipitate.
 i. There is evidence of regeneration as anisocytosis and polychromasia are present.
mi. FIA due to feline haemoplasma infection. This can be confirmed by PCR testing of
an EDTA blood sample which is a much more sensitive and reliable method of
diagnosis than examination of blood smears. It also enables characterization of which
haemoplasma infection is involved. Mycoplasma baemofelis (formerly H. felis large
form) is most often associated with causing an immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
whereas Candidatus Mycoplasma baemomirutum {formerly H. felis small form) can be
identified in clinically normal, non-anaemic cats. It has been suggested that Candidatus
Mycoplasma baemominutum can be an opportunistic cause of immune-mediated
haemolytic anaemia in immunosuppressed individuals such as those with FIV infection.
iv. Feline haemoplasma infections respond to treatment with antibiotics, doxycycline 
or enrofloxacin at 10 mg/kg/day for 21 days. Although most cats respond rapidly to
this treatment, it is usually not possible to eliminate infection completely and relapses
can be seen. Additional supportive care including intravenous fluid therapy, blood
transfusion, or haemoglobin-based oxygen carriers may be helpful in some cases. Use
of glucocorticoids (at anti-inflammatory or immunosuppresive doses) in these cases 
is controversial, but may be of help in severely affected individuals.
226
219, 220: Questions
219
219 A 3-year-old neutered male DSH cat presented with bilateral uveitis (219). The
cat was negative on screening retrovirus and coronavirus antibody tests. Toxoplas-
mosis is suspected.
i. If this is toxoplasmosis, how would the cat have acquired infection?
i. How would a diagnosis of this disease be attempted?
ii. Assuming it is toxoplasmosis, how should the cat be treated?
220
220 The flexor {withdrawal) reflex is being tested on a cat with suspected spinal cord
disease (220). Explain how the assessment of the response to this test would be used
to help localize a neurological lesion.
227
219, 220: Answers
219 i. Cats are the definitive host for Toxoplasma gondi. Although oocysts shed in
cat faeces can be infective for other cats, this is an unusual method of transmission.
Most cats acquire infection through ingestion of an infected intermediate host {e.g.
prey species, raw meat) where T. gondii is present in tissue cysts (bradyzoites). Some
individuals will acquire infection in utero via transplacental migration of the parasite.
 i. A presumptive diagnosis of toxoplasmosis is usually based on serological testing of
blood samples. Most feline infections are asymptomatic, and long-standing infections
are established with the organism present in tissue cysts. High IgG antibody titres
develop in most infected cats, but the magnitude of the titre cannot distinguish
symptomatic from asymptomatic cats. A four-fold or greater rise in antibody titre
over a 2-4 week period is indicative of recent infection, but in most cats, by the time
clinical signs develop, IgG antibody titres are already very high. Assay of IgM
antibodies is of greater diagnostic value. A high IgM antibody titre is indicative of
recent and/or active T. gondli infection and, combined with appropriate clinical signs,
this is a good basis for trial therapy. However, tissue biopsy and the demonstration of 
active infection histopathologically is the only way of confirming clinical disease.
m. The treatment of choice for toxoplasmosis is clindamycin (12.5 mg/kg twice daily)
given for a minimum of 4 weeks and for 2 weeks beyond clinical cure. Topical
 glucocorticoids would also be necessary to manage the ocular inflammation.
220 Localization of a spinal lesion is helped by evaluating withdrawal reflexes in the
forelimbs and hindlimbs, along with other reflexes such as the patellar, perineal
fanal), and panniculus. These reflexes are characterized as normal, increased
(hyperreflexic), or decreased (hyporeflexic). Hyporeflexia indicates a LMN lesion {i.e.
spinal cord disease in the segment of cord supplying the nerves involved in the reflex),
whereas hyperreflexia indicates an UMN lesion fan exaggerated reflex due to loss of
inhibitory neurones proximal to the reflex arc being tested) (see table below).
Other findings may also be valuable in neurolocalization, such as the presence of a
crossed-extensor reflex, postural reactions, degree of muscle tone fincreased with
UMN lesions), and muscle wastage (more rapid and severe with LMN lesions).
Assessmentof reflexresponses
Site of lesion
Cranial nerves
Forelimbs
Hindlimbs
Tail/bladder
5-I
Normal
UMN
UMN
UMN
7.1-9
Normal
LMN
UMN
UMN
T3-L2
Normal
Normal
UMN
UMN
L-S3
Normal
Normal
LMN
UMN
228
221, 222: Questions
221
221 A 12-year-old neutered female DSH cat was brought in with an ulcerated facial
nodule, which had been present for at least 6-8 weeks (221). A fine needle aspirate
revealed mixed inflammatory cells and mast cells.
i. What is the diagnosis?
ii. What is the behaviour of this disease and how should this cat be treated?
222 i. What are the characteristics of the
222
"ideal' blood donor?
ii. How should blood be collected and a
transfusion administered (222) to an
anaemic cat?
229
22 1, 222: Answers
221 i. The clinical signs and cytology are typical of mastocytic cutaneous mast cell tumour.
i. Although multiple mast cell tumours can occur in cats, most are reported to be
solitary and the head is the most commonly affected site. Mast cell tumours occur in
both a histiocytic and mastocytic form, the latter being more common.
The uncommon histiocytic form of tumour usually requires a biopsy for diagnosis
as the cells are less characteristic of typical mast cells. Siamese cats may be predisposed
and, in contrast to a mean age of 10 years for the mastocytic form, the histiocytic form
occurs in younger cats with a mean age of about 21/2 years. Spontaneous regression
has been reported with these after a varia ble time period (months to years).
Most cutaneous mast cell tumours in cats are mastocytic and well differentiated,
and behave in a benign manner fin contrast to what is often the case with visceral
mast cell tumours). Nevertheless, some cases will have both cutaneous and visceral
involvement and thus further investigations fin particular abdominal radiography and
ultrasonography looking for intestinal or splenic involvement) and routine
haematology should be performed.
Most cutaneous mastocytic mast cell tumours behave in a benign manner. Surgical
excision is the treatment of choice. Histiocytic forms may either be removed or
monitored, as most will regress spontaneously.
222 i. The ideal donor weighs at least 4.5 kg, is clinically healthy, has a PCV of at
least 30%, and has been blood typed. The cat should be screened and negative for key
blood-borne infections including FeLV and FIV {ELISA), FIA (haemoplasma PCR),
Bartonella (PCR) and, where relevant, Ebrlichia.
i. Blood is collected from a conscious or sedated donor. 7-14 ml blood per kg donor
bodyweight can be collected directly into syringes or into a blood bag preflushed and
then mixed with anticoagulant (1:9 ratio of acid citrate dextrose:blood). Following
blood collection, the donor should receive 2-3 times the volume collected as
replacement fluids {e.g. normal saline) IV to avoid hypovolaemia.
The blood type of the recipient should be known so that appropriate blood can be 
given. Blood should be administered IV through a filter as soon after collection as
possible at a rate not exceeding 5 ml/minute. Feline erythrocytes crenate rapidly after
collection making transfusion of stored cells more vulnerable to rapid removal. Where
cross-matching and typing has not been performed, a test dose of 0.5-1.0 ml of blood
should be administered and the patient observed for 20 minutes for evidence of
transfusion reaction {tachycardia, facial pruritus, vomiting, tachypnoea) before
continuing. If a transfusion reaction is suspected, the transfusion should be stopped
and administration of antihistamines {diphenhydramine 2 mg/kg IV) and general
shock therapy considered. Where needed, oxygen therapy and maintenance of a
patent airway may also be required.
230
223, 224: Questions
223
223 A 5-year-old neutered male DSH cat is presented with a 24-hour history of
severe lethargy progressing to collapse. Mucous membranes are noticeably pale on
physical examination (223) and haematology reveals a severe anaemia. The cat is a
known hunter from a rural background and on further questioning the owner reports
that rat poison is used on the local farm.
i. How could a suspicion of anti-coagulant rodenticide poisoning be confirmed in this
case?
ii. How should this patient be managed?
224 An anorexic 3.2 kg patient is
admitted (224) for assisted
nutritional support (tube feeding).
i. How can the energy require-
ments of this cat be calculated?
ii. If a veterinary liquid diet has 0.9
calories/ml, what volume does the
cat require per day to meet its
energy requirements?
i. What is the maximum meal size
and how should the cat be fed?
231
223, 224: Answers
223 i. Anticoagulant rodenticides are inhibitors of the enzyme responsible for recycling
vitamin K in the liver. Toxicity causes inhibition of production of the vitamin K
dependent coagulation factors II, VIl, IX, and X, resulting in spontaneous haemorrhage.
In this case diagnosis is suspected from the history and can be confirmed by identifying:
Prolonged coagulation times: factor Vll has the shortest half-life of the factors
affected so PT is prolonged before APTT.
Positive PIVKA test.
Haematology may reveal a non-regenerative anaemia in acute cases; within a few
days a strong regenerative response should be seen.
Normal fibrinogen and fibrin degradation products rule out DIC.
ii. The type of rodenticide should be confirmed where possible. Half-lives of
anticoagulant rodenticides vary from 14 hours (first generation products such as
warfarin) to 6 days {second generation products such as brodifacoum), and residual
anticoagulant effects may still be present for up to 3 weeks with some products.
Treatment includes 2.s-5 mg/kg vitamin K, (phytomenadione) given by oral or
subcutaneous routes for 14 {first generation) to 21 {second generation) days. PT can
be monitored to assess response to vitamin K, and should be checked 2-5 days after
stopping treatment. Additional supportive care may include:
9 ml/kg fresh plasma (may be easiest given as a whole blood transfusion).
Intra venous crystalloid fluids (e.g. normal saline) if the patient is hypovolaemic.
Whole blood or packed red cells if severely anaemic.
Haemoglobin-based oxygen carrier (e.g. Oxyglobin@ at 5-10 ml/kg IV).
Specific treatment according to the site of haemorrhage.
Colloid products such as hetastarch and dextrans should be avoided as anticoagu-
lation effects have been reported.
224 i. The cat's RER should be calculated first. RER is the resting energy requirement
for a normal, non-fasted cat at rest in thermoneutral conditions. It is calculated as:
Cats >2 kg bodyweight: RER = [30 x BW(kg)] + 70.
Cats <2 kg bodyweight: RER = 70( BW kg)0.75s.
In sick cats, the RER is usually multiplied by an illness factor (typically 1.2) to
calculate the illness energy requirements.
i. This cat's RER is 167 calories per day. Using a standard illness factor of 1.2, this
cat requires 200 calories per day. This will be supplied by 222 ml of food (200 + 0.9).
m. The maximum meal size is 45 ml/kg {stomach capacity of the cat). Initially the cat
should be fed four to six equal sized meals a day, although the meal frequency can
subsequently be reduced in those patients requiring long-term support (weeks or
longer). The cat is fed one third of the RER (74 ml) on day 1, two thirds of the RER
{148 ml) on day 2, and all of the RER from day 3 onwards. On the first 2 days, water
is also supplied via the tube to ensure that the cat's requirements for this are met.
232
225:Question
225
225 This cat (225) had a bilateral thyroidectomy performed 24 hours previously.
Now, the cat is inappetent and the total serum calcium level is 1.7 mmol/l (6.8 mg/dl).
How significant is this result, and how should the cat be managed?
233
225: Answer
225 The main concern in finding a calcium of 1.7 mmol/l (6.8 mg/dl) at this time after
surgery, is that the levels may fall further, potentially resulting in life-threatening
clinical signs. A total calcium of 1.7 mmol/l (6.8 mg/dl) may be associated with mild
clinical signs {restlessness, irrita bility, hyperaesthesia) although it is quite possible that
the cat will appear clinically normal. Calcium is present in three forms in the blood:
ionized calcium (50-60% of the calcium; the only form available for immediate action
 on cells), protein-bound (35-40%), and complexed {to, for example, phosphate and 
bicarbonate ions). Total calcium levels should be interpreted in relation to serum
albumin levels and electrolyte and acid-base status. Unlike dogs, the relationship
between total serum calcium and albumin levels is not close enough to provide a math-
 ematical formula which can be used to compensate for hypo- or hyperalbuminaemia.
Close monitoring of blood calcium levels or prophylactic treatment is recom-
mended according to the guidelines in the table (below).
Calcitriol {vitamin D} is rapidly effective {24-96 hours) and most cats can be
maintained on this alone within 5 days with no need for additional calcium supple-
mentation. Subsequently, the dose of calcitriol should be titrated to the lowest effec-
tive dose, aiming for blood calcium levels in the low-normal range. The cat should be
gradually weaned off therapy by reducing the daily dose or dosage frequency. Several
months of supplementation may be required but most cats can be weaned off all
treatment within 3 months of surgery.
Interpretation of blood calcium levels post thyroidectomy
Calcium mmoll (mg/dl)
 Interpretation
Action required
1.8-2.0 (7.2-8.0)
Mild, usually
Monitor calcium once to twice daily. no treatment
no signs
required at this stage
1.5-1.8 (6.0-7.2)
Moderate, may
If no clinical signs, can either monitor closely or
need treatment
treat prophylactically:
Calcium: 10% calcium gluconate: 5-15 ml/kg/day
in intravenous fuids or diluted with an equal
volume of 0.9% saline and given SC:
25-50 mg/kg elemental calcium orally twice daily
Vitamin D3: active calcitriol, 0.03-0.06 ug/kg/day
<1.5 (<6.0)
Severe, requires
Cats showing severe clinical signs (seizures, coma)
treatment
require immediate treatment:
Calcium gluconate: I 0% IV at 0.5-1.5 ml/kg diluted
 in 25-50 ml of 0.9% saline given slowly (over
20-30 minutes) to effect monitoring for bradycardia.
Cats showing milder clinical signs can be treated
with subcutaneous therapy. In both situations.
 subsequent oral calcium and vitamin D therapy are
required (as above)
234
Note: references are to case
arthritis 1, 14
breeds
numbers
ascites 68, 80, 97, 183
 blood type prevalence 86, 190
aspirin 197
inherited disorders 23, 33, 72,
Abyssinian cat 72, 86
asthma 77, 119, 173, 178
144, 187
acetaminophen (paracetamol) 44,
ataxia 139
British Shorthair 37, 86
118
abial standstill 108
 bronchial disease, chronic 150,
acidosis 174, 188
azalides 47
178
acromegaly 17
azithromycin 2, 47
see also asthma
actinic dermatitis 171
azotaemia 174, 176,213
 bronchoalveclar lavage
 adenocarcinoma
cytology 47, $2, 119
 bronchial/pulmonary 124
Bacteroides spp. 182
prccedure 146
colon 84
balanoposthitis 155
bronchcconstriction 173
adrenal glands
barium-impregnated polyethylene
bronchodilators 52, 173, 178
bilateral enlargement 147, 168
spheres (BIPS) 18
bronchopneumonia S2
unilateral enlargement 49
Bartonella spp. 13, 15
bulla csteotomy 145
 adrenccorticotrophic hormone
basal cell tumour, nasal 170
Burmese cat 33, 86, 126
(ACTH) 168
 beclomethasone propionate
adriamycin (doxorubicin) 7S
178
caleitriol (vitamin D3) 225
Aelurostrongyhus abstrusus 150 
benazepril 12, 197
calcium:phosphate ratio 34
aglepristone 133
β2-adrencceptor agonists 52,
calcium, blood levels 34, 102,
albuterol 173, 178
173, 178
225
allergic disorders 112
Birman cat 86
calcjum gluconate 22s
 see also hypersensitivity
bisacodyl 103
calcium oxalate crystals/uroliths
alopecia, ventral 121
bladder
141, 153
alpha-blcckers 92
distension 161
calcofluor white S8
 amitriptyline 159
drainage 26, 161
Campylobacter jejuni 62
amoxicillin 36, 38, 160
expression 192
Candidatus Mycoplasma
amoxicillin-clavulanate 2, 215
rupture 69, 80
haemomimtum 218
amphotericin B 156,19S, 210
tumour29
carbimazole 213
ampicillin/amoxicillin 36
wall thickening 159
carbonic anhydrase inhibitors,
amyloidosis 12,72
bleeding disorders S7
oral 139
anaemia
blindness, sudden cnset 28
cardiac disease 15, 108, 120
jn CRF 4
blood, collection for transfusion
causing thromboembolic
haemolytic 9
222
disease 132
regenerative 148, 218
blood donor, ideal' 222
cardiac silhouette
rodenticide toxicity 223
blood glucose 17, 21, 181
enlarged 87
analgesia 113
 blood pressure measurement
cbscured 158, 166
 angiotensin-converting enzyme
216
cardiomegaly 20, 37, 129
{ACE) inhibitors 12, 134, 197
blood smear
ECG 152
anisocytosis 148, 218
haemolytic anaemia 9
anorexia 61, 199, 209
haemoplasma infection 218
dilated 197
 see also appetite loss
leucopenia 163
hypertrophic 20
 anterior mediastinal lymphoma
new methylene blue-stained 9,
 carnitine deficiency, relative 130
(AML) 71, 123
154
carprofen 29
 antibodies, maternal transfer SS,
regenerative anaemia 148
central venous pressure (CVT)
110
reticulccytes 154
measurement 82
anticholinesterase 10S
Romanowsky-staining 9,
cephalosporins 182, 21$
anticonvulsants 139
148
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
anti-diuretic hormone (ADH),
Wright-Giemsa stained
analysis 46
response test 19, 114
218
collection prccedure S3
antiemetics68
blood transfusion 101, 222
contraindications to collection
 antifreeze ingestion 142
blood types 86, 190, 222
46
antifungal agents
blood typing 101
drainage obstruction 135
systemic 48, 156, 175, 195, 210
body condition scoring 186
reducing production 19
topica1 48
bodyweight
cestodes 180
antihistamines 222
reduction 189
charcoal, activated 44
antioxidants 44
relative 186
chemotherapy 71, 84
appetite
 bone marrow biopsy, indications
doxorubicin 75
1oss 25, 30, 61, 68, 163, 199,
7, 112, 179
health and safety 205
209
bone marrow disorders 112, 163,
ymphoma 207
 see also anorexia
179
chest drainage 36, 66, 88
stimulation 199
Bordetella bronchiseptica 76
Chlamydophila felis 2, 6, 76
23.5
rex
chlorambucil 137,182,184,207
cutaneous lesions, see skin lesions 
doxycycline 2, 47, 76, 218
chlorhexidine 48, 169
cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2)
duodenum, mass 98 
chlorpromazine 68
inhibitors 29, 84, 156
dysautonomia, feline 24
chlorpropamide 19
cyclophosphamide 84, 207
dyschezia 84, 127
cholangichepatitis 182, 215
cyclosporine 16
dysmetria 139
cholangitis, fymphccytic 164
cyproheptadine 199
dysphonia 91
chorioretinopathy, hypertensive
cystitis 81
dyspnoea 36, 39, 52
28
bacteria1 73
emergency procedures 173
chronic renal failure (CRF)
idiopathic 159, 161
expiratory 77, 91
ACE inhibitor therapy 134
cystocentesis 26, 161
history and examination 91
anaemia 4
Cystoisospora (Isospora) spp. 62
inspiratory 40, 71, 91, 124,
bicchemical abnormalities
cytochrome p450 system 44
145, 158, 166, 201
174, 191
recurrent 150
clinical signs 196
dantrolene 92, 192
severe 173, 214
dietary control 149
degenerative joint disease (DJD)
dystocia 22
differentiating from ARF 209
39
dysuria 29, 95, 159,161
hypertension 216
dehydration, CRF 149
kidney changes 174
dermatitis
 echecardiography 15, 20, 120
PKD 23
actinic 171
M mode 197
wrinalysis 176
flea allergic 3
edrophonium chloride injection
chylomicrons 63
dermatophyte infection 121
105
chylothorax 66
diagnosis S8
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 74
cimetidine 44
environmental contro] 48
electrccardiography (ECG) 20
ciprofloxacin 47
teatment 48, 175
24 hour (Helter) 83
cisapride 18
desmopressin (DDAVP) 19
cape rhythms 108
cisternal puncture S3
Devon Rex cat S9, 144
heart rate assessment 108, 152
clavulanate/amoxicillin 2, 215
dexamethasone screening test
interpretation 152
clindamycin 36, 38, 47, 219
168
enalapril 12, 197
Clostridia 182
diabetes insipidus 19, 114
encephalopathy, hepatic 206
coagulaticn disorders S7, 106,
diabetes mellitus
endocarditis, bacterial 15
144
control of blood glucose 21
endometrial hyperplasia, cystic
coat colour 167
diagnosis 181
109,212
coccidian parasites 62
insulin ineffectiveness 11 
colchicine S0
insulin resistance 17, 168
203
collapse 223
neuropathy 35
energy requirements, resting
colleid products 223
diaphragm
(RER)224
colon, tumours 84
hernia 37
enrofloxacin 36, 47, 218
colonoscopy 203
rupture 158
enteropathogens 10, 62,
107
colostrum Ss, 110 
diarrhoea 62, 117
eosinophilia, differentiai
congenital disorders 18, 37, 51,
chronic 107
diagnoses 112
72, 94, 139, 206, 211
chronic small bowel 8
 eosinophilic airway inflammation
conjunctivitis 2,6
differentiating small and large
119
constipation S1, 95, 103, 127,
bowel disorders 8
eosinophilic granuloma complex
217
haematochezia and dyschezia
{EGC) 16, 156
evaluation 127
epistaxis S7,167
management 103
infectious causes 10
erythrocyte refractile bodies, see
severe 103, 127
diazepam 92, 125, 192, 199, 208
Heinz bodies
cornea, clouding 70
 erythracytes, see red blood cells
Cornish Rex cat 40
calcium:phosphate ratio 34
erythromycin 18, 47
coronavirus antibody testing 126
CRF 149
erythropoietin 4
corticosteroids 145
dry foods 73, 141, 153
Escherichia coli 182, 215
see aiso ramed agents
hypersensitivity 107, 121
ethanol therapy 142
cryptococcosis
meat cnly 34
ethylene glycol ingestion 142
nasal40, 195
for weight loss 189
etretinate 79
oral156
digoxin 197
Cryptococcus reoformans 40,
dioctyl sodium succinate 103
fading kitten syndrome' 138
195
diphenhydramine 222
faecal analysis 10, 107, 117, 198
crystalluria 73, 141, 176
Dipylidim caninwm 180
famotidine S0
Ctenocephalides felis 3
dirofilariasis 77, 150
febantel 198
Cushing's syndrome
diureties 19, 129, 173, 197
feline calicivirus (FCV) infection
(hyperadrenccorticism) 17, 74,
Doppler SBP measurement 216
6, 14, 42, 56, 76
147, 168
doxorubicin (adriamycin) 75
carrier cat 78
236
rex
feline herpes virus (FHV)
gastrcintestinal tract
hyperaldosteronism 30
infection 6,13, 56, 76, 200
endoscopy 90, 203
lypercalcaemia 141
carrier cat 78
 inflammatory disease 107
hyperchylomicronaemia63
feline immunodeficiency virus
tumours 84, 207
lhyperglycaemia 181
{FTV) 13, 14, 38, 41
Giardia infection 117
hyperkalaemia 188
oral disease 41, 42
gingivitis 41
hyperlipoproteinaemia 63
positive test 110, 122
necrotizing ulcerative 38
hyperparathyroidism, secondary
ransmission 122
gingivostomatitis,
nutritional34
feline infectious anaemia (FIA)
hymphoplasmacytic 42
hyperphosphataemia 174
104, 218
 glomerular filtration rate 174,
hyperpncea 91
feline infectious peritonitis (FTP)
213
hyperproteinaemia 174, 176, 213
13,97,118, 162, 202
 glomerulonephritis 12
hypersensitivity
diagnosis 126
glucccorticoids S, 68, 169, 173,
detary 107, 121
pyogranulomatous lesions 61
178,182, 184, 218
fleas 3, 121
transmission risks 202
glucosamine 39, 159
hypertension 28, 43
feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) 13,
glutaraldehyde 48
in CRF 216
14,38,71
glutathione 177
ccular abnormalities 28, 30,
cutcomes of exposure 96, 104
glyceryl trinitrate 129, 173
43
outcomes of infection 96
glycosaminoglycans 70
hyperthyroidism 20, 89, 116,
patient-side test kit 172
replacers 159
181,185, 213
preventative plan 104
goldsalts 137
diagnosis 143
test 140
 gonadotrophin releasing
masking of renal disease 213
hormone (GnRH) analogues
radioactive iodine therapy 193
lesicn (FORL) 41
93
hyphaema 13, 28, 30
feline trypsin-like
granuloma
hypcalbuminaemia 12
immunoreactivity (fTLI) 25,
eosinophilic 16, 156
hypocalcaemia 34, 102, 225
31, 68
oral 156
hypokalaemia 30, 33, 174, 185,
femur, distal pathclogical
griseofulvin 175
191
fracture 34
growth, restriction/stunting 1,
hypothyroidism 72, 193
fenbendazole 117, 198
126,206,211
congenital S1
fentanyl, transdermal 113
ferrous sulphate 4
H,-blcckers 4, S0
 jeccaecocolic junction, mass 207
fipronil3
haematochezia 62, 84
imidacloprid 3
fea infestation
haematuria 29, 95, 161
immune-mediated disorders 14,
hypersensitivity 3, 121
haemoplasma infection 218
184
treatment 3
head tit 
immunity, maternal transfer SS,
fleas, life cycle 3
left-sided S9
110, 138
flexor (withdrawal) reflexes
nght-sided 136
immunoglobulin G (IgG) Ss, 219
220
health and safety, cytotoxic
immunoglobulin M (IgM) 219
fluconazole 156, 195
agents 20s
immunosuppressive therapy 137,
flucytosine 19s, 210
heart failure, congestive 173
182,184
fluoroquinolones 47, 182,
heart rate, assessment from ECG
impression smear 169, 195
215
108, 152
infertility, queen 212
fluticasone propionate 178
heart rhythm 108
inflammatory bowel disease,
food aversion 199
heartworm, feline 77, 150
lymphocytic-plasmacytic 107
foods, see diet; nutritional
Heinz bodies 9
inhalation, steam S
support
Helicobacter spp. 160
inhaler, metered dose 178
 fracture, acetabulum 103
hepatomegaly 164
inherited disorders 23, 33, 72,
fractures
hernia
144,187
pathological of femur 34
diaphragmatic 37
insect growth regulators 3
sacrum 192
perineal217
insulin resistance 17, 147
fructosamine, serum 181
Holter monitoring 83
insulin therapy 21, 147
fungal culture S8
Horner's syndrome S9
ineffectiveness 11
furosemide 129, 139, 173,
Howell-Jolly bodies 218
 interferon, recombinant human 
197
human choricnic gonadotrophin
200
{hCG]85
intrinsic factor 31
gait abnormalities 35
hydrccephalus
jodine, radioactive 89
gall bladder mass 215
congenital139
iron deficiency 4
gastric emptying 18
internal 13S
isoerythrolysis, neonatal 101,
 gastric Helicobacter-like
hyperactivity 116
190
organism (GHLO) 160
hyperadrenccorticism (HAC) 17,
jsotretinoin 79
gastritis 90, 160
74,147,168
itraconazole 48, 156, 175, 195
237
rex
jaundice 118, 164,182, 215
lysosomal storage disease 70
nasopharyngoscopy 111
joints
nasopharynx
degenerative disease 39
macrolides 47
biopsy 111
inflammation 14
magnesium ammonium 
mass 111, 145
pain 1, 39
phosphate (struvite) 73
nebulization, saline S, S2
joint smear 14
magnetic resonance imaging
neck ventroflexion 33, 185
'junctionopathies'18$
(MRI) 147, 168
nephrolith 134
malnutriticn 194
nephropathy, protein-losing 12
keratinccytes, acantholytic 184
mammary glands, hyperplasia
neuromuscular disorders 185
ketcconazole 147
133
neuropathies 35
kidneys
marbofloxacin 36
newborn, see kittens
amyloidosis 12
mast cell tumours 6S, 221
 nictitating membrane, protrusicn 
biopsy 162
meat-only diets 34
8
CRF 174
mediastinum, mass 71, 123
nitenpyram3
lymphoma 204
megacolon 103, 127
nitroglycerine 173
polycystic disease 23, 187
megacesophagus 128
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
size 134, 162, 174, 196, 204
megoestrol acetate 16, 93, 199
drugs 12,29, 84, 156
kittens
melanin 167
nutritional disorders 34, 194
causes of mortalities 138
meloxicam 29, 84
nutritional support 130
infectious disease 76, 138
mental retardation S1
energy requirements 224
maternal antibodies Ss, 110,
Mescestoides lineatus 180
importance in sick cat 194
138
metered dose inhaler (MDI) 178
indications for 194
neonatal isoerythrolysis 190
methazolamide 139
nasc-oesophageal tube 64, 99
methimazole 213
cesophagcstomy 165
labour22
methoprene 3
mystagmus 136
lactulose 103, 206, 217
methotrexate 182
laparotomy 61, 207
methylprednisclone 16
obesity
Jaxative agents 103, 217
metoclopramide 18
assessment 186
left ventricle
metronidazole 36, 38, 107, 117,
 nisks and management 189
enlargement 152
160,182,215
ccular disorders
hypertrophy 20
metyrapone 147
infectious 2, 6, 13, 219
wall thickening 120
miconazole 48
neurologica1 24
leucopenia 163
Microsporum canis 48, 58, 175
 systemic hypertension 28, 30,
lily toxicity 188
milbemycin 198
43
lipaemia 63
mitotane 147
Gedema
lipidosis, hepatic 130
mucopolysaccharidosis 70
pulmonary 129, 173
liver
mucous membranes, pallor 4
subcutaneous pitting 12
biopsy 164, 215
muscle relaxants 92, 192
cesophagostomy tube 165
congenital conditions 206
musculoskeletal pain 1, 39
cesophagus, stricture S0
enlargement 164
myasthenia gravis, diagnosis 105
oestrus, control 93
lipidesis 130
mycobacterial infections 115,
cestrus behaviour, following
nodular lesicns 61
131
neutering 8S
 paracetamol (acetaminophen)
Mycoplasma spp. 47, 76
cmega-3 fatty acids 149
toxicity 44
Mycoplasma haemofelis 104, 218
cmeprazole 160
liver disease, drugs 177
mycosis fungoides 79
ondansetron 68
Longhair cats 23, 187
mydriasis 24
opioids 113
lower motor neurone (LMN)
oral disease 16, 38, 41, 42, 56,
disease 35
N-acetyleysteine (NAC) 44
156,179
lufenuron 3, 175
nasal bridge, depression 70
oral hygiene 42
lungs
nasal cavity
orthopncea 91
cardiogenic cedema 129
biopsy 157, 170
osteopenia 34
infiltrative disease 115
bleeding 57
orarian remnant syndrome 85
umour 124
cryptococcosis 40,195
ovulation, jnduction 93
ymphoadenomegaly,
flushing ≤, 111, 157
ovulation failure 212
submandibular 115
neoplasia 157
oxazepam 199
ymphoma 115
nasal discharge 5, 56, 157,
oxygen therapy 214
anterior mediastinal (AML)
195
71, 123
unilateral 54, 167
pads, spongy swelling 137
cutaneous epitheliotropic 79
nasal lesions
pallor 4
intestinal 84, 207
crusting/ulcerated 171
pancreas, hypoplasia/aplasia 31
renal 204
proliferative 170
pancreatitis 2s
treatment 7S, 20S
naso-oesophageal feeding 64, 99
feline acute 68
238
rex
pancytopenia 179
potassium bromide 208
renal failure
paracetamol (acetaminophen) 44,
potassium citrate 153
acute (ARF) 188, 210
118
potassium supplementation 191
differentiating acute and
paralysis, hindlimb 132
poxvirus (cowpox) infection
chronic 209
paraneoplastic disease 74, 115
169
see also chronic renal failure
parasites 112
praziquantel 180, 198
{CRF}
intestinal 180
prazosin 92,192
renomegaly 162, 187, 204
nematode 198
prednisolone 16, 50, 84, 85, 107,
 resting energy requirement (RER)
protozca 10, 62
137, 139, 145, 184, 207
224
respiratory 77, 119, 150
 prednisolone sodium succinate
reticulocytes 154
see also flea infestation
173
retina
parathyroid glands,
pregnancy
central degeneration 197
damage/remova1 102
contro]93
detachment 28, 43
parathyrcid hormone 34
early loss 212
progressive atrophy 72
paws, pododermatitis 137
labour 22
retinoids 79
pelvic canal, narrowing 103
prepuce, discharge 155
Rex cats 40, 59, 86, 144
pemphigus foliaceous 184
primidone 139
rhinitis
penicillins 38, 182
prochlorperazine 68
chronic S,157
penis, bruising/ischaemia 15S
progestagens 93, 133, 169
fungal 27, 40
 pentobarbitone (pentobarbital)
progesterone, endogenous 85,
post-viral's
125
133
beatment S
pentosan polysulphate 39, 159
progesterone receptor antagonists
rhinotomy S
perineal hernia 217
133
road traffic accidents 69, 80,
 periodontal disease, necrotizing 
prostaglandin F
109
192, 201
38
prostatic disease 95
rodenticide toxicity 223
 pericardioperitoneal
protein energy malnutrition
rutin 66
diaphragmatic hernia (PPDH)
194
37
protein restriction 12, 149, 206
sacrum, fracture 192
Persian cat 23, 86, 97, 187
proteinuria 176
S-adenosyl methionine (SAMe)
petechiation 106
protozoan infections 10, 62, 117
177,182
phenobarbitone (phenobarbital)
proxymetacaine 64
salbutamol 52, 173, 178
12S,208
pseudocysts, perinephric 204
sarcoma, vaccine site 151
phenoxybenzamine 92, 192
ptyalism 156, 211
seborrhoea sicca 193
phenytoin 139, 208
pulmonary cedema 129, 173
seizures 125
 pheromone sprays 199
pulmonary tumour 124
medical management 208
phosphate restriction 149
pupil dilation 211
selamectin 3, 198
photodynamic therapy 171
pupil size 24
Siamese cats 18, 86, 136, 139,
pimcbendan 197
'pyloric stenosis' 18
167
piroxicam 29, 84
pylorcmyotomy 18
'sick euthyrcid' 116
pituitary gland, mass 147, 168
pyometra,'uterine' stump 109
 skeletal pain 1, 39
platelet clumping 106, 163
pyothorax 32, 36
skin fragility 74
pleural effusion 36, 166
pyrantel 198
skin lesions
pleural fluids, categories 183
pyrexia S6
multiple nodular 65
pneumonia S2
pyriproxyfen 3
nodular/plaque-like 79
pododermatitis, ulcerative 137
pyruvate kinase deficiency 72
nodular/ulcerative 169,
poisoning, see toxicities
221
pollakiuria 159, 161
radicactive iodine therapy 193
pemphigus foliaceous
polyarthritis, inflammatory 1, 14
radiotherapy 171
184
polychromasia 148, 218
ramipril12
squamous cell carcinoma
polycystic kidney disease (PKD)
Rapid H blood typing card
171
23,187
101
ucerative 200
polydipsia 72, 114, 141, 196
red blood cells
skull, domed 139
differential diagnoses 60
fragility 72
sneezing 40, $6, 57, 91, 157,
polymyopathies 33, 185
Heinz bodies 9
195
polyneuropathy 35
Howell-Jolly bodies 218
sodium hypochlorite 202
polyp
immature 154
'spacer' device 178
ducdenal98
reflexes 220
spasticity 144
nasopharyngeal 145
regurgitation
spinal jnjuries 132, 192
polyuria 72, 114, 141, 196
differential diagnoses S0
spinal lesion 220
portosystemic vascular anomaly
distinguishing from vomiting
spironolactone 30, 129, 197
94, 206, 211
128
 squamous cel carcinoma 156,
 portovenogram 94
intermittent 71
171
239
ndex
Staphylococcus 182
tracheal avulsion 201
vomiting 2S, 128
starvation 194
tracheal lavage 146
distinguishing from
steatorrhoea 31
tracheoscopy 124, 201
regurgitation 128
stifle joint, degenerative disease
ransfusion reaction 222
intermittent 68, 182
39
transitional cell carcinoma (TCC)
 persistent 18, 90, 98, 160
Streptococcus 182
29
progressive 207
struvite crystals 73
traumatic injury 69, 80, 192,
recurrent severe 90
 sublingual lesion, proliferative
201
yulval discharge 109
156
tichogram 121
sucralfate 4, S0
tri-iodothyronine (T3)
warfarin toxicity 223
sulphonamides 156
suppression test 143
water deprivaticn test 19, 114
trilostane 147
water intake 60, 114
tachycardia 116
turbinectomy S
see also polydipsia
tachypnoea 91
weight loss 13, 25, 31, 61, 72,
Taenia taeniaformis 180
ulceration
116, 130, 134, 181, 185, 213
'tail pull' injury 192
skin 171, 200
in obesity 189
taurine 45, 130
tongue S6
withdrawal reflexes 220
deficiency 45, 197
urethra, obstruction 26, 92,
Wood's lamp 48, 58
functions 45
161
supplementation 130
urethrogram, retrograde 95
zinc sulphate centrifugation 117
technetium 99m 143
urinary cortisol to creatinine ratio
 zona pellucida antigens, porcine
teeth
(UCCR) 168
93
extraction 41, 42
urinary protein:creatinine ratio
zoonoses 117, 131, 169, 198
'neck' lesions 41
(UPC) 12
root abscess 54, 167
urinary retention 192
Tensilon 10S
urinary tract disease
terbinafine 175
lower 67, 73, 9s, 141
terbutaline S2
see also parts of terinary
tetracyclines 47, 76
theophylline S2
urination
hiazide diuretics 19
encouraging frequent 159
thoracccentesis 36, 66, 166
jnappropriate 67
fuid analysis 32, 88
lack of 69, 192
procedure 88
urine
thrembecytopathy 106
culture 26
thromboembolic disease, distal
dipstick evaluation 100
132
pH 141, 153
thymoma 123
urine sediment analysis 73, 81,
thyroidectomy, hypocalcaemia
141, 176
after 102,22$
urine specific gravity {USG) 19,
thyraid mass 116
176, 213
carcinoma 89
uroliths 141, 153, 176
nodule 213
ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA)
thyrotropin releasing hormone
177, 182
(TRH) stimulation test S1,
uveitis 13, 219
143, 193
L-thyroxine S1, 193
vaccination
thyroxine {T4) levels 20, $1, 116,
Chlamydophila 2
143, 181
FeLV-infected cat 104
tongue
ste-associated sarcoma
petechiaticn 106
151
proliferative lesions 16, 156
very low density lipoproteins
ulceration S6
{VLDLs) 63
torovirus 8
vestibular disease 136
Toxocara cati 198
vincristine 84, 207
toxicities
viral infections 10
ethylene glycol 142
vitamin B,, 31
liy 188
vitamin D, (calcitriol) 225
paracetamc] (acetaminophen)
vitamin K, (phytomenadione)
44
223
rodenticides 223
vitamin K-dependent
Toxoplasma gondi 13, 104, 219
coagulopathy 44
240