Self-AssessmentColourReviewof
Small
Mammals
SusanA.Brown
KarenL.Rosenthal
MANSON
PUBLISHING
Self-Assessment Colour Review of
Small Mammals
Susan A. Brown
DVM
Midwest Bird & Exotic Animal Hospital
Westchester, Illinois
Karen L. Rosenthal
MS, DVM, Dipl ABVP Avian
The Animal Medical Center
New York, New York
Manson Publishing/The Veterinary Press
Common name
Scientific name
Original range
13-lined ground squirrel
Citellus tridecemlineatus
North America
African hedgehog
Ateterix atbiventris
Africa
Chinchilla
Chinchilla laniger
South America
Common marmoset
Callithrix jacchus
South America
Cotton-tail rabbit
Sytvilagus nuttali
North America
Cotton-top tamarin
Saguinus oedipus
South America
Domestic rabbit
Oryctolagus cunicutus
Worldwide
Eastern gray squirrel
Sciurus carolinensis
North America
Eastern red squirrel
Tamiasciurus hudsonicus
North America
European hedgehog
Erinaceus europaeus
Europe
Ferret
Mustela putoriusfuro
Europe/North Africa
Golden hamster
Mesocricetus auratus
East Europe/Middle East
Guinea pig
Cavia porcetlus
South America
Lion tamarin
Leontopithecus rosalia
Brazil
Long tailed macaque
Maccaca fascicularis
South-East Asia
Mongolian gerbil
Meriones unguiculatus
Mongolia
Mouse
Mus muscuius
Worldwide
Owlmonkey
Aotus trivirgatus
Central/South America
Patas monkey
Erythrocebus patas
Africa
Potbellied pig
Sus scrota
Asia
Prairie dog
Cynomys ludovicianus
North America
Raccoon
Procyon lotor
North America
Rat
Rattus norvegicus
Worldwide
Red fox
North America
Rhesus monkey
Macaca mulatta
India
Spider monkey
Atetes geoffroyi
South America
Squirrel monkey
Saimiri sciureus
South America
Stripped skunk
Mephitis mephitis
North America
Virginia opossum
Didetphis virginiana
North America
Copyright @ 1997 Manson Publishing Ltd
ISBN: 1-874545-45-6
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means without the written
permission of the copyright holder or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright Act 1956 (as amended), or under the terms of any licence permitting
limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 33-34 Alfred Place,
London WC1E 7DP.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be
lia ble to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
For full details of all Manson Publishing Ltd titles please write to:
Manson Publishing Ltd, 73 Corringham Road, London NW11 7DL
Typeset and designed by: Paul Bennett
Colour reproduction: Reed Reprographics, Ipswich, UK
Printed by: Grafos SA, Barcelona, Spain
Preface
Small mammal veterinary medicine has greatly expanded in its breadth of knowledge over
the past ten years. During the same period, people owming pets such as rabbits, ferrets and
rodents have demanded a higher quality of medical care than was formerly expected.
These two factors have forced veterinarians to seek out sources of information about these
species. Until recently, it has been difficult to obtain accurate, current, non-anecdotal
written material on small mammals.
To aid veterinarians in their quest for information, we offer this text in a self-
assessment format which challenges readers to use their clinical knowledge on a variety of
species. We have assembled an international collection of distinguished colleagues that
have contributed cases which range from basic to advanced. Therefore, this book can be
used by veterinarians with a wide range of clinical experience.
The format is a question followed by its detailed answer on the next page. We have
strived to construct every question and answer to ^stand alone’ and not rely on informa-
tion provided in other cases. The topics consist of case reports, clinical techniques,
anatomy and husbandry. We have tailored the number of questions per species to reflect
the frequency in which these species are seen in practice. As such, rabbits, ferrets and
guinea pigs constitute the largest numbers of cases in the book.
A unique aspect of this book is that most questions are illustrated with a photograph,
radiograph or diagram to aid in understanding a concept. Most case report answers
include differential diagnoses to enable veterinarians to reason beyond the the scope of
particular questions. Unlike many other small mammal texts, this is a very practical book
with detailed solutions that allow veterinarians to put into use the information they have
just read.
We anticipate that some readers will criticize the extent or complexity of the diagnostics
and treatments suggested for some of the species in the text. Although financial con-
straints often determine the level of veterinary care patients receive,veterinarians are
obliged to make owners aware of all the available options. We have offered in our
answers the best possible treatment plans available at the time of writing and, as needed,
other less complex or expensive options can be tailored from this information. We must,
as veterinarians, offer the same high standard of care for these small mammal species as
we do for other companion animals and let the owners decide for themselves the extent to
which they wish to pursue treatment. The human-animal bond can extend to all species
and it should not be dishonored by our prejudgments.
The text is not meant to be memorized. Small mammal medicine is a rapidly evolving
field. The ultimate challenge to veterinarians is to apply the critical thinking this book
demands, the fundamental veterinary medicine principles, and the basic knowledge of
physiology, anatomy and husbandry to future situations that may be encountered in small
mammal species.
Susan A.Brown
Karen L. Rosenthal
1997
Dedications
Richard, Zoki, Alex, Falcor, Uma, Travis, Lucy, Psycho Kitty, Cleo and Indy
Hilary, Eleyna,Bill and Tigger
3
Contributors
Nancy L. Anderson, DVM, Dipl ABVP Avian
Holly S. Mullen, DVM, Dipl ACVS
Ohio State University
Emergency Animal Hospital & Referral
Columbus, Ohio USA
Center
San Diego, California USA
R Avery Bennett, DVM, MS, Dipl ACVS
University of Florida
Christopher J. Murphy, DVM, Dipl ACVO
Gainesville, Florida USA
University of Wisconsin
Madison, Wisconsin USA
Beth Ann Breitweiser, DVM
All Wild Things Exotic Animal Hospital
Joanne Paul-Murphy, DVM, Dipl ACZM
Indianapolis, Indiana USA
University of Wisconsin
Susan A Brown, DVM
Madison, Wisconsin USA
Midwest Bird & Exotic Animal Hospital
Robert D. Ness, DVM
Westchester, Illinois USA
Midwest Bird & Animal Hospital
David A. Crossley, BVetMed, FAVD, MRCVS
Westchester, Illinois USA
Animal Medical Centre Referral Services
Barbara Oglesbee, DVM, Dipl ABVP Avian
Chorlton, Manchester UK
Ohio State University
Columbus, Ohio USA
Barbara J. Deeb, DVM, MS
University of Washington
Sharon Patton, MS, PhD
Seattle, Washington USA
University of Tennessee
Pamela H. Eisele, DVM, Dipl ACLAM
Knoxville, Tennessee USA
University of California
Stuart L. Porter, VMD
Davis, California USA
 Blue Ridge Community College
Paul A. Flecknell, MA, VetMB, PhD, DLAS.
Weyers Cave, Virginia USA
Dipl ECVA, MRCVS
Samuel M. Ristich, DVM
University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne
Indian Prairie Animal Hospital
Newcastle-upon-Tyme, Tyne and Wear UK
Aurora, Illinois USA
Karen Helton, DVM, Dipl ACVD
Karen L. Rosenthal, MS, DVM,
Cardiopet Dermatology Service
Dipl ABVP Avian
Little Falls, New Jersey USA
The Animal Medical Center
Elizabeth V. Hillyer, DVM
New York, New York USA
Oldwick, New Jersey USA
Andrew Routh, BVSc, MRCVS
Stapeley Grange Wildlife Hospital & Cattery
Jeffrey R Jenkins, DVM, Dipl ABVP Avian
Avian & Exotic Animal Hospital
Nantwich, Cheshire UK
San Diego, California USA
David Scarff, BVetMed, CertSAD, MRCVS
Cathy A. Johnson-Delaney, DVM
Anglian Referrals
University of Washington
Norwich, Norfolk UK
Seattle, Washington USA
Anthony J. Smith, DVM
El Paso Zoo
Douglas R. Mader, MS, DVM, Dipl ABVP
Long Beach Animal Hospital
El Paso, Texas USA
Long Beach, California USA
Greg Whelan, BVMS, CertLAS, MRCVS
Paul E. Miller, DVM, Dipl ACVO
SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals
University of Wisconsin
Harlow, Essex UK
Madison, Wisconsin USA
David L. Williams, MA, VetMB, PhD,
Timothy H. Morris, BVetMed, PhD,
CertVOphthal, MRCVS
CertLAS, Dipl ACLAM, MRCVS
Animal Health Trust
SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals
Newmarket, Suffolk UK
Harlow, Essex UK
4
I-3: Questions
1 This four-year-old African
hedgehog died suddenly with-
out premonitory signs (1).
a What are the lesion(s) obser-
ved on necropsy?
b What is the most likely
cause of the postmortem
changes in this animal?
2 A seven-year-old intact male rabbit is lethargic, cachexic and approximately 8%
dehydrated. The mucous membranes are sticky and pale and the kidneys are smaller
than average. The heart rate is 300 beats per minute and the respiratory rate is 28
breaths per minute. The rabbit has a history of chronic respiratory disease, which has
been treated by the owner with an unknown dose of tetracycline in the water for the
past two years. There has been a noticeable weight loss over the past two months and
the rabbit has been anorectic for two weeks. The following are the serum bio-
chemistry and hematology results:
Test
Patient vatue
Normal vatues
PCV
19%
33-50%
 Plasma protein
74 g/l (7.4 g/dl)
54-83 g/ (5.4-8.3 g/dl)
WBC
7.2 × 10/ml
5.2-12.5 ×10/ml
CO:
11.4 mmol/l (11.4 mEq/l)
16-38 mmol/l (16-38 mEq/l)
Calcium
3.0 mmol/ (12.0 mg/dl)
1.4-3.1 mmol/l (5.6-12.5 mg/dl)
Phosphorus
3.4 mmol/ (10.6 mg/dl)
1.3-2.2 mmol/1 (4.0-6.9 mg/dl)
Glucose
5.6 mmol/ (100 mg/dl)
4.2-8.7mmol/l (75-155 mg/dl)
Creatinine
689.5 μmol/ (7.8 mg/dl)
44.2-221 μrmol/i (0.5-2.5 mg/dl)
BUN
191 mg/dl
13-26 mg/dl
Sodium
151 mmol/1l (151 mEq/l)
131-155 mmol/ (131-155
mEq/l)
Potassiurm
6.4 mmol/ (6.4 mEq/l)
3.6-6.9 mmol/ (3.6-6.9 mEq/l)
Alanine aminotransferase 63 U/]
48-80 U/1
Urine specific gravity
1.010
1.003-1.036
a What is your diagnosis for the anorexia?
b What is your treatment regime for this rabbit?
3 Fentanyl/droperidol and fentanyl/fluanisone are useful for providing analgesia and
immobilization for minor surgical procedures in rabbits. After completion of the
procedure, some of the effects of these neuroleptanalgesic mixtures are reversed with
which one of these drugs: butorphanol, naloxone, atipamezole or yohimbine?
5
I-3:Answers
1 a The most prominent gross lesion is splenomegaly. Hepatomegaly is also present.
b Neoplasia. Numerous types of neoplasia are described in all hedgehog species
including primary or metastatic adenocarcinoma, hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma,
fibrosarcoma, hepatoma, hepatocellular carcinoma and leiomyosarcoma. Animals
over three years of age are most susceptible. In one study, 69% of individuals that
died in an African hedgehog collection had evidence of an ongoing neoplastic
process. Other differential diagnoses for splenomegaly and hepatomegaly include
septicemia, trauma and cardiac disease.
2 a The presence of markedly elevated BUN and creatinine values in the face of
isosthenuric {not concentrated) urine is diagnostic for renal failure. Chronic renal
failure is more likely than acute renal failure in this rabbit because of the presence of
small kidneys, hyperphosphatemia and anemia, and the lack of hyperkalemia and
oliguria. Causes for acquired chronic renal failure in pet rabbits have not been
studied. Common etiologies cited for other mammals include infectious interstitial
nephritis or pyelonephritis {bacterial, viral, fungal), glomerulonephritis secondary to
immune complex deposition, neoplasia and nephrotoxins, such as antibiotics and
hypercalcemia. Especially in consideration of the history of chronic respiratory
infections, obtain a urine culture to rule out bacterial causes of the renal failure. The
effects of the chronic administration of tetracyclines in the drinking water on the
renal failure is unclear. Tetracyclines can exacerbate chronic renal disease and
overdosing is associated with acute renal failure in other species.
b Administer intravenous or intraosseous lactated Ringer's solution immediately.
Replace the dehydration deficit over six hours and continue with diuresis. Place the
patient on standard maintenance fluids of 1o0 ml/kg/day once BUN concentrations
approach more normal values. Substitute subcutaneous fluids once the dehydration is
corrected and the patient is urinating normally. Monitor serum potassium and
correct for any excesses or deficiencies. Much of the acidosis is expected to be
corrected by the fluid therapy. Treat the anemia with ferrous sulfate (4-6 mg/kg PO
q 24 hours). Add B-complex vitamins to the parenteral fluids if needed. Although
dosages are not established for rabbits, anabolic steroid or recombinant human
erythropoietin therapy may be beneficial. Treat the anorexia with gavage or tube
feedings until the patient is eating on its own. Select a safe broad-spectrum antibiotic
with minimal nephrotoxicity while awaiting culture results. Enrofloxacin {10-15
mg/kg SC, IM or PO q 12 hours) is an excellent first choice. Avoid
trimethoprim/sulfa combinations, tetracyclines and aminoglycosides because of
potential nephrotoxicity. Do not use chloramphenicol if anemia is present. If the
rabbit shows minimal response to fluid therapy, the prognosis for long-term survival
isgrave.
3 Use naloxone or butorphanol to reverse the fentanyl component in the
neuroleptanalgesic mixtures. These two drugs reverse the respiratory depression,
reduce the degree of sedation and generally speed recovery. It is important to note
that naloxone, a mu-opioid antagonist, also reverses the analgesic effect of the
fentanyl, so that the ra bbit may then experience pain. Administration of butorphanol
reverses the effects of fentanyl but butorphanol has its own analgesic effect at K-
opioid receptor(s), thus maintaining some postprocedure pain relief. Butorphanol is,
therefore, preferred.
6
4, 5: Questions
4a
4b
4 The radiographs demonstrate a “Y' fracture of the distal humerus in a 178 g
Eastern red squirrel (4a, b). External coaptation was elected for fracture stabilization
due to the small size of the fracture fragments. A modified Schroeder-Thomas splint,
using a wire coat hanger, is applied to the limb. This type of splint creates traction at
the fracture site while maintaining the limb in a functional position. How would you
create traction at the fracture site?
 5 A domestic ferret has a systemic illness and you need to obtain a blood sample in
order to diagnose disease.
a From where and how would you collect blood from the ferret?
b What volume of blood can be safely collected from a healthy ferret?
c Is blood typing necessary for a ferret blood transfusion?
d What sites are suitable for intravenous or intraosseous catheterization?
>
4, 5: Answers
4 Place tape around the caudal aspect of the proximal humerus and then wrap it
around the cranial bar of the splint. This secures the proximal humerus to the cranial
bar of the splint. Then, secure the proximal portion of the antebrachium to the
caudal bar of the splint by passing tape cranial to the antebrachium and around the
caudal bar of the splint. By pulling the proximal radius and ulna caudally and the
proximal humerus cranially, traction is applied to the fracture site. Apply additional
lateral and medial support.
5
5 a Cephalic vein, jugular vein, lateral saphenous vein,
and ventral tail artery. Use a 25-27 gauge needl for
small-diameter veins and a 22 gauge needle for the
jugular vein and ventral tail artery. The novice
practitioner may find it easier to perform phlebotomy
in the anesthetized or sedated ferret. Most ferrets can
be phlebotomized fully awake with the aid of a trained
ha ndler once some experience is gained.
Obtain blood from the cephalic vein by restraining
the ferret as in the dog, with one hand around the
neck and the other holding off the vein with the
thumb with the forearm restraining the patient's body
{illustrated). Once blood is seen in the hub of the
needle, release the pressure with the thumb to allow
more blood to flow into this short vein. About 0.s-1.0
ml of blood can be collected from this site. To access
the jugular vein, have an assistant scruff the ferret and then wrap its body tightly
with a towel restraining the ferret's forearms against its chest. Have the assistant
maintain a scruff hold on the upper neck area and lay the ferret on its dorsum. Apply
pressure just lateral to the thoracic inlet and visualize or palpate the jugular vein
which runs from the inlet to the base of the ear. Clip the hair if needed to aid in
visualization. The jugular vein can also be accessed by holding the ferret in a similar
manner as the cat with its front legs pulled over the edge of the table and the neck
hyperextended.
Access the ventral tail artery by wrapping the ferret in the same manner as
described for jugular venipuncture. Have the assistant scruff the patient and pull the
hind legs cranially. Insert a 22 gauge needle in the ventral tail midline approximately
2.5 cm from the tail base and move the needle dorsally creating gentle suction until
blood enters the syringe. Up to 3 ml of blood can be obtained from this site.
The lateral saphenous is a short vein that yields up to 0.5 ml of blood. Access this
vein by holding the ferret on its side with a scruff on the neck and firm pressure
applied to the upper thigh.
b A maximum of 1% of the body weight can be removed as blood volume in a
healthy ferret. For example, a 1,000 g ferret can lose a maximum of 10 ml of blood
safely.
c Ferrets have no discernable blood types, therefore blood typing is not necessary and
multiple donors may be used to transfuse a ferret patient.
d The cephalic, lateral saphenous and jugular veins. The most common site for an
20 gauge spinal or regular hypodermic needle.
8
6, 7: Questions
6 This three-year-old spayed female rabbit has a progressively enlarging white area in
its eye {6). Currently, there is a bulge in the cornea over the white area.
a What is your diagnosis and what is the likely etiologic agent?
b What treatment would you recommend?
c Why is this a challenging procedure in rabbits?
d Describe two enucleation techniques in rabbits.
7 A three-year-old female guinea pig has had an unpleasant body odor for three days.
Six days ago the owner took the guinea pig to another veterinarian to have the feet
examined because the plantar surfaces were reddened (7). The veterinarian diagnosed
pododermatitis. The owner was instructed to take the guinea pig off wire flooring
and place it on shredded paper. The veterinarian also prescribed oral amoxicillin
with clavulinic acid to treat the infection. The feces in the carrier have a thick-liquid
 consistency. The guinea pig is still eating and drinking.
a What is the source of the odor?
b What is the cause of the soft stool?
9
6, 7: Answers
6 a An intraocular abscess most likely due to Pasteurella muitocida.
b Enucleation.
  s   a   a  s   
it is lacerated.
d Two enucleation techniques in rabbits are described that avoid cutting the sinus.
Indications for enucleation include intraocular Pasteurella spp. abscesses, trauma and
other end-stage ocular diseases. The first technique is a transconjunctival approach.
Remove the borders of the eyelids and dissect the palpebral conjunctiva off the
surface of the eyelids. Continue dissection on to the bulbar conjunctiva along the
globe. Stay as close as possible to the surface of the globe to avoid damaging the
venous sinus. Once all the periorbital structures are dissected free from the globe,
place a hemostatic clip on the optic nerve and blood vessels and remove the globe.
Alternatively, use a transpalpebral approach. Perform dissection staying as close to
the wall of the bony orbit as possible in order to avoid damaging the venous sinus.
Remove all structures from within the bony orbit. If the sinus begins to bleed, place
hemostatic clips blindly in order to control the hemorrhage. As a last approach,
remove the globe as quickly as possible, pack the bony orbit with gel foam, and
apply digital pressure to control hemorrhage. Remove all conjunctival and glandular
tissue prior to closure. Suture the eyelids closed once hemostasis is achieved. In most
rabbits, 3-0 or 4-0 nylon works well.
7 a Feces soiled perineal area. Other causes of strong body odor in the guinea pig
include perineal soiling due to urinary tract or uterine disease, soiling of fur around
the mouth due to dental disease, smegma in the perineal sac (which occurs in both
male and female) and infections or neoplasia of the perianal sebaceous glands.
b Antibiotic associated diarrhea of guinea pigs. The use of Gram-positive spectrum
oral antibiotics can seriously alter the sensitive balance of bacterial flora in the
cecum. These antibiotics decrease the populations of dominant bacteria allowing
species such as Clostridia spp. and Escherichia coli, which are normally present in
small numbers, to colonize the cecum rapidly. These bacteria produce enterotoxins
which are absorbed systemically. The result of the cecal dysbiosis and enterotoxin
production is diarrhea, systemic toxicosis and ultimately death. Remember
antibiotics to be avoided by the PLACE' rule fpenicillin, lincomycin, ampicillin,
amoxicillin, cephalosporins, clinda mycin, erythromycin). Sulfa-trimethoprim
combinations, enrofloxacin and chloramphenicol are rarely associated with GI
disturbance in guinea pigs.
10
8- I0: Questions
8 How would you treat the guinea pig in question 7?
9 List the precautions the person in the photograph should take when examining this
wild skunk (9)?
10
10 A recently purchased guinea pig develops diarrhea. On a direct fecal smear oval
organisms measuring S5-115 x 45-75 μm are seen swimming across the slide (10).
Similar organisms are found on a sugar flotation of the feces.
a What is the organism shown?
b Is this organism the probable cause of the diarrhea?
11
8-10: Answers
 8 Conservative therapy can be used in this case because the guinea pig is still eating,
drinking and is active and alert. Discontinue the antibiotic immediately. Offer a diet
that consists primarily of free choice grass hay, which will aid in restoring normal gut
motility. In addition, remove all grain-based or other high-starch treat foods and
limit the pelleted foods. High levels of ingested starch encourage the growth of
Clostridium spp. and E. coli in the cecum. Administer vitamin C (30-50 mg/kg PO q
12-24 hours) using either a syrup or crushed tablet. Vitamin C is a dietary
requirement in the guinea pig and in cases of disease a dose higher than normal
maintenance can be beneficial. In addition, vitamin C may slow the absorption of
enterotoxins through the cecal wall. Use fresh dark, leafy greens, such as kale,
mustard greens, dandelion greens, Swiss chard or collard greens, at half to one cup
daily for the vitamin C source when normal stools are produced. Once greens are
being consumed, discontinue oral dosing of vitamin C. Do not depend on pelleted
foods to provide the complete vitamin C requirement due to this vitamin's relatively
short shelf-life.
Check fecal Gram stains for clostridial spores if the diarrhea persists or if the pet
becomes systemically ill. Treat with metronidazole (20 mg/kg PO q 12 hours) if
spores are present. Obtain a fecal culture if spores are not visualized. Treat the
guinea pig with injectable aminoglycosides or enrofloxacin while awaiting culture
results. Use intravenous, subcutaneous or intraosseous fluids as needed in the
 a a  d    i i   i 
with profuse watery diarrhea.
9 (1) Protect yourself and your staff from being bitten. Skunks can be asymptomatic
carriers of rabies without outward signs of the disease. If a bite occurs, euthanize the
animal and have the brain examined for rabies. Advise clients of the risk of rabies
even in captive-raised animals. Consider having the professional staff vaccinated for
rabies if exposure to this species is frequent. (2) Be aware of the legal obligations
regarding the handing and treating of skunks. In some areas of the USA, it is
forbidden to own or treat skunks. If a state requires a special permit to own this
species, place a copy of this legal document in the client's record. (3) Vaccinate
appropriately. Skunks need to be vaccinated for canine distemper only and can
receive a modified-live distemper vaccine approved for use in ferrets. Vaccines
seropassed in ferrets may result in clinical disease if given to another mustelid such as
the skunk. There is no approved rabies vaccine for use in skunks. In addition, it is
strictly forbidden to administer a rabies vaccine to wildlife species in most areas of
the USA. (4) Be familiar with the husbandry requirements and the behavioral aspects
of this species before accepting them as patients.
10 a This is a trophozoite of a Balantidium species, probably B. caviae. This is a
ciliated protozoan and both cysts and trophozoites are found in the feces. It is
identified by its large size and the swimming movements of the trophozoite. A
characteristic macronucleus is visible in both the cyst and the trophozoite.
b This organism is usually non-pathogenic and is unlikely to be the primary cause of
the diarrhea. Other causes for the diarrhea need to be investigated.
12
II- I3: Questions
11 An African hedgehog has
11
rolled tightly into a ball and
has stayed in this position for
some time (11).
a How would you collect a
blood sample from this hedge-
hog?
b How would you administer
parental fluid?
12 A mouse is maintained on
12
gas anesthesia (12).
a What is an appropriate fresh
gas flow rate for a mouse on
an open-mask system?
b Does providing this flow
rate present any special prob-
lems?
13 It is common to perform
13
venipuncture on non-human
primates (13).
a
What venipuncture site
would you recommend for
obtaining large volumes of
blood from an anesthetized
primate?
b What venipuncture site
would you recommend for the
awake primate?
13
I1-I3:Answers
11 a Except in the very debilitated animal, it is usually necessary to anesthetize a
hedgehog to obtain a blood sample. Isoflurane anesthesia is preferred for short
procedures, although injectable anesthetics can also be used.
Visualize the superficially located lateral or medial saphenous vein. Collect blood
either by lancing the vein with a needle and collecting the free flow of blood or by
drawing blood directly into a syringe. Use small-gauge needles (25-27 gauge). Insulin
syringes with the needle attached work well. The femoral vein is also a good col-
lection site. Palpate this vein on the medial aspect of the thigh as pressure is applied
at its proximal end. The delicate cephalic vein collapses easily and is a poor choice
for venipuncture. The jugular vein is very short and lies deep beneath subcutaneous
fat in the hedgehog, making it difficult to palpate. It runs from the thoracic inlet to
the base of the ear. Apply pressure just lateral to the thoracic inlet on the preferred
side of venipuncture. Do not use toe nail clipping as a routine method of blood
collection in the hedgehog. It is painful and yields a very small, potentially con-
taminated, sample.
b Intravenous catheterization is difficult in the hedgehog, therefore the intraosseous
route is used. Place an intraosseous catheter in the femur with the approach through
the trochanteric fossa using a 20-22 gauge hypodermic needle of appropriate length.
The catheter can be left in place for several days. Administer a systemic antibiotic
while the catheter is in place and for at least three days afterwards.
12 a If the tidal volume of most animals is approximately 10-15 ml/kg then each
breath of a 30 g mouse will be about 0.3-0.5 ml. Prevent rebreathing of exhaled
gases in an open-mask system by using a flow rate of three times the animal's minute
volume. Since respiratory rates in anaesthetized mice are generally 80-120
breaths/minute, this requires a flow rate of 7s-1 80 ml/minute.
b Although this represents the most economical use of anesthetic gases, some
vaporizers are incapable of delivering accurate vapour concentration at such low
settings. Therefore, since it may be impractical to provide such a low flow, use a flow
of 1-2 l/minute.
13 a The femoral vein. Locate the femoral vein in the femoral triangle. The pulse of
the femoral artery helps to locate the triangle. The inguinal lymph node is often
palpable in the cranial portion of the femoral triangle. Aim the needle and syringe in
the direction of the pulse of the femoral artery. If the angle is correct, the vein will be
the posterior aspect of the hind limbs along the tibia. It courses along the posterior
midline and is easily accessible even in small monkeys.
b The cephalic vein lies along the antebrachium. Primates can be trained to present
their forearm through a cage opening to allow venipuncture.
14
14-16: Questions
14
14 A five-month-old female guinea pig has patchy hair loss and pruritus. Microscopic
examination of a skin scraping reveals this organism (14).
a What is the genus and species of the organism?
b What treatment would you recommend?
15 Rabbit endotracheal intubation is challenging.
a What factors would you consider when endotracheal intubation is performed in a
rabbit?
b What equipment would you use to perform endotracheal intubation in a rabbit?
16
16 A five-year-old pet rabbit is losing weight and having difficulty with prehension
and chewing. Signs were first noticed several months ago and the rabbit's condition
has been deteriorating. The rabbit is emaciated and has an abnormality of the incisor
dentition ( 16) and a palpable irregularity of the ventral border of the mandible. What
is the likely cause of the abnormality and how would you manage it?
1.5
I4-l6:Answers
14 a This parasite is Gliricolla porcelli, a debris-feeding louse. Lice and eggs attach to
hair shafts and can be seen on gross inspection.
b Treat with ivermectin (0.2-0.4 mg/kg) repeated at two to three week intervals until
the infestation is eliminated. This is an effective treatment because the lice ingest
cutaneous fluids and therefore the medication. Other suggested treatments include
insecticidal shampoos, dips, sprays or powders that are safe for kittens, repeated at
the same frequency as the ivermectin. Use topical insecticides with extreme caution,
particularly in debilitated or overweight animals. Treat all guinea pigs in a colony
and clean the environment thoroughly.
15 a The rabbit has a long, narrow mouth that, particularly in smaller breeds, cannot
open wide enough to permit simultaneous positioning of the laryngoscope blade,
visualization of the larynx and placement of an endotracheal tube. Lightly
anesthetized rabbits usually have very active laryngeal reflexes that contribute to the
difficulties of placing an endotracheal tube. It is easy to traumatize the delicate oral,
pharyngeal and airway tissues of rabbits with the laryngoscope blade or endotracheal
a jo uos o a uo  a jo q an o a ais aa
 n  n  an i    o  i 
trachea can cause soft-tissue swelling, leading to dyspnea after the tube is removed.
An anesthetic mask, used for animals not intubated, does not allow for control of the
airway in an emergency or for the use of mechanical ventilation.
b Endotracheal intubation equipment depends upon the practitioner's preference, the
size of the rabbit and the method of intubation. Use Cole, straight or cuffed
endotracheal tubes, 2.0-4.0 mm ID in size. For rabbits under 2 kg, use small
laryngoscope blade sizes 58 mm or 75 mm and the larger blade size 102 mm for
rabbits above 2 kg. Use either a Miller, Wisconsin or Guedel blade. Direct the
placement of the endotracheal tube with commercially available semi-rigid
endotracheal tube stylets or 3.5 or 5.0 Fr urinary catheters.
16 Obliquely worn incisor teeth may be due to functional disturbances, occlusal
problems or uneven tooth growth. The most likely cause of this degree of oblique
wear is uneven tooth regrowth following trauma. The rabbit was dropped
approximately one year previously, fracturing both upper first incisor and left lower
incisor teeth above the gingiva. The right lower incisor was not trimmed until the
fractured teeth had regrown resulting in abnormal occlusion. The right upper first
In cases showing a mild degree of oblique incisor wear, an abnormal chewing action,
such as that caused by a unilateral cheek tooth problem, should be suspected. To
 prevent this problem, trim the incisors every two to four weeks to allow proper tooth
alignment as they regrow. In addition, perform a complete physical examination,
including visualization of the molars, with each visit.
In cases where the incisors fail to grow back into occlusion, extraction is a viable
option provided that the cheek teeth are healthy. The alternative is regular trimming
the remainder of the life of the rabbit.
16
17-19: Questions
17 a With regard to the rabbit in question 16, what additional cause would you
suspect, particularly if this was a 15-month-old dwarf breed rabbit?
b Why would you perform further investigations prior to attempting dental
treatment?
18 Ketamine is a commonly used anesthetic. Why is it not recommended to
administer intramuscular ketamine to small rodents?
19a
19b
19 A juvenile male squirrel, cared for by a
wildlife rehabilitator, is no longer able to walk.
There is pain and swelling in the left shoulder.
The squirrel's diet consists of only fruits and
nuts. These radiographs are taken (19a, b).
a What is your diagnosis?
b What is the name of the metabolic process
responsible for this problem and how did it
develop?
c How would you treat the orthopedic
problems?
17
I7-I9: Answers
17
17a Dwarf breed rabbits are particularly
prone to hereditary malocclusions
including relative mandibular pro-
gnathism. These usually become
apparent by 12 months of age, causing
serious dysfunction by the time the
animal is 18 months old. Tooth over-
growth occurs, impeding mastication,
which ultimately leads to starvation if
not treated. Unfortunately, affected
individuals may have already produced
several litters by the time a problem is recognized.
b Secondary cheek tooth malocclusion is common after a prolonged period of incisor
dysfunction. The reverse is also true. Once a significant degree of secondary
malocclusion develops, repeated dental procedures are needed for maintenance.
Perform a thorough examination of the mouth along with radiography of the skull
while the patient is anesthetized. This provides the best chance of detecting both
intra-oral cheek tooth problems and tooth root disease. In this case, the maxillary
and mandibular incisor tooth roots are abnormal following the earlier trauma. The
intra-oral overgrowth of the first mandibular premolar teeth shows as a clearly
stepped occlusal line on the lateral radiograph (17). Grossly deformed mandibular
cheek tooth roots are also visible. Palpable irregularities of the ventral mandible are
common in cases of cheek tooth malocclusion in rabbits due to a high incidence of
root elongation, and are an indicator of a poor long-term prognosis.
18 Intramuscular ketamine causes muscle necrosis and the volume of injection required
is too high and will be painful. The low pH of ketamine {3.0) also results in pain on
injection. The relatively high doses required to produce sedation (50-100 mg/kg) results
in injecting a relatively large volume of drug in comparison to other species. This larger
relative volume may explain the increased occurrence of muscle necrosis.
19 a Compression fractures of the proximal left humerus and of the second lumbar
vertebra are seen radiographically. There is also a general decrease in cortical
thickness in all long bones.
b Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism is the metabolic process responsible for
the bony disease. Fruits and nuts are low in calcium and relatively high in
phosphorus. The result of a diet with a reverse calcium:phosphorus (Ca:P) ratio is
metabolic bone disease. The compression fractures are pathologic.
c The overall goal of treatment is to place the animal on a proper plane of nutrition
by correcting the diet, specifically the Ca:P ratio. Administer parenteral calcium once
and follow with oral supplementation of calcium. Correct the diet. No stabilization is
recommended for the fractures. These bones are too soft to hold implants. Pins often
tear through and wires collapse the bone. Confine the squirrel to a small cage and
handle with great care. Generally, pathologic fractures due to nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism heal rapidly once the diet is corrected. Remodeling of malunion
fractures generally results in a functional outcome. In a compression vertebral
recovery. It must be emphasized that gentle handling and restricted activity is vital, as
well as an improved diet.
18
20, 21: Questions
20
 20 A two-year-old female intact pet rat develops these two large tumors on the
abdomen (20).
a What is your diagnosis and prognosis?
  p      sn u  s   q
c What would you recommend to prevent the occurrence of these tumors in pet rats?
21
21 A two-year-old guinea pig is depressed, thin and anorexic with a clear, watery
discharge from both eyes (2i). The chin is wet from saliva and there is a serous
discharge and crusting around the nose.
a What considerations must you take into account when performing a physical
examination on an ill guinea pig?
b What is the most likely cause of the guinea pig's condition?
c What is the cause of the oculonasal discharge?
19
20, 2I: Answers
20 a This is most likely a mammary gland tumor. Mammary tumors are common in
rodents. In rats, these tumors are usually benign mammary fibroadenomas.
metastasize to regional lymph nodes, abdominal viscera or lungs. During surgical
removal of mammary tumors, collect regional lymph nodes to stage the disease.
Unless ulcerated or suspected to be malignant, do not remove the skin overlying the
subcuticular suture pattern or skin staples because rodents frequently chew and may
remove the sutures. Use an Elizabethan collar as needed. Prognosis for recovery is
good unless there is metastasis.
b In mice, mammary tumors are frequently malignant, invasive and difficult to
remove. They are associated with infection by the mouse mammary tumor virus. In
guinea pigs, about 70% of the mammary gland tumors are benign fibroadenomas
and 30% are mammary adenocarcinomas.
c Ovariohysterectomy at a young age may decrease the incidence of mammary gland
tumors and can be recommended to owners of female pet rats.
21 a Guinea pigs have a relatively low tolerance for pain. Inappropriate handling of
an ill guinea pig, particularly if it is in pain, can be disastrous. Warn owners prior to
an examination that handling severely ill patients can be risky. If the patient is
depressed and uncomfortable, perform the examination as quickly and gently as
possible and have oxygen readily available. Do not place an ill guinea pig in dorsal
recumbency particularly if respiratory or cardiac disease is suspected. If necessary,
use inhalant anesthesia to reduce the stress of examination or diagnostic sampling.
 Use pain relieving medications, such as butorphenol, buprenorphine and flunixin
meglumine, as needed.
b The most common cause of anorexia coupled with a wet chin in a guinea pig is
Overgrown molars. Many factors influence the severity of this condition (see 87).
c The stress of handling can cause clear to milky lacrimal and nasal secretions in the
guinea pig.Upper respiratory disease and pneumonia caused by Bordetella and
Klebsiella spp. or viral agents can also result in oculonasal discharge. Chlamydia
psittaci is a cause of guinea pig inclusion conjunctivitis. Other causes of oculonasal
discharges include chronic hypovitaminosis C and exposure to noxious odors, such
as ammonia or volatile oils, from pine or cedar sha vings.
20
22, 23: Questions
22
22 A five-year-old intact male guinea pig is thin, painful on abdominal palpation and
had a decreased appetite for one month. There is a urethral plug visible (22).
a What are the two most likely etiologies for the plug?
b What is the best diagnostic test to differentiate the etiologies?
c If the result of the test is negative, what other diagnostic tests would you perform?
d How would you treat it while you await the laboratory results?
e What long-term husbandry would you recommend?
23 A rabbit is induced with gas anesthesia (23).
23
What is a potential problem during induction of
anesthesia in rabbits with volatile agents, such
as isoflurane or halothane?
21
22, 23: Answers
22 a Inspissated secretions from the vesicular glands or urethral calculi.
b An abdominal radiograph. Most calculi in guinea pigs are formed from calcium or
magnesium salts and are therefore radiopaque. Calculi may also appear in the
ureters. Concretions in the vesicular glands can also appear radiopaque, but will be
located outside the areas of the ureters or bladder.
c Obtain a urinalysis and urine culture by cystocentesis to evaluate for an infectious
cystitis. Examine a serum biochemistry profile to evaluate renal function secondary
to the obstruction.
d Relieve the obstruction using a water-soluble lubricating jelly and gentle digital
pressure. A normal stream of urine should be observed as the bladder is gently
expressed. If urethral patency is questionable, sedate the guinea pig with isoflurane
and pass a small, soft catheter into the urethra and flush with sterile saline.
Analgesics may be necessary post-catheterization to prevent urethral spasm.
In cases where the obstruction cannot be relieved quickly, perform a cystocentesis
with a 25-27 gauge needle to relieve the pressure in the bladder. If the urethra
remains obstructed, perform a cystotomy to allow retrograde flushing and removal of
the plug. Administer fluid therapy with 0.9% saline using an intravenous or intra-
osseous catheter in obstructed guinea pigs that are systemically ill. In stable indi-
viduals, use 0.9% saline subcutaneous to support renal function. Many obstructions
are associated with a bacterial infection. Administer enrofloxacin while awaiting
culture results. Use trimethoprim/sulfa combinations only if minimal renal damage is
suspected. Administer oral vitamin C (30-50 mg/kg IM, SC or PO q 12-24 hours) to
aid in the healing of damaged tissue, particularly in anorectic animals. Vitamin C is a
necessary dietary requirement of guinea pigs.
e Gently clean secretions from the prepuce and perineal area as needed with a mild
antiseptic solution once a week. Put the guinea pig on a healthy diet that contains
free choice grass hay, limited pellets and a minimum of a half cup daily of dark leafy
greens to provide essential dietary vitamin C. Vitamin C can be added to the drinking
water, but it has a bitter taste and is inactivated in less than 24 hours. A bitter taste
in the water may decrease water consumption, which is not desirable in an animal
with potential renal disease.
23 Breath-holding is a potential problem in rabbits. Immediately following exposure
to halothane or isoflurane, some rabbits hold their breath for periods of one to two
minutes. Often this is not noted because of the close physical restraint employed to
prevent the animal from injuring itself due to struggling. Breath-holding results in a
reflex bradycardia and also moderate hypercapnia and hypoxia. Since breath-holding
is a voluntary response, it is reasonable to assume that the rabbit is stressed by the
procedure and its plasma catecholamine concentration is elevated. When the rabbit
does eventually inhale, it may be exposed to a high concentration of halothane
(which is known to sensitize the heart to the arrhythmogenic effects of catecho-
lamines) and may also be hypoxic and hypercapnic. This may explain the sudden
death of some rabbits on induction. Unfortunately, the use of commonly available
pre-anesthetic medications (e.g. acepromazine, xylazine) does not eliminate the
problem. Eliminate this problem by observing the animal closely and remove the
mask when breath-holding occurs. Reintroduce the mask as the rabbit recommences
breathing.
22
24-26: Questions
24
25
24 This photograph demonstrates a
25 A four-year-old ferret has this skin
transverse, dorsal approach for bilateral
mass on its foot (25).
ovariectomy in mice {24). How would
a What are your differential diagnoses
you carry out the technique?
for ferret skin masses?
b What is the most likely diagnosis?
c How would you treat the masses?
d What is the prognosis?
26 A mouse develops pruritus and hair
26
loss over its dorsum. The skin appears
reddened with multifocal crusts and
patchy alopecia. Another mouse in the
same cage is asymptomatic. There is also
a 10-year-old Yorkshire terrier recently
diagnosed with allergic dermatitis living
in the same household.
a What are the differential diagnoses for
pruritus and alopecia in the mouse?
b What diagnostic steps would you take
to find the cause of the problem?
c What is the organism shown and how
would you treat it (26)?
d What recommendations would you
make regarding the other animals in the
household?
23
24-26:Answers
24 In small rodents it is possible to remove the ovary (without removing the uterus)
through a lumbar approach. Place the patient in ventral recumbency and prepare the
lumbar and flank areas for aseptic surgery. Make a dorsal midline incision or,
alternatively, make a transverse incision on each side of the dorsal midline. Through
the incision, shift the skin from one side to the other to gain access to each ovary.
Through the skin incision, bluntly dissect caudal to the last rib at approximately the
level of the third lumbar vertebra through the muscles of the body wall into the
peritoneal cavity. The ovary is located within the fat pad at the caudal pole of the
kidney. Remove the ovary. No ligation is required and hemorrhage is generally
minimal although a hemaclip can be placed on the vessels, if needed. Appose the
muscle with 5-0 or 6-0 synthetic, absorbable suture material and close the skin with
subcuticular sutures.
25 a They include mast cell tumors, sebaceous gland adenomas, squamous cell
tumors, adenocarcinomas, cutaneous lymphoma and abscesses.
b Mast cell tumors are the most frequently seen cutaneous neoplasia in the ferret.
Cutaneous mast cell tumors in ferrets appear as papules or nodules and vary in color
from tan, yellow, brown or red. They are multiple or solitary and occasionally will
resolve without surgical removal. Some are pruritic and are covered with dried blood.
Lesions can occur anywhere. Mast cell tumors in the ferret are usually benign but
metastasis to distant organs has been reported.
c Excise and biopsy these masses under general anesthesia. Pretreatment with
antihistamines is not indicated. Radiograph and/or ultrasound ferrets with skin
masses to examine for the presence of organomegaly due to distant neoplasia.
d The long-term prognosis for the majority of cases of mast cell tumor is good.
26 a The causes of pruritus and alopecia in the mouse include ectoparasites,
dermatophytosis, bacterial infections, barbering, pinworms and neoplasia. The more
common ectoparasites include the parasitic mites Myobia musculi and Myocoptes
musculinus. Less common species of mites include Radfordia affinis,Psorergates
simplex, Otodectes bacoti, Sarcoptes scabiei, Notoedres muris and Trichoecius
romboutsi. Other ectoparasites include fleas, primarily in households with dogs and
cats. The louse, Polyplax serrata, is also considered. Dermatophytosis is an
uncommon cause of pruritus in the mouse. Trichophyton mentagropbytes can be
isolated from 60% of clinically normal pet shop mice. Bacterial dermatitis (i.e.
Staphylococcus) is not typically pruritic but may cause skin crusting. Barbering, due
to stress and overcrowding, causes alopecia but not pruritus. Pinworms cause a
localized perianal pruritus. Neoplasia, such as epitheliotrophic lymphoma,
occasionally causes alopecia and pruritus but generally is associated with scaly skin.
     s  s a ss   
c This Sarcoptes mite was found after a skin scraping. Two to three injections of
ivermectin (0.20-0.40 mg/kg q 7-14 days) is usually sufficient to cause resolution of
the signs. Insecticidal dips may be too toxic, even diluted, for mice. Use any
insecticide product in mice with great caution.
d Consider the other mouse an asymptomatic carrier and treat it with ivermectin.
Since the dog may not be suffering from allergies but rather a mite infestation, it is
important to examine all household pets and people for mites. The household
environment should be thoroughly cleaned.
24
27, 28: Questions
27
27 Chinchillas have only recently become popular as pets (27).
a What is the origin of the domesticated chinchilla?
b What are the special hus bandry requirements of chinchillas?
c Describe the anatomical characteristics of the male and female chinchilla.
28
28 A four-year-old obese female rabbit develops ulcerations on the plantar surface of
the metatarsus (28). The metatarsus is painful and swollen and digital pressure
exudes a thick purulent exudate.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What rabbit breeds are commonly affected?
c How would you treat the condition?
2.5
27,28:Answers
27 a The chinchilla is a hystricomorph rodent originally found in the high Andes
Mountains of South America. This species was hunted to near extinction in the early
1900s and 11 animals were brought to California in 1923. Most chinchillas in the
USA are related to these 11 animals. Until recently, chinchillas were bred for their
pelt or medical investigation (hearing research and studies of Chagas disease). It is
now bred for the pet tra de.
b Although chinchillas survive in a variety of environments, they do best in cool, dry
conditions. Cold temperatures are preferred in the pelt industry as it stimulates a
thick coat. Heat stroke is a significant problem, especially in humid environments.
Wire cages are commonly used but solid flooring in a portion of the cage reduces
foot problems. Since chinchillas enjoy climbing and jumping, recommend a multilevel
 o     a        
Commercially raised chinchillas are typically caged in polygamous groupings. If a
single large cage is used, provide escape boxes to protect other chinchillas from the
aggressive behavior of the dominant females. Chinchillas require a dust bath to keep
their fur coat groomed. If they are deprived of this, the coat will appear oily and
matted and the chinchilla may become depressed and anorectic. Place a mixture of
silver sand and Fuller's earth (9:1) in a small container in the cage for a short period
of time each day. If left in the cage, the bath will be soiled with feces and food.
c In females, the cone-shaped clitoris is easily confused for a penis. The female has
four mammary glands, one at each inguinal region and one on each lateral rib. There
 are two uterine horns opening into one cervix. A membrane closes the vaginal vault
except during estrus and parturition. In the male, there is no true scrotum. The
testicles are located in the inguinal canal area and are palpated just beneath the skin.
This necessitates closure of the inguinal canal when castration is performed.
Determine the sex of young chinchillas by measuring the length of the perineal
distance, which is longer in males than females.
28 a Ulcerative pododermatitis or 'sore hocks' is the most likely diagnosis.
b Breeds with thin fur on the foot pads. These include the Rex, New Zealand, Satin,
Californian, Flemish Giant and Checkered Giant breeds.
c There are a variety of factors that result in pododermatitis in the rabbit. A purulent
exudate indicates the lesions are secondarily infected with bacteria. Rabbit pus is
   o   s    a n a 
improve husbandry, improve diet, treat the bacterial component and make the rabbit
more comfortable. Provide the rabbit with a clean, non-wire cage floor. Take
radiographs to determine the extent of the lesion and to help to determine how deep
to debride. Debride necrotic tissue while the rabbit is anesthetized to minimize pain.
Obtain microbiological cultures from deep lesions. Debride lesions as often as
necessary to allow healthy tissue to form. Apply bandages and change them daily if
the lesions are extensive. Wet to dry bandaging removes necrotic debris during early
treatment of the lesions. Soak the wounds in an antiseptic solution one to three times
a day. Apply a topical antibacterial agent after soaking. Administer systemic
antibiotics based on culture results in cases where the lesions are extensive.
26
29, 30: Questions
29 A young rat develops tail lesions. There are bleeding ulcers along the length of the
tail and the tissue between the ulcers is necrotic and peeling. Some areas of the tail
are edematous while others are constricted. Distal to the constrictions, the tissue is
dark and non-bleeding.
a What is the term used to describe this condition?
b What is the etiology?
c How would you treat the condition?
d What should the owner do to prevent this outcome in the future?
30a
30b
30 A one-year-old spayed female ferret housed
indoors is experiencing decreased appetite with
intermittent diarrhea and melena of three
weeks duration. The ferret is depressed, thin
and weak. The mucous membranes are pale
and the hematocrit is 27%. Lateral (30a) and
ventrodorsal (30b) radiographic views are
shown.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What differential diagnoses would you
consider in a one-year-old ferret with these
signs?
c What other diagnostic tests might be helpful?
27
29, 30: Answers
 o   a o a        6
tail. This results in edema, inflammation and necrosis distal to the constrictions.
Ringtail is a disease of young, weanling or neonate rats.
b Chronically poor husbandry is the proposed etiology. Decreased humidity (<20%)
is one part of the problem. Housing animals in wire mesh bottom cages with
hygroscopic bedding in rooms with excess ventilation exacerbates this problem.
Ringtail may be caused by an abnormal response to environmental conditions or
poor temperature regulation of the tail.
c Treat the tail based on the severity of the disease. Debride necrotic material and
change the bandages daily if necessary. Daily hydrotherapy appears to be soothing.
Apply antibacterial topical medication as needed.
d Correct any improper husbandry conditions: house the rats with proper humidity,
bedding should not be excessively hygroscopic and rats should be examined daily to
look for early signs of this disease.
30 a Gastric foreign body is the most likely diagnosis. The radiographs show a
gastric radiopaque density. A rubber band was surgically removed from the stomach
and the ferret recovered uneventfully. There was a small gastric ulceration found near
the pylorus that was proba bly responsible for the recurring melena.
b GI foreign body is the most common diagnosis in a young ferret that is inappetent
or anorexic. Vomiting is not usually associated with a chronic gastric foreign body
but may be present in cases where complete GI obstruction occurs. Chronic gastric
foreign bodies cause gradual loss of body condition due to decreased appetite over
time. Chronic bleeding ulcers result in a blood loss anemia. The foreign object or a
focal area of abdominal pain can often, but not always, be palpated in affected
ferrets. Grasp the ferret firmly by the loose skin along the back of the neck (scruffing)
and allow the body to hang unsupported to palpate the cranial abdomen thoroughly.
Rubber foreign bodies are most common in ferrets under one year of age. Gastric
Other possible differential diagnoses in a ferret this age showing these clinical signs
are, in descending order of frequency: lymphoma, Helicobacter mustelae gastritis
(which may result in gastric ulcers), eosinophilic gastroenteritis, GI tract polyps,
proliferative bowel disease, Aleutian disease virus infection, renal failure secondary to
polycystic renal disease or toxins.
c Because GI foreign body and lymphoma are the two most likely diagnoses in this
case, the most important tests to perform are whole body radiographs (two views)
and a CBC. Take radiographs after a four to six hour fast to empty the GI tract of its
contents. Perform abdominal ultrasound, barium radiography or endoscopy if
radiography or abdominal palpation is inconclusive. Evaluate metabolic status with
serum biochemistries and urinalysis.
28
3 1, 32: Questions
31 The rabbit has unique GI anatomy and physiology.
a How does the *digestive strategy” of the rabbit differ from other herbivores?
b What is unique about the stomach of the rabbit?
c Why are suckling rabbits predisposed to bacterial diseases of the GI tract?
32a
326
32 An institution has a collection of marmosets and tamarins including this golden
lion tamarin (32a), which is an endangered species. Several animals are acutely weak
and anorectic and some are exhibiting jaundice. They have a mild lymphocytosis
along with an increase in both AST and serum bilirubin. Several have died. Gross
necropsy findings include jaundice, pleural and pericardial effusions, subcutaneous
and intramuscular hemorrhages, splenomegaly and enlarged, yellow-tan livers.
Histopathology of the liver reveals diffuse hepatocellular necrosis, acidophilic bodies
and a mild inflammatory infiltration (32b) (photograph courtesy of Richard
Montali).
a What is your diagnosis?
b What is the underlying etiology and is it zoonotic?
c What would you recommend to prevent future exposure?
29
31, 32: Answers
31 a Rabbits are herbivores and hindgut fermentors like horses {colon fermentor) and
large ruminants. However, because of their small body size, rabbits are unable to
store large volumes of coarse fiber for long periods of time which would allow for
bacterial and protozoal digestion. Rabbits have a system that eliminates fiber from
the gut as rapidly as possible and employs its digestive process on the non-fiber
portion of forage, which is directed into the cecum for fermentation. This system is
driven by the presence of fiber in the diet.
b The rabbit has the largest stomach and cecum of any monogastric mammal. The
stomach of the rabbit is simple and acts as a storage vessel for the ingested feed. The
rabbit has a well-developed cardiac sphincter which is arranged in such a way that
the rabbit cannot vomit. Adult rabbits have a remarkably low pH, between 1.5 and
2.2, in their stomach.
c Suckling rabbits have a pH of S-6.5 in their stomach. The pH drops at the time of
weaning. The higher pH allows the normal microbial population of the gut to
develop; however, it also predisposes the young rabbit to develop pathogenic bacteria
infections.
32 a These monkeys are dying from callitrichid hepatitis which is a sporadic
epizootic in marmosets and tamarins.
b Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) which is an arenavirus. LCMV is a
common rodent pathogen. Wild mice of many species are the principal reservoir
hosts but laboratory mice and hamsters serve as important transmitters to other
animals and people. Asymptomatic rodents shed LCMV. The virus is shed in urine,
saliva and milk. Vertical transmission is common in infected mice. There are two
forms of LCMV infection in mice. One form is acquired perinatally and results in a
persistent, asymptomatic infection with life-long virermia and viral shedding. These
animals are asymptomatic until 7-10 months of age when an immune-complex
glomerulonephritis develops. The mice then appear emaciated with a roughened hair
coat and a hunched posture and die. In the other form, mice acquire LCMV after the
first week of life. This is the non-tolerant or acute form. There is viremia but no viral
shedding. The mice either die acutely or recover by eliminating the virus via
circulating antibodies. Humans may contract LCMV from contact with carrier
rodents. Clinical manifestations in people include fever, headache, myalgia, nausea,
vomiting, sore throat and photophobia.
c Discontinue the practice of feeding neonatal mice to non-human primates and
eradicate wild mice from cages housing callitrichids. Screen any rodents caught
within a primate facility via IFA or ELISA serology for the presence of LCMV.
30
33, 34: Questions
33a
33b
33 A four-year-old castrated male ferret that is lethargic, has a decreased appetite
and a swelling of the right side of the face {33a). The swelling is soft and non-painful;
it bulges into the oral cavity with a 1 cm wide, round translucent area in the center
resembling a fluid pocket (33b).There are no other oral abnormalities. The ferret is
slightly tachypneic with harsh airway sounds and a left-sided 4/6 holosystolic
murmur.
a What is the etiology of the swelling?
b How would you diagnose and treat the condition?
c What is a possi ble cause of lethargy and inappetence in this ferret?
34
34 A young potbellied pig is observed rubbing its neck and ears. The physical exam-
ination shows crusts and erythema of the face, neck, margins of the ears, axilla and
limbs (34).
a What is your diagnosis?
b What are the differential diagnoses?
c How would you confirm your diagnosis?
d What treatment would you recommend for this pig?
31
33,34:Answers
   si o s a     a  5 
of facial or mandibular swelling include enlarged lymph nodes and abscesses.
b Perform a fine-needle aspirate of the swelling which will reveal a mucoid to
tenacious, clear or blood-tinged fluid. Cytology of the fluid shows amorphous debris
and occasional red blood cells. Lance or marsupialize the lateral wall of the
mucocele. Recurrence is more likely with lancing than with marsupialization.
            
present is cardiac disease. Diagnose and characterize cardiac disease with radio-
graphs, an electrocardiogram, and an ultrasound. The other most common cause of
lethargy, particularly if it is intermittent, in a ferret of this age is hypoglycemia
caused by an insulinoma (beta cell tumor of the pancreas). One or more fasting blood
glucose samples should be assessed. Other causes in the aged ferret include adrenal
disease, metabolic disease and neoplasia (particularly lymphoma). Simultaneous
occurrence of multiple medical conditions is very common in ferrets, particularly in
animals over three years of age.
34 a Sarcoptic mange (Sarcoptes scabiei) is the most likely diagnosis. Infested pigs
have scales, crusts and erythema which begin on the face, pinna, axilla and distal
extremities but develop to encompass much of the skin in chronic cases. This disease
has zoonotic potential and owners may develop transient erythematous lesions on
their skin, especially on the inside of their arms and on their chests.
b Occasionally, in the USA, the‘stick-tight” flea of poultry {Echidnophaga gallinacea)
is seen on potbellied pigs. The demodex mite of pigs (Demodex phylloides) is
typically not pruritic. Although lice may have roughly the same distribution on the
pig as sarcoptes, the pig louse (Haematopinus suis) which is 3-6 mm in length and
gray-brown in color is easily identified.
Other causes of erythema and crusting include any source of localized irritation.
 Sunburn commonly occurs on the unpigmented skin of pigs exposed to long periods
of sunlight. If severe, these lesions are followed by pain, flaking, cracking and
hemorrhage. Erythema is also caused by other irritants, such as extreme cold
(frostbite) and chemicals. The thick keratin crusts without pruritus, referred to as
'parakeratosis', may be related to several dietary deficiencies or oversupplementation
problems. Zinc deficiency, hypovitaminosis A, thallium poisoning, or a diet too high
in calcium results in these scales and keratin crusts. “Dorsal pyoderma' is an
exudative, painful bacterial dermatitis most often occurring on the backs of pigs.
These lesions are analogous to *hot spots' (moist dermatitis) in the dog.
c Perform deep skin scrapings from affected areas to look for mites. The scraping
should be deep enough to cause slight hemorrhage. Negative skin scrapings do not
rule out mange. Response to therapy is often the best diagnostic test. Use skin
biopsies taken from several locations to confirm the diagnosis. In this case, the
diagnosis was sarcoptic mange based on the results of a skin scraping.
d Ivermectin (0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC) repeated once 0r twice at 10-14 day intervals.
32
35, 36: Questions
35 A three-year-old female guinea pig has tissue
35
protruding from the vulva (35). The pig far-
rowed last night and there were three dead pups
present in the cage in the morning.
a What is your diagnosis concerning the
protruding tissue?
b What treatment would you recommend?
c How would you perform the procedure?
36 The tibial fracture in a chinchilla was
36
stabilized with an intramedullary {IM) pin and
then a type I external skeletal fixation device
was added (36).
a Why was the external fixator added to the IM
pin?
b What is the minimum number of pins that
should be used with an external fixator device
when an IM pin is also present?
c What is the minimum number of IM pins
required if the external fixator device were the
sole mea ns of sta bilization?
d Why are the pins inserted at an angle with
respect to each other rather than parallel to
each other?
e When are the implants removed?
33
35, 36: Answers
35 a Uterine prolapse.
b Ovariohysterectomy is the treatment of choice in this case. Stabilize the patient
metabolically before anesthesia and surgery. If the animal is debilitated, reduce the
tissue and place a purse-string suture as a palliative procedure prior to definitive
surgical management.
c The technique of ovariohysterectomy in guinea pigs is similar to that in rabbits
though the uterus is not coiled. Place the patient in dorsal recumbency and prepare
  n      o      
Identify the uterine horns dorsal to the apex of the bladder. Grasp one horn and
exteriorize it through the incision. Trace the horn craniad to the ovary. The oviduct
circles cranially all the way around the ovary. The ovaries, located at the caudal pole
of the kidneys, are within a large fat pad. As in rabbits, the suspensory ligaments are
long and it is easy to exteriorize the ovaries. There is a single artery and vein which
run medial to the ovaries and extend along the uterus following the uterine horns to
the uterine body. Place a clamp between the ovary and the uterine horn to allow
traction to be applied to the ovary. The ovarian ligament need not be broken down.
There are many vessels which supply the ovary within the fat of the mesovarium.
Create an opening by blunt dissection through the fat of the mesovarium and pass a
ligature around the portion of the mesovarium containing the vessels supplying the
Alternatively, place a vascular clip to control hemorrhage. Repeat this procedure on
the contralateral side. Break down the fat-filled broad ligament of the uterus by
vessels within the broken ligament. Ligate the uterus just cranial to the cervix to
prevent urine leakage. Care is taken to avoid damaging the urinary bladder. Closure
is routine. Use 40 synthetic a bsorbable suture material.
36 a A single IM pin does not stabilize rotational forces. A transverse fracture, as
depicted here, needs rotational stability for proper fracture healing. The external
fixation device provides rotational stability.
b Only one pin is required on each side of the fracture when using an external
fixation device to add rotational stability. With one fixation pin proximal to the
fracture and one distal, the fracture cannot rotate. Add additional pins for more
sta bility.
c When using an external fixator device as the sole means of fixation, there must be
at least two fixation pins {although three are preferred) proximal and distal to the
fracture site.
d To prevent the device from being easily pulled out of the bone. If all pins are placed
parallel to each other, the fixator easily pulls off.
e As with any fracture, remove orthopedic implants only after there is radiographic
evidence that the fracture is healed. There is no set time when this occurs.
34
37, 38: Questions
37
37 A six-month-old New Zealand White rabbit appears to be blind in both eyes. The
figure (37) shows a white ring visible at the limbus. The rabbit is one of a litter of
four purchased from a laboratory colony to be a pet. The rabbit had apparently
normal vision until recently.
a What is your diagnosis?
b Is this likely to happen to the other rabbits in the litter?
C Are there any other problems associated with this condition?
38 A two-year-old potbellied pig has caught its hind limb in the doorway of its cage
and tears off the rear claw. To repair this surgically, the pig must be anesthetized.
a Which injectable anesthetics can be used for tranquilization or pre-medication in
potbellied pigs?
b If an inhalant anesthetic is chosen, which is most commonly used in the potbellied
pig and why?
c Which procedure would you use to intubate the pig?
e Which analgesics would you use in the potbellied pig?
3.5
37,38:Answers
37 a Early corneal edema resulting from raised intraocular pressure due to glaucoma.
b This is an inherited condition in this breed of rabbits. The bu gene causing
buphthalmos is quite widespread in the laboratory population of the New Zealand
White rabbit. The gene is recessively inherited. Litters produced by parents with
normal vision but carrying the bu gene will have an average of one in four of the
offspring develop the condition. Animals homozygous for bu are not always affected
parents, it is difficult to predict if the other three ra bbits will develop this problem.
c Glaucoma in rabbits does not appear to cause the same painful ocular sequelae that
Occurs in the dog or cat. Usually, by the time the owner has noticed changes in the
eye the animal is already blind. The affected eyes do not become severely buph-
thalmic, therefore secondary trauma due to an exposed bulging eye is uncommon.
Surgery to relieve intraocular pressure can be performed early in the disease in an
attempt to prevent blindness, but late in the disease it is of questionable value.
The bu gene also carries with it some semi-lethal effects, such as low litter size {note
that only four animals were born in this litter), high infant mortality and occasional
sudden death. Recommend that owners not use these animals for breeding.
38 a Use acepromazine maleate (0.0s-0.25 mg/kg IM) for reliable sedation. If
availa ble, administer azaperone {Stress-Nil, Pitman Moore, Mundelein, IL; Stresnil,
Janssen Animal Health) (2 mg/kg IM) for tranquilization for minor procedures. Use
ketamine alone (20 mg/kg IM) or ketamine combinations for tranquilization.
Administer combinations, such as ketamine (20 mg/kg IM) and acepromazine {1.1
mg/kg IM) or ketamine (20 mg/kg IM) and xylazine (2 mg/kg IM).
b Isoflurane. Both induction and recovery times are less with isoflurane than any
other commonly used inhalant anesthetic. Give injectable premedication to
intractable pigs. To control excessive salivation, administer atropine {0.o5 mg/kg
SC). Reportedly, halothane is associated with problems of increased respiratory
secretions, catecholamine-induced arrhythmias and hyperthermia. Hyperthermia is
also reported as a complication of the use of isoflurane in potbellied pigs but to a
lesser degree than with halothane.
c Intubation of the potbellied pig is challenging. The epiglottis lies behind an
elongated soft palate and a tracheal tube is easily misplaced into the laryngeal
diverticulum. Intubate the pig while it is in lateral recumbency. Use a spring-type oral
speculum to hold the mouth open, fully extend the tongue and use a 150-i95 mm
laryngoscope blade to lift the palate. Place a stylet in the endotracheal tube to aid in
 h se ll isimi pue saseo piounae aun yanou aqni aul anoun aaessd s
advanced through the vocal folds into the airway.
d Most analgesic agents have a very short half-life in the potbellied pig.
e The two longest-acting analgesic agents in swine are butorphanol (0.1-0.3 mg/kg q
4-6 hours) and buprenorphine (0.05-0.10 mg/kg IM q 8-12 hours). Other narcotic
agents have half-lives of less than one hour and must be given by constant infusion to
be effective.
36
39, 40: Questions
39 Many diagnoses would not be possible in small rodent pets without appropriate
laboratory samples. Blood collection from the orbital sinus is not acceptable in the
pet rodent because of technique complications, such as nasal or ocular blood drain-
ing or blindness.
a Where can you collect blood in the mouse, rat, gerbil and hamster?
b How would you collect blood from these sites?
40 It is common and normal for rabbits to have
JcPenney
40
a thick, white urine due to calcium carbonate
precipitate {40). It is also common to observe
calcium concentrations between 3-4 mmol/l
(12-16 mg/dl) in the serum of normal rabbits.
a What is unique about calcium metabolism in
the rabbit?
b What factors could increase calcium car-
LONIRV
bonate precipitation in the urine?
B
37
39, 40: Answers
39
39 a Mice, rats and gerbils all have large
lateral tail veins {39); hamsters have a ven-
tral caudal tail artery which is more accessi-
ble in the female. Jugular veins and femoral
arteries, while not easily visualized, are
equally as large as the tail veins. Cephalic
and lateral saphenous veins are more easily
visualized, but are smaller in diameter. Do
not use a toe nail clip to collect blood as it is
painful, stressful and the blood can mix with
tissue fluids leading to inaccurate results.
b It may be necessary to anesthetize some
patients for successful phlebotomy. Excessive restraint in debilitated animals can have
fatal results. Slightly warm the patient before venipuncture to dilate the vessels.
Calculate the blood volume to be collected. In a hydrated, healthy animal, 6-10% of
the body weight in grams is the total blood volume. A maximum of 10% of the total
blood volume may be taken in whole blood. Use an insulin syringe to reduce blood
waste in the needle hub and prevent excessive negative pressure on the vessel. Break
the suction on the syringe and coat the syringe with heparin before use. Allow blood
to flow into the syringe without pulling on the plunger until the vein has time to fill
again. Consider hemorrhage as part of the total collectible volume. Apply pressure to
the vein until hemostasis is acheived.
40 a Rabbits are unique in their methods of absorption and excretion of calcium.
Many species of animals absorb and control calcium in relation to their metabolic
needs, regulated by the parathyroid hormone interacting with meta bolites of vitamin
D and calcitonin. Rabbits appear to absorb calcium from the gut in direct proportion
to the concentration in the diet. This absorption appears to be independent of
metabolic need. It is still unclear as to the role that vitamin D plays in calcium
absorption in the rabbit. The primary route of calcium excretion is renal. When the
blood calcium level exceeds the kidney threshold, the excess blood calcium is
excreted in the alkaline urine. This is different than other species where the bile is the
primary route of removal. Plasma calcium concentrations can change dramatically
depending on the amount of calcium in the diet. *High' plasma calcium concen-
trations from 3-4 mmol/l (12-16 mg/dl) are commonly found in rabbits on a
calcium-rich diet, such as those eating alfalfa-based pellets and alfalfa hay.
b The two most common factors that will result in increased calcium carbonate
precipitate in the urine are increased dietary calcium and an increase in the urine pH.
The form of the calcium in the diet also influences its digestibility. For instance
calcium oxalate is about 49% digestible, dicalcium phosphate is about 53%
digestible and calcium carbonate is about 81% digestible.
The rise of urine pH may be associated with urinary tract infection. In addition,
inadequate water intake can obviously lead to a more concentrated urine. The role
vitamin D plays in calcium metabolism in the rabbit is controversial. Some studies
indicate that high dietary concentrations of vitamin D along with high dietary
calcium concentrations may predispose the rabbit to calcification of the aorta and
kidney, but this is not always reproducible. For this pathology to occur, it may be
necessary to maintain high concentrations of vitamin D and calcium for prolonged
 periods or there may be other unknown meta bolic or dietary factors involved.
38
41-43: Questions
41 An eight-year-old female owl monkey fell
41a
from a branch about 12 m above the ground.
Two days following the fall, it is still lame on
the right hind limb. A radiograph of the pelvis
is taken (41a).
a What fractures do you see?
b What would you recommend for the surgical
management of these fractures and why?
42 In the USA, pet ferrets are routinely vaccinated for rabies and canine distemper
virus. What vaccine schedules would you recommend for the ferret?
43 A pet rabbit has signs of an upper
43
respiratory tract infection and is exhibit-
ing a head tilt with occasional circling.
The photograph shows ocular lesions
observed in this patient (43).
a What ocular lesions are present?
b What is the likely cause?
c How would you treat this condition?
39
41-43: Answers
41b
41 a There is a long oblique fracture of the
ilium, a fracture of the ischium and a pubic
fracture on the right side which creates a free-
floating aceta bular segment.
b Repair these fractures with a 2.7 mm
reconstruction plate applied to the ilium (41b).
This pulls the ischial and pubic fractures into
alignment. Due to both of the large muscle
masses that surround the pelvis and the ample
pelvic blood supply, the pubic and ischial
fractures do not require further stabilization.
Additionally, unlike the ilium, they are not
along the weight-bearing axis. The ilium plate
stabilizes the one fracture that is along the
weight-bearing axis, allows rigid fixation and
gives anatomic alignment for early return to
function. This is vital for non-human primates
as postoperative activity restriction is difficult.
42 Recommend vaccination against canine distemper virus because the disease in
ferrets is nearly always fatal. In the USA, the canine distemper virus vaccine licensed
for use in ferrets is Fervac-D {United Vaccines, Madison, WI). This is a modified live
vaccine given subcutaneously. Administer the first vaccination at six to eight weeks
of age and repeat boosters at two to three week intervals until the ferret is 16 weeks
of age and then booster annually. Ferrets over 16 weeks of age that have never been
vaccinated receive two boosters two to three weeks apart. Do not use a canine
distemper virus vaccine that is propagated in a canine cell line because it can result in
clinical disease.
Recommend vaccination against rabies virus in the domestic ferret. Although the
risk of exposure is small in ferrets housed indoors, local animal control ordinances
may require vaccination. In some areas, an unvaccinated ferret that bites a human
will be euthanized and the head submitted for rabies virus examination.Not every
municipality will recommend vaccination. In the USA, the killed rabies virus vaccine
licensed for use in ferrets is IMRAB-3 {Rhone-Merieux Inc., Athens, GA). Ferrets are
susceptible to rabies virus but are not natural reservoir hosts of the virus. The
incubation period for rabies virus in the domestic ferret is still under investigation.
Vaccinate ferrets subcutaneously at three months of age and give boosters annually.
Ferrets do not need to be vaccinated against feline panleukopenia, feline leukemia
and feline infectious peritonitis viruses because they are not susceptible to these
disea ses.
43 a The ocular lesions visible are hypopyon, aqueous flare, anterior synechiae, iridal
neovascularization and episcleral congestion.
b These are all signs of anterior uveitis. Microbiologic culture of an aqueous tap was
negative. Pasteurella multocida was cultured from a ventral bulla osteotomy. The
Ocular lesions proba bly arose from hematogenous spread of the organism.
c Treat this ocular condition with a combination of mydriasis with atropine, rigorous
topical anti-inflammatory medication and systemic and topical antibiotics.
40
44, 45: Questions
44
44 An adult male rat in a pet shop has what appears to be blood coming from his
eyes (44). Two other adult males in the same cage are sneezing and sitting hunched in
the corner with rough appearing hair coats. There is a total of six large rats in the 75-
litre glass tank with fresh pine shavings for bedding.
a What is the red staining around the rat's eyes?
c What predisposing factors are associated with rat respiratory diseases?
45a
45b
45 An owner reports dysuria in a rabbit for the
last three days. Radiographs are taken and
radiopaque material is seen in the bladder (45a,
b). Urinary tract calculi of varying sizes and
abnormally large amounts of calcium carbon-
ate {commonly referred to as sludge') are com-
mon in the rabbit.
a What are the signs of urinary tract calculi or
sludge in the rabbit?
b How is this diagnosed?
c How is urolithiasis treated in the rabbit?
41
44, 45: Answers
44 a Porphyria. It occurs when the rat's Harderian gland becomes inflamed and
secretes porph yrin-pigmented tears.
b A common viral agent, SDAV, is frequently responsible for this highly contagious
condition, which is called sialodacryoadenitis. SDAV is an RNA virus that replicates 
in the epithelial cytoplasm of the respiratory tract and travels along the ducts into the
glands of the head. It has a special predilection for the Harderian gland. Younger
animals are more severely affected and the virus usually resolves in a week.
 Other causes of poryphyria include infections caused by Sendai virus, P3 virus and
corona virus. Organisms such as Pasteurella pneumotropica and Mycoplasma
pulmonis can act as common bacterial secondary invaders. It is advisable to treat
most cases with antibiotics following appropriate cultures and sensitivities. In some
cases the porphyria persists due to permanent damage to the Harderian gland.
c Bedding, such as cedar or pine shavings or cypress mulch, can predispose rats to
irritant and may be tumorogenic. Thujone can cause convulsions and cortical brain
lesions if there is prolonged exposure. In addition, volatile oils are strongly scented
and may mask feces and urine odors in the cage. In an aquarium or other enclosed
environment, ammonia and other toxic gases, which are heavier than oxygen, sink to
the floor where the animals are living. This disastrous situation may cause respiratory
conditions to deteriorate rapidly. Hardwood shavings or pellets are a much better
choice for cage litter, with no sanitary compromise. Other predisposing factors
include overcrowding, high environmental temperatures and inadequate nutrition.
45 a They include calciuria with one or more of the following signs: anorexia,
dysuria, stranguria, reluctance to move, a hunched posture and perineal staining with
calcium carbonate precipitate. If calculi are in a ureter or kidney, these structures
may need to be removed and therefore a preoperative radiographic contrast study is
recommended to check the function of the opposing kidney.
b With abdominal radiographs, ultrasound and urinalysis, if indicated.
             
Perform hematology, serum biochemistries and a urinalysis. Take a urine microbio-
logic culture. Since low-grade cystitis may be present, administer antibiotics.
thetized. The use of a mildly acidic solution may aid in this process. Gently flush
until the urine is clear. Use analgesics postcatheterization as urethral spasm is com-
mon. Diurese these patients with parenteral fluids. Hospitalize rabbits until they are
urinating normally. If bladder sludge cannot be removed by flushing, a cystotomy is
thennecessary.
 Perform a routine cystotomy to remove urinary tract calculi or sludge that cannot
be removed with flushing. Culture the bladder mucosa and analyze the calculi for
mineral composition. Closure is routine. Postsurgically, administer analgesics.
Perform follow-up radiographs and urinalysis routinely to check for recurrence. If
needed, increase water consumption by the addition of fruit-flavored drink additives
(e.g. fruit juice, oral electrolyte solutions) to the water. Reduce dietary calcium to
decrease the amount of calcium excreted in the urine. Prevention of recurrence is
hampered because the pathology of this disease is not yet fully understood, therefore
advise owners that this disease, even with appropriate management changes, may
recur.
42
46, 47: Questions
 46 A female potbellied pig needs to have an ovariohysterectomy.
a What is the preferred age to perform this procedure?
b What are the landmarks for the skin incision?
c How is the conformation of the uterus different from that of dogs and cats?
47a
 47 A squirrel monkey has a large swelling on its head (47a) (photograph courtesy of
 J.L. Wagner). The monkey is sensitive to palpation in many joints and is reluctant to
move. Swellings are apparent over the epiphyses of the long bones and are seen
radiographically. The monkey eats a commercial diet, purchased over a year ago,
formulated for New World monkeys. The feed is stored in a plastic garbage can. The
diet is supplemented with apple sauce, fruit cocktail and treats such as marsh-
mallows.
a What is the cause of the swellings and reluctance to move?
b How would you treat the condition?
c What would prevent recurrence?
43
46, 47: Answers
46 a Eight weeks of age for a number of reasons. In a prepubescent gilt, the uterus is
small and coiled with small vasculature. In the adult sow, it is larger and prominent
but with large blood vessels. Although it is easier to identify the uterus in an adult,
the larger vascular supply makes for a more difficult surgery. The underdeveloped
vascular supply in gilts minimizes the risk of hemorrhage. Also, breeders often prefer
to sell young pigs that have already been spayed. Ovariohysterectomy obviously
prevents estrus. Once pigs reach puberty, they are polyestrus and continue to cycle
until they get pregnant. Owners find this annoying, especially in house pets.
b Make the incision on the ventral midline between the most caudal two pairs of
teats. Following the body wall incision, identify the uterus. In a prepubescent gilt, the
 e a    u a m s e   si n
hook to help locate the small uterus of a gilt.
c The ovaries are located close to the uterine body so the horns are tightly coiled and
not laid out in a "Y' configuration as in dogs and cats. This makes identification and
ligation of the blood supply more tedious. Also, in pigs the ovaries are less firmly
attached and the uterus is more fria ble.
47b
47 a Vitamin C deficiency or scurvy. This
leads to cephalohematoma, joint pain and
skeletal changes, such as swelling of the
epiphyses of long bones. Additional signs
include periosteal hemorrhage and gin-
givitis associated with damage to connec-
tive tissue surrounding the teeth. In severe
cases, hemorrhages occur throughout the
body. Vitamin C deficiency is common in
New World monkeys on poor or marginal
diets. New World monkeys are one of the few groups of animals that have a need for
vitamin C supplementation. Since this monkey was consuming a diet formulated for
New World monkeys, it should have had adequate vitamin C concentrations.
However, vitamin C is labile, being sensitive to the damaging effects of heat and
light. The vitamin C was no longer active in the packaged diet. In addition, there
were no other dietary sources of vitamin C in the diet.
b Correct the underlying dietary problems. Administer vitamin C (ascorbic acid) (25
mg/kg/day IM, SC or PO). Most non-human primates readily accept chewable
vitamin C tablets. Feed citrus fruits and other foods high in vitamin C. Drain
cephalohematomas using aseptic technique with a 19 or 21 gauge butterfly catheter
(47b) (photograph courtesy of J.L. Wagner). Either place drains in the subcutaneous
space and cover with bandages or drain the hematoma daily for several days. If
bandaged, change dressings daily. Administer an analgesic, such as acetaminophen
(5-10 mg/kg PO q 8 hours) to help ease joint pain and discomfort. Soften foods to
decrease oral trauma if the teeth and gums are involved.
c By maintaining adequate amounts of vitamin C in the diet. The potency of vitamin
C decreases rapidly if exposed to excessive heat or moisture. Most commercial New
World monkey diets lose their vitamin C potency within 90 days after milling.
Supplement the diet with fresh fruits and vegetables high in vitamin C. Use vitamin C
rich fruits and vegetables as well as vitamin C tablets to maintain a minimum vitamin
C concentration of 2 mg/kg/day. Use 25 mg/kg/day when deficiencies are present.
44
48, 49: Questions
48 A 16-week-old male rabbit
48
has a right-sided head tilt,
vertical nystagmus {fast phase
up) and mild epistaxis (48).
The rabbit was left in the
backyard to exercise a few
hours before the examination.
It panicked and ran forcefully
into the fence when a dog en-
tered the yard. Postural reac-
tions are difficult to assess
due to the rabbit's tendency
to fall to the right, but pain
and proprioception appear to
be normal. The right eye lacks
menace and palpebral responses, but has a normal PLR. Although the rabbit is
breathing rapidly, on auscultation of the thorax all parameters are within normal
limits. Otoscopic, fundic and oral examinations are within normal limits. The rest of
the physical examination is unremarka ble.
a Localize the lesion.
b What emergency treatment plan would you recommend?
c What one additional diagnostic test would be most useful in determining a
prognosis?
49
49 A two-year-old male gerbil has crusts around the eyes, is depressed and anorectic
(49). The perinasal area is erythematous with patches of alopecia. Both front paws
are denuded medially and the hair coat over the entire body is matted.
a What is responsible for these signs?
b What factors contribute to nasal dermatitis in the gerbil?
c How would you manage this condition?
4.5
48, 49: Answers
48 a The right-sided head tilt and tendency to fall to the right indicates a lesion to the
right vestibular system, either central or peripheral. The vertical nystagmus with fast
phase up indicates a central lesion most likely in the central vestibular region.
Localization of cranial disease is hampered in this species because palpebral and
menace responses are often blunted when rabbits are stressed or in shock.
b Treat for shock and head trauma. Establish an intravenous or intraosseous
catheter. Administer sodium prednisolone succinate {5-10 mg/kg IV or IO) or
dexamethasone sodium phosphate (4 mg/kg IV or IO). Administer lactated Ringer's
solution {approximately 20 ml/kg over 1 hour) to control hypovolemia, but do not
overhydrate because this will contribute to cerebral edema. Provide oxygen by cage,
mask or nasal catheter to reduce cerebral edema. Ensure that the rabbit is ventilating
adequately. Furosemide (2 mg/kg IV or IO) may aid in decreasing production of
cerebrospinal fluid. Lubricate the right eye to protect it from desiccation.
c A skull radiograph to rule out fractures. The epistaxis and CNS signs could be
caused by soft-tissue trauma, which would have a good prognosis for recovery over
10-14 days. If skull fractures are present, the prognosis is guarded for non-displaced
fractures. In these cases the potential for intracranial hemorrhage is greater. It may be
necessary to perform cranial surgery to relieve the pressure. Displaced skull fractures
resulting in malocclusion of the teeth must be considered in the long-term prognosis
of the rabbit.
49 a The Harderian gland. This is a periocular lacrimal gland found in many small
rodents. It drains into the nose and when inflamed its secretions increase. The
lacrimal secretions contain a porphyrin pigment (red-orange in color) that is irritating
to the skin. Alopecia on the face and front legs is caused by the gerbil trying to clean
the excessive secretions from its eyelids and nose. In addition, overgrown, sharp or
broken toenails can cause ocular damage including corneal lacerations. Secondary
loss of ocular or periocular integrity allows bacterial invasion resulting in
Or smell its food.
b (1) Bedding that is too rough or too shallow. Gerbils live in burrows and spend a
great deal of time digging. Perinasal tissue integrity is lost when thin layers of
bedding or substrates, such as sand or rough shavings, are used. Staphylococcus spp.
desert dwelling species and poorly tolerate a humidity level above 50%. (3) Bedding
containing volatile oils, such as cedar shavings. (4) Primary or secondary
mycoplasma infections, as well as some viral infections, contribute to disease of the
respiratory tract, which may lead to increased nasal and Harderian gland secretions.
(S) Stress. Common causes of stress are dirty cages, improper or inadequate diet or
an incompatible cage mate.
c Change the bedding to a soft, non-toxic material, such as hardwood shavings or
pellets, cellulose pellets or newspaper products. Provide at least a 5 cm depth of
bedding. Gently remove crusts and skin debris and cleanse the face with a mild
antiseptic solution. It may be necessary to use anesthesia in severe cases. Trim the
nails to prevent further abrasions. Apply a non-steroidal ophthalmic antibiotic
ointment to the affected areas at least twice daily. Use the minimum amount of
topical medication because gerbils will ingest any excess during grooming. Avoid
separating compatible gerbils for an extended period of time, because they may fight
when reunited.
46
50-52: Questions
50 An adult pet mouse is left in the care of a young girl while the owner is on holiday
for two weeks. When the owner returns, she finds the mouse near death and takes it
to the local veterinary clinic. The young girl is not available for questioning.
a What possible etiologies should be considered in this case?
b What emergency therapy should you institute?
c What precautions should be taken with hospitalized rodents?
51 A four-year-old pet female guinea pig has progressive hair loss for one year.
Repeated skin scrapings are negative for parasites. Areas of thinning and alopecia are
bilaterally symmetrical over the flank area and the skin appears grossly normal.
a What are your differential diagnoses?
b What additional diagnostic tests would you advise?
52
52 A skin scraping from a gerbil with a rough hair coat and dermatitis of the face
and back is examined.
a What are these organisms (52)?
b Are they involved in the dermatitis?
c How would you treat the organisms?
47
50-52: Answers
50 a Lack of food or water, inappropriate food, inappropriate environmental
temperatures and injuries due to unskilled handling or escape. It is possible that the
mouse was not attended to regularly even if there was food and water in the cage
when the owner returned. A history of trauma may be unknown since the caretaker
will often put the animal back in the cage without telling the owner of any problem.
bAdminister oral electrolyte solutions if the animal can swallow.Warm parenteral
Is si uaed aul j! aisnoauinqns iaisiuupe pue aunaduan apoq oi spin
ambulatory. In cases where more intense therapy is needed, give a bolus of fluid
intraosseously through the femur, or intravenously. Take radiographs especially if
trauma, GI foreign bodies, heart or lung disease is suspected. Administer oxygen if
there is evidence of respiratory distress. Trauma to the limbs, spine or teeth ca used by
falls from unskilled hands or from enclosure escapes are common.
C Make sure that rodent cages are escape proof. Even a severely debilitated animal
will attempt to find an escape route. Secure lids and doors around all edges, and
make sure that wire spacing is smaller than the dorsoventral thickness of the animal's
skull. To avoid drowning the patient or creating a cold and wet environment, do not
use deep dishes of water. Do not use sipper bottles as the sole source of water
because some animals are either too debilitated or painful to drink from them or are
unfamiliar with their use. Place marbles or large stones in a shallow water bowl to
eliminate spillage and the risk of drowning.
51
51 a They include ectoparasites (Chiro-
discoides caviae or Trixacarus caviae),
lice (Gliricola porcelli or Gyropus
ovalis), dermatophyte infection (Tricho-
phyton mentagropbytes), bacterial skin
infection, malnutrition, hyperadreno-
corticism, hypothyroidism and hype-
restrogenism.
b Repeat the skin scrapings and examine
hairs and skin debris microscopically for
dermatophytes as well as parasites. Sub-
mit material for a fungal or bacterial
culture as indicated. Perform a skin biopsy if scrapings are negative and other
physical findings are normal. Careful abdominal palpation can often reveal abnormal
enlargements of the ovaries or uterus. Radiograph and/or ultrasound the abdomen if
ovarian or uterine disease is suspected. It may be possible to submit serum for
hormone assays to differentiate the various endocrine diseases. This case was
diagnosed with cystic ovaries and uterine fibrosarcoma {51). The cause of the hair
loss was most likely hyperestrogenism caused by the cystic ovaries. The haircoat
returned to normal within three months after an ovariohysterectomy was performed.
 52 a The organisms are Demodex mites.
b They cause dermatitis in gerbils and hamsters. These mites burrow into the skin
and therefore these organisms may not be found on superficial skin scra pings.
c Use ivermectin (0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC with ranges up to 1.0 mg/kg PO). Repeat this
treatment in 10-14 days. Although, mites are treated in other animals with a water-
amitraz mixture, hamsters and gerbils can have a fatal reaction to this drug.
Demodicosis is rarely a primary disease and underlying disease is usually present.
48
53, 54: Questions
53 An otherwise healthy four-month-old male rabbit
53
has a closed midshaft fracture of the tibia and fibula
(53). The fracture is repaired with a type II external
fixator. The rabbit recovers well from surgery and the
fracture appears stable. Over the next 24 hours, the leg
shows an expected amount of soft-tissue swelling and
bruising. The rabbit is not chewing on the fixator, but
avoids using the leg. The rabbit is anorectic, but is
drinking water and has a normal rectal temperature.
a What is the cause of this rabbit's anorexia?
 b What drugs are recommended for use as analgesics in
rabbits?
54
54 A four-year-old ferret is experiencing thinning of the hair on the tail. Upon further
inspection a raised, round, ulcerated lesion is noted midway down the length of the
tail (the lesion after the hair around it is shaved is shown (54). The owner reports
that the ferret does not appear to be bothered by the lesion. The ferret is on a high-
quality commercial cat food diet and is otherwise clinically normal.
a Is the thinning of the hair on the tail related to the lesion?
b What are the differential diagnoses for skin masses in ferrets?
c How would you manage skin masses on ferrets?
49
53,54: Answers
53 a Pain. Rabbits are very sensitive to pain, stress or fear and will often become
b Butorphanol is a narcotic agonist/antagonist that is considered to be a safe and
effective analgesic in rabbits (0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV, IM or SC q 4 hours). Mild sedation
is commonly observed at higher doses. Bradycardia, respiratory depression, ptyalism
and nausea are potential, but infrequently reported, effects of narcotic agon-
ists/antagonists. Buprenorphine {0.02-0.05 mg/kg SC or IV q 12 hours) is another
narcotic agonist/antagonist that has been used successfully in rabbits. Flunixin
meglumine is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory that provides moderate levels of
analgesia for visceral and orthopedic pain (1.1 mg/kg SC or IM q 12 hours or 2.0
mg/kg PO q 12 hours). The injectable form of flunixin can be given orally if mixed
   b        s
mild analgesia for orthopedic pain. As with any species, it is important to maintain
adequate hydration and to monitor for gastric irritation when administering non-
steroidal anti-inflammatories.
54 a Not likely. Partial to complete alopecia of the tail can occur in ferrets indepen-
dent of any other skin lesions or clinical signs. The etiology is unknown. It usually
appears at about the time of a normal hair molt. Hair regrowth usually occurs in one
to three months. If the hair does not regrow, or if the hair loss progresses above the
tail base, adrenal hyperplasia or neoplasia should be considered.
b Neoplasia, enlarged lymph nodes and abscesses. Neoplasms that produce masses in
or under the ferret's skin include mast cell tumor or mastocytoma, sebaceous gland
adenoma and adenocarcinoma, benign cystic adenomas, fibroma and fibrosarcoma,
hemangioma, cutaneous hemangiosarcoma, chordoma, neurofibroma, leiomyoma,
histiocytoma, squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, cutaneous lymphoma
 and melanoma. It is possible to have more than one type of skin neoplasm present on
an animal. The diagnosis in this case was mast cell tumor.
c All masses in the ferret should be investigated and surgically excised as soon as
possible. Because neoplasia is the the most common cause of skin masses in the
ferret, do not recommend a “wait-and-see' approach. Obtain radiographs and/or an
ultrasound to assess for metastatic pulmonary or hepatic disease or underlying tissue
involvement. Perform histopathology on the mass to obtain a diagnosis and
prognosis.
Although the majority of skin neoplasms in the ferret are benign, metastasis to
distant sites has been reported with mast cell tumors, sebaceous gland adeno-
carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy
ha ve not been successful in treating metastatic disease.
50
55, 56: Questions
55 Describe lavage and tube feeding procedures for the anorectic rabbit.
56a
56 A six-year-old male castrated ferret that lives in-
56b
doors with no other pets is acutely dyspenic and re-
cumbent. It responds well to oxygen therapy. These
radiogra phs are taken (56a, b).
a What are your differential diagnoses for this
ferret's respiratory problems?
b Based on the radiographs,
what immediate treat-
ment would you consider?
c What other tests would you perform?
d What other treatments would you give?
e What is the prognosis?
51
55, 56: Answers
over the short term with syringe feedings of ground rabbit pellets or alfalfa powder
(obtained through health food stores) mixed with puréed fresh vegetables, canned
pumpkin or strained human vegetable baby food. Add an oral electrolyte solution to
thin the mixture and feed approximately 10-15 ml/kg PO q 8-12 hours.
If prolonged forced alimentation is expected or if the patient is difficult to handle,
place a S-8 Fr nasoesophageal feeding tube. Use good restraint in the conscious
rabbit and a small amount of lidocaine gel on the tip of the tube and a drop of
lidocaine on the nasal mucosa to decrease any discomfort on placement. Secure the
catheter to the skin over the dorsum of the nose and the cranium either with surgical
glue or sutures. Use an Elizabethan collar only if necessary (which is rare). Before
administering food, radiograph the rabbit's thorax to ensure the tube is properly
placed. Rabbits may not cough or otherwise indicate improper tube placement in the
trachea when sterile saline is introduced. Administer a high-calorie, non-dairy human
or equine liquid food supplement for the short term, or the previously mentioned
syringe feeding mixture for the long term. Pass the food through a fine strainer to
avoid clogging the nasoesophageal tube. Flush the nasoesophageal tube with saline
before and after feedings to maintain a clear line.
Offer the patient fresh hay (grass is preferred) and a variety of fresh greens daily
 oa   s   d   a a
eating has resumed with normal stool production, tube feeding can be discontinued.
56 a Heart disease (hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy), neoplasia (parti-
cularly lymphosarcoma) and severe influenza infection are the most likely differential
diagnoses. Other potential causes of respiratory difficulties {e.g. heartworm,
distemper virus) are less likely due to the signalment and husbandry.
b The radiographs reveal thoracic fluid. Immediately treat this ferret by removing the
pleural fluid via thoracocentesis. Analyze and culture the fluid. Drain both sides of
the thorax by using a 25 gauge butterfly catheter placed low in the chest wall.
Aspirate multiple sites on either side of the chest to remove as much fluid as possible.
c Once the ferret is stable, retake the radiographs to view the thoracic contents more
clearly. In this case, a large heart is present leading to the diagnosis of heart disease.
To further characterize the heart disease, perform an echocardiograph. The echo-
cardiograph determines the type of heart disease present. Dilated cardiomyopathy is
the most common form of heart disease in the ferret. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
is seen infrequently and restrictive cardiomyopathy is very rare. Perform an electro-
cardiogram to further characterize the heart disease. In this case, the echocardiograph
reveals left ventricle dilation, mitral and tricuspid valve regurgitation and a poor
shortening fraction. The diagnosis is dilated cardiomyopathy.
d While the ferret is in the hospital, give it oxygen therapy as needed and remove
pleural effusion as it accumulates. Begin long-term treatment in the hospital and
continue at home. Administer furosemide (2.2 mg/kg PO q 8-12 hours), digoxin
(0.01 mg/kg PO q 24 hours) and an ace inhibitor such as enalapril (0.5 mg/kg PO q
48hours).
e The prognosis depends on the response to treatment. Even ferrets with severe heart
failure may do well with treatment and have a good quality of life as long as they
continue to respond to the medication.
52
57, 58: Questions
57 Rabbits have large inguinal rings and canals
57
which allow the testicles to move freely into and
out of the abdominal cavity. However, inguinal
herniation of abdominal viscera is rare.
a Name the structure pictured which prevents
herniation of intestines through the rabbits'
inguinal canal (57).
b How are closed and open techniques for
ra bbit castr ation per formed?
58 A one-year-old male guinea pig rubs
58
his perineal region on the cage sides. His
anogenital region is packed with a thick.
oily material mixed with hair and wood
chip bedding. The area is gently cleaned
as shown(58)
a What abnormalities are present?
b What is the anatomical term for this
'pouch'?
c What is the common name of the
material that accumulates in this region
and how does is develop?
d How would you treat the condition?
53
57, 58: Answers
57 a The epididymal fat pad. The epididymal fat pad within the abdomen extends
down into the inguinal canal when the testicle is in the scrotum. This large fat deposit
prevents viscera from passing through the inguinal canal.
b With the rabbit in dorsal recumbency, clip and prepare the fur around the cranial
aspect of the scrotum and penis as well as along the inner thighs for aseptic surgery.
The first technique described is for a closed castration. Make a 1-1.5 cm incision
through the scrotum longitudinally on each side of the midline about midway along
 
with the tunic intact. The tunic tightly adheres to the end of the scrotum by the
proper ligament of the testis. Break down this ligament to allow exteriorization of the
testicle. Apply caudal traction to the testicle and use dry gauze to strip the facial
attachments allowing the narrow portion of the cord to be exteriorized. Once the
cord using a two- or three-clamp technique. The disadvantage of this technique is
aui jo ino ds Ae shassaa oads a 'ynoua iu iou si ais aul f iei
ligature.
A second technique involves performing an open castration and closing the
inguinal ring. Make an incision as described above and incise the vaginal tunic to
allow exteriorization of the testicle, spermatic cord and vascular supply. Double
ligate the spermatic cord and remove the testicle. Trace the vascular pedicle craniad
and identify the inguinal canal. Place a single interrupted suture across the inguinal
canal being careful not to compress the blood vessels passing through the canal.
A third technique involves an open castration removing only the testicle, leaving
the epididymal fat pad intact. The fat pad prevents herniation of intestine through
the inguinal ring. With all of these techniques, the scrotal incision may be left open to
heal by second intention or sutured closed using either an intradermal pattern, tissue
adhesive or skin staples. Use 4-0 absorba ble synthetic sutures.
S8 a The tissue is inflamed and ulcerated due to chronic irritation and superficial
infection.
b The perineal sac. It is present in both sexes of guinea pigs. The anus is located at
the very dorsal portion of the sac. In females, the vaginal orifice is separated from the
anus by the perineal sac.
from the skin within the pouch. The pouch usually fills with trapped hairs, skin
debris and oily secretions. The guinea pig does not have true anal glands. Build-up of
    a i    a a    s
the guinea pig should be grooming this area. Grooming will decrease during systemic
disease. The material is also present with low fiber diets causing chronic soft stools to
accumulate. Two common systemic conditions include hypovitaminosis C and renal
disease.
d Topical treatment is usually sufficient. Gently clean the area of debris and flush
with saline once or twice a day. Application of a topical ointment aids in the removal
of debris. Give a systemic antibiotic only if there is another disease present that war-
rants its administration. Administer vitamin C if necessary. Investigate and correct
underlying disease.
54
59-61: Questions
59 Any condition in hamsters that results in a wet perineal area is often referred to as
"wet tail' by pet owners. It is not uncommon for these animals to be given a variety of
over-the-counter medications.
a What etiologies should you consider when a hamster presents with a soiled, wet
perineum?
b What is a common sequela to true *wet tail'?
c How would you treat true wet tail"
60 Sudden deaths have
60
occurred in a group of
orphan European hedgehogs
of mixed age. Before the
deaths there was evidence of
a green diarrhea flecked with
blood. Bacteriological culture
of
thediarrheawas
unremarkable. Two of the
dead hedgehogs had rectal
prolapse and the postmortem
examination showed con-
gestion of the small and large
intestinal mucosa and focal
pneumonia of the lungs.
Histology of the large
intestine showed a severe enteritis with marked thickening of the submucosa caused
by infiltration of large mononuclear cells and neutrophils (60) (photograph courtesy
of R. Munro). Numerous Gram-positive rods are present within the cells in the deep
submucosa.
a What is the most likely cause of this syndrome?
b What are your differential diagnoses?
c How would you confirm a diagnosis?
d How would you manage the remainder of the group?
e Are there zoonotic implications?
61 It is common for male potbellied pigs to be castrated. At puberty, approximately
three months of age, boars tend to become aggressive and may develop a strong
musky odor. Accordingly, perform castration prior to this age. What technique
would you use for castrating a potbellied pig boar?
5.5
59-61: Answers
59 a The most common cause of perineal staining is diarrhea from bacterial enteritis.
Debilitated animals or those with overgrown incisors may have soiled perineums
because they cannot groom themselves. An older hamster with polyuria caused by
renal disease or endocrinopathies may have a urine-soaked perineum. Damp and
dirty bedding can cause the fur to become wet and matted. Cystitis or cystic calculi
can result in urine scald. Uterine neoplasia or infection can cause a mucoid, foul-
smelling discharge that soils the perineum.
Classic “wet tail' is proliferative ileitis resulting in a watery or mucoid diarrhea. It
is primarily a disease of recently weaned hamsters. In the laboratory this disease can
be created by infecting hamsters with chlamydial or campylobacter-like organisms.
Conditions that can predispose a hamster to this disease include overcrowding and
shipping stress. The mature single household pet is not likely to develop this disease.
Enteritis in hamsters can also be caused by the use of antibiotics inappropriate for
   s  a   s  
antibiotic destroys the delicate balance of bacterial flora in the GI tract.
b Intussusception and rectal prolapse. The hamster often chews the prolapsed tissue
and dies from secondary complications.
c Determine the cause of bacterial enteritis and correct it. Stop unsafe antibiotics,
clean up the environment and isolate the patient. Give warmed subcutaneous fluids
taking care to avoid the cheek pouches. Administer oral electrolyte solutions along
with syringe feedings of a bland diet. Use enrofloxacin (10 mg/kg PO q 12 hours) or
trimethoprim/sulfadimethoxine (30 mg/kg PO q 12 hours) as safe broad-spectrum
antibiotics. Perform a fecal examination for parasites.
G0aSalmonellaenteritidis
b Screening of fecal samples and wild casualties reveal this as the predominant
serotype, but Salmonella typhimurium is also occasionally isolated. There are reports
of Klebsiella spp. being isolated from similar disease outbreaks. Other differential
diagnoses include coccidiosis and heavy intestinal parasite infestation.
C Culture from the septicemic carcasses is likely to prove more rewarding than fecal
sampling
d Isolate the group and identify all stress factors and eliminate them if possible.
Administer an appropriate antibiotic based on culture results to all the animals in the
group. The use of probiotics is controversial, but is not likely to do any harm. Fluid
therapy and nutritional support of the more severely affected hedgehogs are essential.
e Humans can develop salmonellosis and this potential should be carefully weighed
when considering treatment of affected animals.
61 Perform castration in a manner similar to that done in a tomcat. Make a full-
thickness incision through the scrotum over each testicle, exteriorize the testicle, open
the tunic and ligate the spermatic cord with a strong {3-0) monofilament absorbable
  o   a  a 
Another technique involves a prescrotal incision as is performed in the dog.
scrotum. Make an incision through the raphe and exteriorize the testicle, open the
tunic and ligate the spermatic cord as previously described. Repeat the procedure for
the opposite side using the same incision. Use a 3-0 monofilament, absorba ble suture
to close the subcutaneous and then subcuticular layers.
56
62-64: Questions
62 A five-year-old male rabbit acutely develops a head tilt. The external ear canal
appears normal; however, the tympanum is opaque and bulging slightly. A spinal
needle is inserted through the tympanum and an aspirate is removed for a micro-
biologic culture. Skull radiographs are taken and otitis media of the right ear is
evidenced by the increased radiographic opacity within the osseous bulla.
a What is the name of the surgical procedure used to treat this condition?
b How would you carry out the procedure?
63
63 A pet African hedgehog has heavy faking and crusting on the skin and some loss
of quills (63).
a What is your diagnosis?
b What are your differential diagnoses?
c How could you confirm the diagnosis?
d How would you treat the condition?
64 Several rats from a large research
64
facility have developed the ocular lesion
seen in the photograph (64). A tech-
nician working with these rats has been
anesthetizing them for two hours daily
for a skeletal loading experiment, using
a standard xylazine/ketamine anesthetic.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you manage this con-
57
62-64: Answers
62 a Treat the infection aggressively with a ventral bulla osteotomy. This allows
removal of infected tissue and debris. A microbiologic culture can also be obtained
during the procedure.
b Palpate the bulla caudal and medial to the vertical ramus of the mandible. Make an
incision about 4-5 cm long medial to the mandibular salivary gland between the
angular process of the mandible and the wings of the atlas. Incise the subcutaneous
muscle longitudinally along the same plane as the skin incision. Bluntly separate the
digastricus muscle from the hyoglossal and styloglossal muscles, avoiding the
hypoglossal nerve which runs on the lateral aspect of the hyoglossal muscle.
Continue blunt dissection down {dorsally). Palpate the bulla as a round structure
between the jugular process of the skull and the angular process of the mandible.
Continue blunt dissection until the surface of the bulla is reached. Place a self-
retaining retractor to maintain exposure. Incise the periosteum of the bulla with a
scalpel and use a periosteal elevator to expose the bone of the osseous bulla. A small
muscle courses along the ventral surface of the bulla from caudal to cranial. It has a
tendinous attachment to the jugular process of the skull. Make the incision medial to
this structure. The bone lateral to it is very hard and difficult to penetrate. Medial to
this muscle, the bone is very thin and easily penetrated. Penetrate the bulla with a
Steinmann pin and enlarge the opening with rongeurs. Collect samples for cytology
and microbiologic culture. Irrigate the bulla and remove all debris. Remove the entire
epithelial lining of the bulla using a small curette. During currettage, carefully avoid
the dorsomedial aspect of the bulla cavity which is the location of the ossicles and the
promontory. Damage to these structures results in vestibular signs.
Once the bulla has been adequately debrided, place an ingress-egress drain.
Loosely close the muscles and subcutaneous tissues and routinely close the skin. Use
the drain to irrigate the middle ear for 7-10 days. Maintain the rabbit on appropriate
antibiotic therapy based on the results of the microbiologic culture and sensitivity.
Take radiographs one month after treatment to assess the status of the disease.
63 a An infestation of skin mites, most often of the genus Chorioptes.
b Other ectoparasites, dermatomycosis, bacterial folliculitis and immune-mediated
diseases.
c Mites are demonstrated on a microscopic examination of skin scrapings from the
affected area.
d The simplest and most effective treatment is ivermectin (0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO or by
SC injection) given as a single dose. Repeat the dose at two to three week intervals
for a minimum of three treatments. Insecticidal whole body dips are not recom-
mended due to the potential for toxicity. Thoroughly disinfect the environment since
mites can survive off the pet for several days.
64 a This vascularized area of corneal ulceration in the central interpalpebral zone of
the cornea occurs because the animals have their eyes wide open during anesthesia
with these agents. Dehydration of the cornea plays a major role in the development
of this lesion.
b Solve the problem by taping the lids closed during surgery. Consider protecting the
eyes in this manner during any long procedure under anesthetic where ocular drying
and subsequent trauma may occur if the eyes remain open. Alternatively, a sterile
58
65, 66: Questions
65 Endotracheal intubation in guinea
65a
pigs is very challenging. This shows the
caudal aspect of the guinea pig oral
pharynx (65a) (photograph courtesy of
S. Jahn).
a What is the central circular opening
called and what are its implications
concerning anesthesia in this species?
b If placement of an endotracheal tube is
required in a guinea pig, what obstacles 
must you overcome?
c If needed, how would you accomplish
endotracheal intubation in a guinea pig?
66
66 A three-year-old rabbit is acutely paralyzed in the rear limbs. The paralysis occur-
red after the rabbit was handled by several small children. The patient is alert and
responsive, with normal mentation and normal appetite. The front limbs have no
neurological abnormalities; the rear limbs are bilaterally hyporeflexive, and show no
evidence of voluntary motion. This spinal radiograph was taken (66).
a What lesion is depicted in the radiograph?
b Why is this lesion commonly found in rabbits?
c What is the prognosis for this rabbit?
59
65, 66: Answers
65b
65 a This opening is the palatal ostium.
In the guinea pig the soft palate extends
down to the base of the tongue. The
 small palatal ostium is the only opening
between the oral pharynx and the more
proximal aspects of the pharynx. It is
difficult to pass either a stomach tube or
an endotracheal tube through this small
opening. Trauma to the soft palate can
cause bleeding and subsequent asphyxi-
ation of the animal.
b The mouth of the guinea pig is long
and narrow and does not open very wide. Achieve access to the glottis by passing
through the small palatal ostium. Prominent premolars and molars limit the space
si du aun kiuo 'aarl si anui ai apq adoul e jo uaed ioy aqea
freely movable, and food material often accumulates at the base. This can obstruct
visualization of the palatal ostium and result in aspiration and airway obstruction.
To overcome this problem, fast normal adult guinea pigs no more than two to four
hours before anesthesia. Do not fast pregnant guinea pigs close to term as fasting can
induce ketosis. If a guinea pig cannot be fasted before anesthesia, remove the food at
the back of the mouth with cotton swabs after anesthetic induction.
C A guinea pig may be satisfactorily maintained under inhalant anesthesia using a
small mask and appropriate gas flows. Endotracheal intubation is necessary when
ventilatory support and control of the airway is required. A number of different
techniques are described for endotracheal intubation of the guinea pig. Specially
taper small laryngoscope blades {i.e. size 0 Miller blade) to a narrow point to
facilitate visualization of the glottis. In another technique, use a lighted otoscope with
a 3-4 mm cone. Place the anesthetized guinea pig in sternal recumbency. Introduce
the lighted otoscope cone into the mouth, pass it over the tongue and use it to hold
the ostium open allowing visualization of the glottis. Introduce a 3.5 Fr urinary
catheter into the larynx {65b) (photograph courtesy of S. Jahn). Withdraw the
 Otoscope cone leaving the catheter in place. Advance the endotracheal tube over the
1.5-2.5 mm Cole or straight tubes. Modified intravenous catheters {14 gauge) or
other atraumatic tubing are also used.
66 a A comminuted fracture is visible in the fourth lumbar vertebrae, resulting in
misalignment of the vertebral column caudal to the fracture.
b Rabbits have extremely powerful rear limbs. If adequate control of the rear limbs is
not maintained during restraint, vertebral fractures or luxations can occur if the
ra bbit kicks and hyperextends the spine.
c Poor, especially in cases such as this where alignment of the vertebral column is
not maintained. Routinely euthanizing all rabbits with spinal fractures is not
recommended as some rabbits can exhibit improvement weeks to months later with
supportive care including cage rest and anti-inflammatory drugs. Each case should be
individually evaluated.
60
67-69: Questions
67 Injectable anesthetics are often used to immobilize non-human primates.
a What is the intramuscular drug of choice for anesthesia in primates?
b What dosages are used in a great ape, spider monkey and marmoset?
68 A domestic ferret is proving difficult to handle.
a How would you restrain the ferret?
b How would you administer enteral and parental medications?
69
69 Injectable anesthetics are often administered to small mammals by the intraperi-
toneal route because it is a quick, simple and relatively pain-free method of drug
administration (69). Are there any disa dvantages to the intraperitoneal route?
61
67-69: Answers
67 a Ketamine hydrochloride. Tiletamine/zolazepam is also very effective, but the
recovery time may be prolonged and undesirable.
b Administer ketamine (4-6 mg/kg IM) for a great ape, (10-20 mg/kg IM) for a
spider monkey and (30-40 mg/kg IM) for marmosets and tamarins. Generally, the
smaller the primate, the higher the dosage.
68
68 a It is rarely necessary to use gloves or other hand
protection when handling pet ferrets. Kits under four
adults. Ferrets have a very keen sense of smell and
some odors on the hand, especially food or other ferret
body odors, can precipitate a bite. Place a drop of
isopropyl alcohol on the gums of the biting animal to
cause an immediate release. To examine the dorsum,
rest the ferret's body along the forearm. To inspect the
ventrum, place the patient on its dorsum by cupping its
head in the palm of your hand and secure the ferret
between your forearm and body. A ferret can also be
'scruffed', which calms down some active patients and
allows better access for palpation of the cranial ab-
domen (68). Grasp the ferret by the loose skin along
the back of the neck and suspend it over a table. Gently
stroke downwards on its abdomen to aid relaxation.
Use this hold for administering subcutaneous injections,
cleaning the ears and trimming the nails. Ferrets love
sweet treats and these can be employed to handle a
fractious patient. Put a sticky sweet substance, such as
a cat hairball laxative, on a tongue depressor and allow the ferret to lick it when
weighing the patient or giving injections. For nail trimming without assistance, set the
ferret in a sitting position in the lap, place a small amount of a sticky sweet substance
on its lower abdomen and show the ferret the treat. While the ferret is licking the
treat, trim the nails on all four paws. The ferret's abdomen should normally be re-
laxed and easy to palpate. The spleen, kidneys, stomach and bladder are all accessible.
b The easiest way to medicate a ferret orally is to mask the taste with a sweet or oily
substance. Substances high in sugar content are contraindicated if the ferret is
diagnosed with insulinoma. Sweet substances can be diluted with water and still
maintain the taste desired. Give subcutaneous injections in the neck area as the
animal is scruffed or along the back or shoulders. Administer intramuscular
injections in the lumbar musculature or quadriceps.
69 Intraperitoneal administration of anesthetics has several disadvantages. Inad-
vertent injection into the viscera results in a failure of anesthesia induction. Intraperi-
toneal administration of irritant agents causes pain and an increased likelihood of
peritonitis postoperatively. The inability to titrate the anesthetic dose is the most
serious disadvantage. Since considera ble variation in sensitivity to different anesthetic
agents occurs, select an agent with a wide safety margin. If underdosage occurs, a
preferable to deepen anesthesia using a low concentration of an inhalational agent
(e.g. 0.5-1% isoflurane).
62
70-72: Questions
70 A young doe in a herd of
70
breeding rabbits has vesicles
and ulcerated epidermis with a
keratin rim on the vulva (70).
There were no other clinical
signs of disease in any of the
other ra bbits.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you confirm the
diagnosis?
c How would you treat the
disease?
d How would you control the
disease?
71 A chinchilla has diarrhea
71
for several days after purchase
from a pet store. There is now
a rectal prolapse. These organ-
isms measuring 15 μm in
length are found on zinc sul-
fate flotation of the feces (71).
a What is this organism and is
it causing the diarrhea?
b How would you treat the
chinchilla?
c Are there any zoonotic con-
siderations?
72 An adult rabbit has a facial
72
draining nodule of two months
duration (72)(photograph
courtesy of R.Harvey). Pre-
vious administration of enro-
floxacin for three days was
unsuccessful. The rabbit lives
outdoors in a wooden hutch.
a What is the presenting
lesion?
b Which organism is most
likely to be isolated from this
lesion?
cWhat underlying disease
factors may be important in
the pathogenesis of this condition?
d What is your prognosis for this rabbit and how would you manage the condition?
63
70-72: Answers
70 Ulcerative lesions at the mucocutaneous junctions of the genitalia, anus, nose,
eyelids or lips are typical of rabbit syphilis caused by the spirochete Treponemd
cuniculi. The infection is transmitted by direct contact between breeding rabbits and
from mother to young. Mild lesions may resolve spontaneously, but infected rabbits
become carriers with the spirochetes remaining latent in the lymph glands.
Treponematosis is endemic and subclinical in many rabbitries. Other signs of this
disease include abortions, metritis and infertility.
b Examine material scraped from the lesions under dark-field microscopy to
demonstrate the spiral-shaped organisms. Diagnosis is confirmed by the direct
immunofluorescent test. Use serological assays, the indirect IFA and a microhemag-
glutination test to detect subclinical carriers of the disease.
c Treat with three injections of benzathine penicillin G (42,000 iu/kg IM) given at
seven-day intervals. The treatment results in regression of lesions and eliminates the
infection. Although injectible penicillin is relatively safe, establish the rabbit on a
high fiber diet to avoid potential cecal dysbiosis. Do not use beta lactam antibiotics 
Orally in the rabbit.
d To control the infection in a herd, treat the breeders. To eliminate treponematosis
in a herd, breed only seronegative rabbits.
71 a This is a cyst of a Giardia sp. Giardia can may produce diarrhea in many species
of animals, including chinchillas. Identify it by size, the oval shape and the presence
of nuclei, median bodies and flagella within the cyst. Zinc sulfate flotation is the test
of choice to recover Giardia sp. from the feces. A direct fecal smear is usually
insufficient and multiple very fresh samples need to be evaluated.
b Fenbendazole (25-50 mg/kg PO for 3-5 days) is probably the drug of choice for
treatment, although metronidazole has also been used.
c The zoonotic implication of Giardia in chinchillas is unknown. It is best to be safe
and advise clients that there is a slight zoonotic risk.
72 a A subcutaneous abscess.
b The organism most often isolated from such lesions is Pasteurella muitocida,
although Staphylococcus aureus, Fusobacterium spp.,Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Streptococcus spp., Corynebacterium pyogenes, Escherichia coli and Klebsiella spp.
ha ve been isolated from similar lesions.
c Subcutaneous abscesses have a variety of causes including bite wounds or other
skin trauma, periodontal disease, nasolacrimal duct infection, penetrating cheek
wound and seeding from a distant infection.
diagnostic tests as needed to identify other disease that may alter the immune
response. Obtain a bacterial culture and sensitivity. Culture the wall of the abscess
rather than taking a sample of the discharge. Conventional therapy consists of
teeth. Administer long-term antibiotic therapy. In cases where the entire abscess is
not removed, keep the surgical site open and flush daily with an antiseptic solution to
promote healing by granulation. Lancing and draining the absces often results in
recurrence. Some abscesses will recur at the same or different sites despite aggressive
therapy. Other treatment modalities to use concurrently with surgery, such as
injecting gentocin into the abscess wall or placing antibiotic-laden material into the
abscess lumen, may offer promise.
64
73, 74: Questions
73
73 This patas monkey is housed in an outdoor facility that meets or exceeds
standards of primate housing specified in the regulations of the Animal Welfare Act
(AWA), United States, 1991. Although AWA guidelines serve as a benchmark for
primate facilities worldwide, practitioners should consult the regulations and
legislation of their country.
a What are the minimum space requirements for non-human primates as specified in
the AWA?
accessories?
c What disinfectants are recommended for cleaning cages, dishes and toys?
d What items in (73) fulfill the requirements of environmental enhancement to
promote psychological well-being for this monkey?
74 A one-year-old, neutered male ferret is experiencing chronic upper respiratory
disease. It sneezes, coughs, is lethargic and has had a low-grade fever of 39.4°C for
five to seven days. These signs have occured at least once a month for the last four
months. The ferret appears to return to normal with the use of supplemental feedings
and antibiotics. Amoxicillin and enrofloxacin have been used. The two other ferrets
in the household appear to be normal. This one receives a high-quality commercial
ferret pellet and is housed in a spacious cage. No other clinical signs are evident and
its body weight appears normal.
a What are the differential diagnoses for this ferret?
b What further investigations would you conduct?
6.5
73, 74: Answers
73 a The minimum space provided to each non-human primate whether housed
individually or with other nonhuman primates is determined by the typical weight of
animals of its species and is calculated using the formula listed below. Brachiating
species and Great Apes weighing over 50 kg must be provided with additional
volumes of space in excess of that required for Group 6 animals to allow for normal
postural adjustments.
Group
Weight (kg)
Floor area!
Height (cm)
animal(m²)
1
Under 1
0.15
50.8
2
1-3
0.28
76.2
3
3-10
0.40
76.2
4
10-15
0.56
81.28
5
15-25
0.74
91.44
6
Over 25
2.33
213.66
Examples of non-human primates included in each weight group:
Group 1: marmosets, tamarins, infants (less than 6 months of various species).
Group 2: capuchins, squirrel monkeys, juveniles {6 months to 3 years of age of
various species ).
Group 3: female macaques and African species.
Group 4: male macaques and large African species.
Group 5: baboons, non-brachiating species larger than 15 kg.
Group 6: Great Apes over 25 kg.
b Use stainless steel to construct cages. Build cage accessories such as perches, nest
boxes, feeder boxes and various swings and platforms from non-porous materials
that are durable and easily cleaned and disinfected. These materials include stainless
steel and PVC piping.
c Clean cages, dishes and toys with disinfectants such as Roccal-D (Winthrop, New
York, NY) or One-Stroke Environ {Ceva Laboratories, Overland Park, KS). The use
of a 1:10 bleach solution may corrode surfaces.
d Items in this cage include a paint roller, a hard rubber toy, a ball, a hoop, plastic
dishes, wire puzzle feeder device and a PVC climbing structure.
74 a Lymphoma, viral URI {including human influenza), bacterial URI {including
Bordetella sp.), fungal disease and inhaled irritants. Intrathoracic masses can result in
respiratory signs, such as dyspnea, coughing or wheezing. Cardiac disease can
occasionally cause coughing, but it is rare in young ferrets and would not likely
resolve with the use of antibiotics.
b The two most important diagnostic tests to perform initially are hematology and a
thoracic radiograph. Additional diagnostic tests include thoracic ultrasonography,
tracheal wash with cytology and culture and serum biochemistries. Take a detailed
history to rule out environmental irritants. Substances that affect ferrets include clay
cat litter dust, perfumed fabric softners or detergents used on bedding, carpet
deodorant powders, aromatic bedding materials (pine or cedar chips) and aerosol
room deodora nts.
 In this case thoracic radiography and ultrasonography was normal and the results
of hematology are listed in question 75. There is no history of environmental
irritants.
66
75, 76: Questions
75 The hematology in question 74 revealed a WBC of 15,000 with 50% lympho-
cytes, 4S% neutrophils, 3% eosinophils, 2% basophils, PCV 45% and RBC 6.2
million.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What would be your next diagnostic step?
76a
76b
76 A breeder that sells *germ-free mice' is receiving complaints from researchers that
the mice are infected with worms. The company assures the researchers that fecal
flotations performed weekly are negative for eggs, larvae, cysts and oocysts. The
company maintains that the mice are negative when they leave the facility and
become infected when they arrive at the research facility. One of the researchers
performs a 'tape test? on a newly arrived group of mice and recovers eggs measuring
118-153 x 33-55 μm (76a). On sugar flotation, a second kind of egg is found that
measures 89-93 x 36-42 μm (76b). The mice are 28 days old when they arrive at the
research facility.
a What are the eggs?
b How is a 'tape test' performed and why is it necessary?
c Why are eggs found on the flotation performed at the research institution but not at
the breeder?
67
75, 76: Answers
75 a Lymphoma. The WBC count of 15,000 is greatly elevated over the normal range
of 3,000-7,500 and the absolute lymphocyte count of 7,s00 is also elevated over the
normal high of 3,500. (It should be noted that when lymphocytes compose 60% or
more of the differential diagnosis, this is also considered a possible sign of lymphoma
regardless of the absolute lymphocyte count.) If the leukophilia was due to a bacterial
infection, there should be a neutrophilia of 80% or higher present. Ferrets do not
routinely have significant hemogram changes under the stress of examination or
restraint. Although a definitive diagnosis of lymphoma cannot be made from a CBC,
there is a strong suspicion due to the chronic nature of the illness and the extremely
high absolute lymphocyte count. It is not unusual for immunocompromised lym-
 phoma-affected animals to experience chronic recurring illness, such as respiratory or
GI disease. These infections may respond temporarily to antibiotics or other suppor-
tive care only to recur days to weeks later.
b Obtain a lymph node biopsy or a bone marrow aspirate. Although some cases of
lymphoma will have obvious local or generalized lymph node enlargement, this is not
always the case. Where there is no apparent lymph node enlargement, any peripheral
node may be used for biopsy. The popliteal or inguinal lymph nodes are easy to
access and have minimal blood supply. Remove the entire lymph node rather than
attempting to aspirate it. In the healthy ferret, the peripheral lymph nodes are
surrounded by a large amount of perinodal fat making needle aspiration difficult.
Obtain a bone marrow aspirate from the femur or ilium. Bone marrow aspirates are
frequently less useful for diagnostic purposes than a lymph node biopsy. The
diagnosis in this case was malignant lymphoma based on histopathology of the
popliteal lymph node. Chemotherapy is a viable option for many of these cases.
  n s  a  d s s g 6 
pinworm Syphacia obvelata and 76b is of the mouse pinworm Aspisculuris
tetraptera. Note the flattened side of the Syphacia egg.
b The tape test is necessary to find the eggs of many pinworms, including Syphacia,
because the female worms do not deposit eggs in the intestine. Sypbacia eggs are not
[ a     a  s   a
opening and cements eggs to the perianal skin. Press the adhesive side of a clear piece
 of cellophane tape against the anus and perianal skin. Stick the tape to a slide for
microscopic examination. Sypbacia adults live in the colon. The life cycle is direct
and the larvated eggs deposited by the female are the infective stage. The prepatent
period of Syphacia is 8-15 days.
c Aspiculuris adults live in the anterior colon and cecum where females deposit eggs
rather than attach them to the perianal skin. Eggs, therefore, are present on flotation.
Like Sypbacia, the life-cycle is direct and larvated eggs are infective. The prepatent
period, however, is approximately 23 days and eggs larvate to the infective stage in
approximately six days. The breeding facility was performing fecals on the young
mice and the worms were not old enough to produce eggs. In addition, the breeding
facility was not performing the tape test.
68
77, 78: Questions
77 The chinchilla is a true herbivore
77a
with typical rodent incisor dentition.
a What is the dental formula for the
chinchilla?
b Is the incisor occlusion illustrated
normal for the chinchilla (77a)?
c Describe the radiographic views most
suited to demonstrating the occlusal
planes in the chinchilla.
d What are the main features of interest
when examining these radiographs?
e Why is epiphora a common indication
of dental disease in rabbits and herbi-
vorous rodents?
78a
78b
Once stable, an ophthalmic examination is conducted. The photographs represent
what is observed during the examination of the posterior segment of the eye of the
opossum (78a) and squirrel (78b).
a What is your diagnosis for the opossum?
b What is your diagnosis for the squirrel?
69
77,78:Answers
77b
77c
77aI1C0P1M3
0
11
b Yes. Unlike rabbits, the majority of rodents maintain their jaws in a retrognathic
position when at rest. In this position the cheek teeth are usually in occlusion. When
gnawing, the jaw is brought forward and then moved in a dorsoventral direction. As
many rodents have a relatively large normal range of rostrocaudal jaw movement,
they can compensate for even quite dramatic jaw length discrepancies.
c The occlusal plane is horizontal in chinchillas. It can be demonstrated on lateral
and rostrocaudal radiographs,
d A distinctive radiographic feature of the chinchilla is the large tympanic bulla. The
lateral radiograph in 77b clearly shows the curvature and extent of the incisor teeth
and the cheek tooth occlusal planes. Even with superimposition of the two sides, the
position and length of the cheek teeth can be identified. Note the normal radiolucent
germinal areas at the root apices. The rostrocaudal view in 77c demonstrates the
temporoma ndibular articulations.
e The nasolacrimal ducts, which pass next to the root apices of the premolars and
incisors, frequently become obstructed when the roots of these aradicular hypsodont
teeth elongate or develop other periapical pathology. In addition to primary eye
disease, a purulent ocular discharge may originate from lacrimal duct infection
secondary to either simple obstruction or a tooth root abscess.
78 a This is a normal opossum eye. The opossum tapetum is unusual as it is located
within the retinal pigmented epithelial cells rather than in the choroid. The fundus is
richly invested with blood vessels (holangiotic vascular pattern) and the vascular tuft
(not to be confused with hemorrhage) on top of the darkly pigmented disc is normal
for this species.
b This is a normal squirrel eye. The optic nerve of the squirrel is located far superior
in the fundus and is compressed into a thin line that traverses the fundus in a
horizontal direction. The optic nerve always represents a blind spot in the visual field
of an animal. Thus the shape of the nerve and its location fplaced superior thereby
visualizing the ground) makes it unlikely that the form of a predator could fully
occupy its blind spot. This diminishes the chance of a predator remaining undetected.
70
79-81: Questions
79 The rabbit has a fragile lumbar spine that can luxate or fracture easily if the
animal is handled incorrectly. Describe several techniques for picking up a rabbit.
80 Note the black oval “lesion' on the
80
flank of this hamster (80).
a What is this structure?
b What other rodent species have similar
structures and where are they located?
c What are the known functions of this
structure?
81 An adult European hedgehog is found by the roadside. There is concern because
both hind limbs remain visible below the tibia even though the hedgehog is in its
protective curled posture. A radiograph taken without anesthesia fails to reveal
anticipated hindlimb trauma (81).
a What further tests would you carry out on the conscious hedgehog?
b What is your diagnosis?
c How would you confirm this?
d What is the prognosis?
81
71
79-81: Answers
79
79 Always support the hind quarters of the rabbit
when picking it up or transporting it. Remove rabbits
from their containers on the floor to prevent potential
"escape' jumps from a high table. In addition, weigh
the rabbit on the floor to prevent similar accidents.
Three methods of picking up a rabbit are: (1) Grasp
the loose skin over the back of the neck and lift it up
while placing the other hand under the hind quarters
(79). (2) Place an open hand under the thorax and, as
the rabbit is lifted, grasp the thorax and use the other
hand to support the hind quarters. (3) Grasp the
thorax as in (2) with one hand and firmly grasp the
 on the lumbar area will frequently cause a fractious
rabbit to stop kicking and it protects the area of the
spine that is often luxated or fractured. In each of
these cases the rabbit is transported immediately to
the examination table where a mat or towel is placed
      o  s   r   
damage their backs.
80 a This is a flank or scent gland. It is most prominent in mature male hamsters and
becomes visible with hair thinning.
b Gerbils posses a prominent patch of sebaceous glands on the midventral abdomen;
there are used for territorial marking and identifiying the pups. The gland is larger in
the male. Guinea pigs have prominent sebaceous glands around the anus and over the
rump, which produce waxy secretions used for territorial marking. The glands are
common sites of cysts, abscesses, hyperplasia and neoplasia in these species.
c The flank gland serves as a means for olfactory marking of territory, individual
identification and, possibly, sexual attraction.
81 a A neurological examination can be carried out. If the limb is fractured, pinching
the web between the toes or a nail-bed may not produce the expected withdrawal
reflex. However, in response to pain, the orbicularis muscle will contract, rolling the
hedgehog into a tighter ball with the affected limb still exposed. Reaction of the
panniculus carnosus muscle to this stimulation will cause reflex bristling of the
spines. When there is no deep pain response to the toe pinch, test the neurologic
integrity of the orbicularis muscle by gently pricking the skin over the muscle. This
should produce the expected contraction. Lack of response to this series of tests
indicates hind limb paraplegia. In this animal there was an absence of both the deep
 pain and the withdrawal response.
b Spinal cord trauma is the most likely diagnosis.
c Take lateral and ventrodorsal radiographs of the spine. Sedation is required for
radiography except in very debilitated animals. Use either an injectable agent such as
ketamine hydrochloride (20-80 mg/kg IM) or an inhalant such as isoflurane
administered in an induction chamber or by face mask.
d If spinal damage is confirmed in a wild hedgehog, euthanasia should be considered
due the extremely poor prognosis.
72
82, 83: Questions
82 Routine tuberculin skin testing on all non-human primates minimizes the risk to
the human caretakers from Mycobacteriu tuberculosis.
a What is the recommended type of tuberculin, injection site and route of
administration for the TB test?
b At what time interval is the test read and how frequently is testing performed?
c What constitutes a negative, a suspect and a positive test?
83a
83b
83 An owner complains about chronically red eyes in a New Zealand White rabbit.
The left eye has dramatically changed appearance in the past 24 hours (83a).
a What is the most likely cause for the clinical appearance of the eyes?
b What is present in the anterior chamber of the left eye (83b)?
c What is the appropriate term to describe this finding?
d What treatment would you recommend for this condition?
73
82, 83: Answers
82a
82b
82 a Currently the standard is OT (mammalian tuberculin, Symbiotics, Inc. 1-800-
247-1725) at 0.1 ml intradermally via a tuberculin syringe with a 25-27 gauge
needle. Use as a primary injection site the eyelid and use the skin over the abdomen
as a secondary site (82a).
b Read tuberculin tests at 24, 48 and 72 hours post injection. Tuberculin test non-
human primates at least yearly. Many colonies and laboratory facilities test as often
as every three months. Test humans exposed to non-human primates annually
although many facilities require employee testing every six months.
c Consider a test negative if, at 48 and 72 hours, there is no edema or swelling at the
injection site. Bruising and a small amount of erythema without any swelling still
constitute a negative test. Regard a test as suspicious if, at 48 and 72 hours, there is a
larger degree of erythema with minimal swelling or there is slight swelling without
erythema. Read a test as positive if, at 48 and 72 hours, there is obvious swelling of
the palpebrum with a drooping eyelid associated with erythema (82b). The eyelid
may even be closed and necrotic. Repeat a suspicious test in 7-10 days in the other
eyelid or in the abdominal skin. Isolate the animal from others until its status is
completely determined.
83 a Lens induced uveitis. Both eyes have hypermature cataracts. The leakage of lens
protein initiates an autoimmune response that results in chronic inflammation of the
uveal tract.
b Blood.
c Hyphema. The severe inflammation in the left eye results in frank intraocular
hemorrhage. The vessels of the chronically inflamed iris are so fragile that even minor
tra uma results in bleeding.
d Treat lens induced uveitis by controlling the inflammation. Use steroid and non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory ophthalmic agents. In rabbits, use steroids with great
caution. Removal of the cataract to control the inflammation is not practical for
most rabbits. Once the eye becomes inflamed from lens induced uveitis, the
likelihood of complications subsequent to cataract surgery increases dramatica lly.
74
84-86: Questions
84 At the conclusion of a surgical procedure to remove a mammary tumor in a rat,
several swabs have been used to control hemorrhage and clear the surgical site of
blood. Is this degree of blood loss likely to be significant?
85a
85b
85 This rabbit (85a) has developed dandruff and is losing hair. On physical exam-
ination, reddened, hairless, scaly patches are noted over the head and back. On a
fecal flotation, the organism on the slide was recovered (85b).
a What is this organism?
b How would you treat the condition?
c How would you advise the owners?
86 All non-human primates are susceptible to tetanus and measles virus and the
Great Ape species are also susceptible to poliomyelitis virus.
a What is the degree of susceptibility of non-human primates to each of these three
diseases and what level of exposure do they need to contract the disease?
b What is the degree of severity of each of these diseases for non-human primates?
c What is the current recommended vaccination schedule for non-human primates?
75
84-86: Answers
rat has a blood volume of 15-20 ml. Loss of more than 20% of blood volume
usually causes signs of circulatory failure. A 200 g rat will only need to lose 45 ml
of blood for this to occur, so even one blood-soaked swab represents significant
hemorrhage. Avoid circulatory failure due to blood loss by careful surgical technique.
Ligate blood vessels and use meticulous hemostasis. Cannulate the lateral tail vein
with an over-the-needle catheter and infuse plasma volume expanders, balanced
electrolyte solutions or even whole blood.
85 a Cheyletiella parasitivorax. This organism is referred to as "walking dandruff?
and its presence in the fecal examination is simply fortuitous as a result of grooming.
Identify the mite by the large palpal claws on its anterior surface. It can often be seen
grossly visible moving in the heavily scaled areas. Use clear cellophane tape to collect
the mites from the fur and skin. Examine the tape microscopically.
b Administer ivermectin (0.20-1.0 mg/kg SC q 14 days) for two to four doses or treat
the rabbit by dusting with carbaryl or permethrin powder at weekly intervals.
c C. parasitivorax survives in the environment longer than most mites. The premises
remain a source of infection and should also be treated. Flea elimination products,
necessary. Use these products cautiously, especially in debilitated or obese rabbits, as
deaths have been reported. On occasion the mites affect humans and other animals.
86 a Non-human primates have a low to moderate susceptibility to tetanus and need
 m e  a u si i ag  aa  
treatment. Primates are moderately susceptible to the measles virus and need a low to
moderate exposure level to contract the disease. This is also dependent upon the level
of human contact and the level of measles virus in the human population.
b Severity ranges from an inapparent infection to death. Great Apes are very
susceptible to the poliomyelitis virus at low exposure levels. Severity of this disease
ranges from inapparent to fatal.
c Recommended vaccination schedule for non-human primates:
Age
Type of vaccine
2 months
Tetanus'; trivalent oral poliovirus2
4 months
Tetanus'; trivalent oral poliovirus2
6 months
Tetanus'
15 months
Measles2
18 months
Tetanus'; trivalent oral poliovirus2
4-6 years
Tetanus'; trivalent oral poliovirus2
10-12 years
Measles
14-16 years
Tetanus'; trivalent oral poliovirus2
Every 10 years
Tetanus
' All species.
2Great Apes only, use current human pediatric poliovirus product/route recom-
mendations.
76
87, 88: Questions
87a
    u (i-   i   a 
a Why is guinea pig enamel atypical for a rodent?
b The guinea pig has the same dental formula as the chinchilla. How does the guinea
pig's cheek tooth dentition differ from that of the chinchilla?
c What effect does cheek tooth overgrowth have on the guinea pig's incisor occlusion?
d What is the problem shown in 87a and how would you treat it?
88
88 A three-year-old intact female rabbit develops an acute onset of generalized
weakness, depression and incoordination (88). It is obese, maintains a splay-legged
position, is weak on all four limbs and is reluctant to move. Spinal reflexes are
normal in all four limbs. The breath has an acetone odor and several masses are
palpable within the uterus. The rabbit is housed with an intact male and has had two
normal litters previously, the most recent occurring one year ago.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you confirm your diagnosis?
c How is the condition treated?
d What is the prognosis?
77
87, 88: Answers
87b
87 a Healthy rodents typically have
yellow/orange pigmented enamel on their
incisor teeth. Guinea pigs do not.
b There is a more significant rostrocaudal
divergence of the guinea pig's dental
arcades. Guinea pig cheek teeth are also
markedly curved, compensating for a wider
degree of anisognathism and resulting in
the occlusal planes being angled at about
30° to the horizontal plane (87b). Addition-
ally, the occlusal planes pass directly
through the mandibular condyles and the
tips of the incisor teeth in the guinea pig.
c Cheek tooth overgrowth tends to prevent the dental arcades from being brought
fully into occlusion. It also
prevents the mouth from closing fully in the normal
resting jaw position. As a result, the mandible is held in a more prognathic position.
This results in secondary malocclusion and overgrowth of the incisors.
d Bridging of the tongue by
the mandibular premolars. The tooth on the left has
bridged across the top of the
tongue and is markedly discolored, while the
Overgrowth of the premolar on the right side is much less obvious. As the cheek teeth
occlude, resulting in overgrowth.
This eventually leads to bridging over the tongue.
Until this ‘tongue tied’ state develops, the guinea pig can usually cope without
showing marked signs, so the problem is rarely detected early. Cut back the grossly
overgrown teeth under anesthesia and reduce the crown height of all the teeth to
approximate normal occlusion. Use analgesics and assist feeding after trimming until
the patient is able to eat on its own. Examine these patients every two to three
months because recurrence is common. Provide a diet high in grass hay and herbage
to encourage frequent chewing and a natural level of tooth wear. Ensure adequate
supplementation with vitamin C as deficiency affects collagen production and
maintenance. Scurvy causes weakening of the periodontal ligament and may be a
primary factor in cheek tooth malocclusion.
 88 a Pregnancy toxemia is the most likely diagnosis. Although the cause of pregnancy
toxemia in the rabbit is unknown, hepatic lipidosis is usuall observed at necropsy,
and the syndrome is seen most commonly in does which are obese and/or have
fasted. Pregnancy toxemia usually occurs in the last week of gestation, although it is
sometimes seen immediately postpartum. As in this case, affected does develop
generalized muscle weakness leading to the splay leg appearance, anorexia, tachy-
pnea and an acetone odor to the breath due to ketoacidosis.
b Radiograph the abdomen to confirm pregnancy. Use urinalysis to demonstrate
ketonuria, proteinuria and an acid pH.
c Provide supportive therapy including intravenous or intraosseous fluids and inject-
able antibiotics.
d Guarded to grave. If the doe does not respond to therapy and death is imminent, a
litter. Advise the owner that raising orphan rabbits is often unrewarding. Does used
for breeding should not be allowed to become obese.
78
89, 90: Questions
89 A ferret is diagnosed with a large spleen but does not appear clinically ill.
a What diagnostic tests would you use to determine the cause of the large spleen?
b Would you remove the spleen?
90
90 A mature pet rabbit is anorectic for two weeks,is reluctant to take syringe
feedings and is losing weight. There is a history of recurrent inappetence which was
previously managed by syringe feeding a slurry of liquidized rabbit pellets until the
rabbit resumed eating. It was raised on a concentrate ration of pellets and grain
without access to hay or fresh herbage. The rabbit has normal resting incisor
maxillary incisors (90).
a What is the normal chewing action in the rabbit?
b What is the cause of ina ppetence in this ca se?
c What other signs would you associate with this problem?
79
89, 90: Answers
89 a The diagnostic tests to determine the cause of the large spleen begin with the
history and physical examination. If the history indicates a ferret in good health,
extramedullary hematopoiesis may be a likely cause of splenomegaly, although some
ferrets with lymphosarcoma may also have no clinical signs of disease. The physical
examination of the ferret dictates the diagnostic steps to be undertaken. Spleno-
megaly due to extramedullary hematopoiesis is characterized by an enlarged spleen
with rounded borders. The organ palpates with a smooth surface and a spongy
consistency. No other organ enlargement is present. Palpation of a “lumpy' or hard”
spleen is likely due to neoplasia. Hematology and serum biochemistry panels provide
useful information. Alterations in the hemogram may be seen with neoplastic and
infectious disease. Radiographs confirm the presence of splenomegaly. Use
ultrasound to determine the splenic architecture. Extramedullary hematopoiesis does
not change the normal architecture of spleen, whereas other disease, especially
neoplasia, distorts the splenic architecture. Do a percutaneous splenic aspirate to
determine the cause of splenomegaly. Scruff the ferret and place it on a flat surface
while isolating the spleen with one hand. Aspirate the spleen with a 25 gauge needle
attached to a 3 ml syringe. If neoplasia is present, it is usually diffuse and found on
an aspirate. The ultimate diagnostic procedure is exploratory laparotomy and splenic
biopsy.
b In most instances, remove the spleen if neoplasia is present. Successful treatment of
lymphosarcoma may not depend on splenic removal. Typically, removal of the spleen
for extramedullary hematopoiesis is not necessary. Infrequently, splenomegaly ca uses
the splenic volume to be so great as to cause displacement of other abdominal
organs. If this displacement is severe, it may cause the ferret to be uncomfortable and
even partially anorexic. This is an indication for splenectomy even if the cause is
extramedullary hematopoiesis.
90 a When eating natural foods, the lips are used for prehension and herbage is cut
into manageable sections using the incisors. Rabbits use their incisor teeth in a lateral
slicing action. The food is then crushed and ground using the cheek teeth prior to
swallowing. The free end of the tongue is relatively thin and mobile, and is used to
assist the lips with prehension and the transfer of food from the incisor to the cheek
tooth region. The body of the tongue is fairly solid with a raised section between the
cheek tooth arcades. It is used to move food between the grinding surfaces of the
cheek teeth and form the ground material into a bolus for swallowing.
b The most likely cause is mucosal pain resulting from enamel spikes on one or more
of the cheek teeth causing buccal or lingual irritation.A concentrate ration (grain
and/or pellets) requires much less chewing for each unit of energy intake when
compared with dry or fresh herbage, resulting in inadequate wear to the cheek teeth.
c With a concurrent reduction in the degree of lateral jaw excursion during chewing,
the buccal surfaces of the maxillary (see 9la) and the lingual surfaces of the
mandibular cheek teeth (see 91b) are worn least and sharp points or spikes of enamel
form. Even very minor irregularities on the tooth surfaces may abrade or ulcerate the
contacting lingual or buccal mucosa causing significant pain. This leads to
inappetence, dysphagia, quidding {food dropping from the mouth during chewing)
excessive salivation, reduced food intake and weight loss. Epiphora is occasionally
present due to reflex lacrimation. Cheek abscesses can form secondary to mucosal
penetration.
80
91, 92: Questions
91 Shown are the buccal sur-
91a
faces of the maxillary (91a)
and the lingual surfaces of the
mandibular cheek teeth (91b)
of the ra bbit in question 90.
a How would you treat the
ra bbit's condition?
b What advice would you give
to prevent this problem?
91b
92 A monkey develops hali-
92
tosis, anorexia and intermit-
tent diarrhea. Oral examina-
tion reveals severe gingivitis,
caries and periodontal disease
(92).
a What are your differential
diagnoses?
b What diagnostic tests would
yourecommend?
c How would you treat the
condition?
81
91, 92: Answers
91 a Textbooks generally recommend trimming or filing off sharp enamel spikes and
restoring a normal occlusal surface. This is more easily said than done, particularly as
the occlusal plane is not horizontal in rabbits. In many cases, there is an excessive
curvature of the tooth roots leading to apparent tipping of the affected teeth out of
alignment in the dental arcade. These teeth are subject to abnormal occlusal forces
which may tip them further out of alignment. In early cases, an attempt at treatment
is usually worthwhile provided that no complicating factors are found during pre-
recurrence of enamel spikes is common.
In extreme cases, progressive damage to the tongue may lead to extensive scarring.
Because it is only the mucosal surface that is sensitive, its destruction and scarring
can allow the pain to subside until a new area becomes involved. In addition to
removing the offending enamel spikes, provide supportive therapy, including
analgesia, to get the animal through the acute stage of the disease. Re-examine the
patient at regular intervals because some rabbits require life-long treatment of
recurring enamel spikes. Improve the diet to include hay and fresh herbage.
b Feed rabbits a diet high in fresh grass hay and herbage. Such a diet requires
thorough chewing and provides a natural level of tooth wear. Pellets and grain
should only be provided for individuals with an exceptionally high energy demand,
such as breeding does, debilitated animals and some fast-growing youngsters.
92 a Vitamin C deficiency, a diet high in sugars, a lack of dental prophylaxis,
shigellosis, renal disease, septicemia, tooth root abscesses, Candida sp. infection,
secondary bacterial infections due to immunosuppression, periodontal disease and
gingivitis secondary to metabolic diseases (i.e. diabetes mellitus) and squamous cell
carcinoma or other oral neoplasias. The differential diagnoses for the intermittent
diarrhea include bacterial infections particularly Campylobacter sp., Shigella sp.,
Salmonella sp., Clostridia sp., Gram-negative bacterial overgrowth, parasitic
infections such as Entamoeba histolytica, cryptosporidium, giardia, nematodes and
cestodes, viral infections, lymphoplasmacytic or eosinophilic colitis, proliferative
bowel disease, inflammatory or irritative bowel disease, GI tract neoplasia, irritated
bowel syndrome, foreign body gastroenteritis and stress. Dietary causes of diarrhea
include food allergies, lack of fiber or foods with laxative properties.
b Perform hematology, a serum biochemistry panel and viral serology. Culture the
feces for aerobic and anaerobic bacteria and for Salmonella sp. and Shigella sp.
Examine a direct fecal smear and a fecal floatation. Perform an ELISA test for
Giardia sp. and Cryptosporidia sp. on the feces. Radiograph the teeth and skull to
assess the degree of bone resorption around tooth roots. In addition, use radiographs
to assess overall bone quality and the presence of lytic or proliferative bony lesions
indicating the presence of abscesses, osteomyelitis or neoplasia.
c Until a positive diagnosis is made, treat the diarrhea symptomatically with bismuth
subsalicylate (262 mg/3-5 kg body weight PO q 6-8 hours). Extract severely
damaged or dead teeth although pulpotomy or root canal with endodontic therapy is
preferred. Review diet and husbandry practices including sanitation and disposal of
feces. Discuss any potential zoonotic diseases. Give additional supportive care such as
softened foods, fluid therapy and analgesics for the dental pain. In this case, the
definitive diagnosis was gingivitis due to shigellosis and the organism was sensitive to
trimethoprim/sulfa.
82
93-95: Questions
93 A three-year-old neutered male ferret has a red, inflamed draining tract to the left
of the anus. A foul smelling, purulent material is emanating from the wound.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you manage the condition initially?
c What surgery would you use to resolve the condition permanently?
94 An adult European hedgehog with
94
erythema and pruritus of the haired
areas of the skin is shown. There is some
quill loss over the spine but the condi-
tion is most obvious on the face where
the skin is thickened and crusted with
dried serum (94).
a What has caused this skin condition?
b What laboratory test will confirm this?
c How would you treat the disease?
d Does this condition have significance
for the hedgehog's future health?
95 A young boy who recently purchased
95
a rat from a pet shop notes that both of
its eyes appear cloudy (95). He is con-
cerned that he has done something
wrong in caring for the animal.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What advice would you give to the
owner?
83
93-95: Answers
93 a A ruptured abscess of the left anal gland is the most likely diagnosis. Other
possibilities include neoplasia of the glandular or muscular tissue of the area. This
condition also occurs with incompletely removed anal glands resulting in fistulous
tracts.
b Thoroughly flush the infected tract. Administer a broad-spectrum antibiotic, such
as amoxicillin (15-30 mg/kg PO q 12 hours) or trimethoprim/sulfadiazine {30 mg/kg
reduce inflammation. When the inflammation has subsided in approximately 5-10
days, remove both the affected and normal anal glands. The other anal gland often
becomes affected later if not removed.
c Under general anesthesia, isolate the anal duct opening and make a circular incision
around it. Dissect the glandular tissue around the duct to a depth of 2-5 mm. After
this, the gland may be bluntly dissected from the subcutaneous tissues and anal
sphincter muscle. Either leave the small skin incision open or close it with a single,
5-0 absorbable suture or with tissue adhesive. In ferrets, these glands are relatively
large and the contents have a strong unpleasant odor. Drop soiled sponges and the
anal glands into a dilute bleach solution to neutralize the odor.
               s
severe disease.
b Microscopic examination of a skin scraping from the affected areas will confirm
the cause. Three species of mites are implicated in this disease. In Europe and New
Zealand, the most common species found is the psoroptid mite Caparina triplis,
whereas in the UK, Sarcoptes spp. and Notoedres spp. are more frequently isolated.
Close examination with the naked eye or using a hand lens allows direct visualization
of Caparina mites moving at the base of the spines. Although less than 0.5 mm
across, they are white and contrast markedly with the dark skin of the hedgehog.
c Ivermectin (0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC) is the treatment of choice. Injections are repeated at
two to three week intervals for up to three total treatments. It is important to clean
the environment in the case of hedgehogs held in captivity.
d Trichopbyton erinacei has been isolated from the feces of some skin mites and
damage to the skin may predispose the hedgehog to this or other dermatologic
disease. In addition, serum accumulation on the skin may attract flies and the risk of
myasis. Studies in New Zealand concluded that hedgehogs with skin mite infestation
were less likely to survive hibernation.
95 a There is a nuclear cataract in the lens. The eye appears otherwise normal.
b Reassure the owner that nuclear cataracts occur during the development of the
animal in utero and that nothing he has done has caused the problem. A number of
genes in laboratory rodents cause cataracts with various morphologies and this is
probably one of them. Advise the owner that his pet will not suffer from its
somewhat compromised vision. Even when completely blind, these rodents show few
if any behavioral abnormalities. This rat still has considerable peripheral vision.
84
96, 97: Questions
96
96 A seven-year-old ferret has numerous episodes of lethargy, ptyalism and collapse
over a six-month period. Hematology and serum biochemistry values are normal
except for a mild elevation in SGPT and a blood glucose of 2.8 mmol/l (32 mg/dl).
An abdominal exploratory is performed. A mass is found at surgery (96).
a On what structure is this mass found?
b What is your diagnosis based on the history and the findings at surgery?
c How would treat the condition?
disease process, blood samples are collected.
a What are four sites that can be used for venipuncture in this rabbit?
b Describe methods of venipuncture in the rabbit.
8.5
96, 97: Answers
96 a Pancreas.
b A pancreatic beta cell tumor or insulinoma. Hyperinsulinemia results in
hypoglycemia leading to episodic weakness. In the ferret, ptyalism may be a sign of
nausea.
c With surgery, medicine or a combination of both. Medical treatment includes
frequent feedings, prednisone and diazoxide. Although surgery is the treatment of
systemic disease {i.e. decompensated heart disease), if the owner cannot afford
surgery, or if there are other extenuating cricumstances, then the ferret is maintained
with medical therapy. Owners need to realize that eventually malignant beta cells will
Perform an exploratory laparotomy with careful inspection of all the abdominal
organs. Gently palpate the pancreas feeling for discrete, firm nodules. More than one
insulinoma may be present in the pancreas The insulinoma can be as small as 1-2
mm in size. Occasionally, only diffuse pancreatic thickening may be present. Perform
a nodulectomy in the body of the pancreas by shelling out the nodules. Do a partial
pancreatectomy if tumors are located in the right or left limb. Use hemostatic clips
for a partial pancreatectomy. Bleeding is minimal. Biopsy the liver and any abnormal
lymph nodes. Perform a routine abdominal closure. For suture material, a 4-0
monofilament, synthetic absorbable can be used. Postsurgically, monitor the blood
glucose concentration until the ferret is euglycemic. Infrequently, ferrets will need to
be maintained on either prednisone and/or diazoxide (USA) in the immediate
postsurgical period. Recheck the ferret 7-10 days after surgery and evaluate fasting
monitor the fasting blood glucose at regular intervals for the rest of the ferret's life.
At some point in time, it is likely that the ferret will need to be placed on medication
to remain eugylcemic.
97 a There are a number of suitable sites for venipuncture in the rabbit. These
include the jugular vein, lateral saphenous vein, cephalic vein and the auricular artery
and veins.
b A butterfly catheter or a needle without a syringe attached is used to collect blood
from the marginal ear vein or central ear artery. Use the ear vessels with caution.
Rabbit veins are fragile and prone to hematomas. Damage to the ear vessel may lead
to necrosis and loss of part of the pinna. Necrosis is also likely to occur if
medications are administered through ear vessels. Rabbit skin is easily torn by
clippers and it is safer to pluck hairs from around the venipuncture site and/or use
alcohol liberally to wet down the area. Use a 25 gauge needle attached to a 1 ml
syringe for the small-diameter veins, such as the cephalic and saphenous veins. For
small rabbits, use an insulin syringe attached to a 27 gauge needle for venipuncture
of the cephalic vein. Restrain a rabbit for cephalic venipuncture in a manner similar
for venipuncture. The rabbit is held on its side and the rear leg is held off around the
quadriceps. The lateral saphenous has numerous branches that can be utilized. Use a
22 gauge needle attached to a 3 ml syringe for the jugular vein. In dwarf breeds, a 25
gauge needle may be necessary. Hold the rabbit in sternal recumbency on an edge of
a table with its forelegs pulled down and its head held up. The vein is in the jugular
groove and is superficial. In obese rabbits, there may be fat over the jugular vein
decreasing visualization.
86
98-l00: Questions
98
98 Two adult rabbits are housed in a hutch in the garden of a semi-rural area in the
UK. The previous year, both the rabbits were vaccinated with an attenuated Shope
fibroma virus vaccine. Both rabbits have recently been exposed to a field strain of
myxoma virus resulting in one rabbit's death. The surviving cagemate (98) developed
a What is your diagnosis?
b Are there any factors in the previous history of this rabbit which tends to
strengthen your diagnosis?
c How would you confirm the diagnosis?
d How would you manage the conditon?
e What is your prognosis for this rabbit?
99 A mouse has been prepared
99
for abdominal surgery (99).
What are some likely clinical
consequences?
100 Hypovitaminosis C is commonly seen as a cause of disease in pet guinea pigs.
a What diagnostic tests would be beneficial in diagnosing this condition?
b What is your therapeutic approach for a guinea pig with hypovitaminosis C?
87
98-I00: Answers
98 a These lesions are likely to be the result of myxomatosis, caused by a pox virus.
although less virulent strains of virus are recorded. In this case, it is likely that the
rabbit was either exposed to a non-fatal infection in the previous season, or was
vaccinated successfully with Shope fibroma virus (available in the UK). The degree of
protective immunity produced by this vaccination in the UK is variable. The rabbit
that died likely did not develop protection against myxomatosis despite previous
vaccination.
c Confirm the diagnosis with biopsy and histopathology of the lesion or virus
isolation. It is important to submit intact epidermis.
d Consider prophylactic treatment with an antibiotic such as enrofloxacin (10 mg/kg
PO, SC or IM q 12 hours). No specific treatment is available for the viral infection,
which is self-limiting
e The prognosis is good, as long as secondary bacterial respiratory disease is avoided.
99 Although maintenance of asepsis is important in rodents, removal of large areas
of insulating fur and the use of excessive quantities of an alcohol-based skin-
disinfectant increases the rate of heat loss. Hypothermia is a major problem when
anesthetizing small rodents. This is due to their high surface area:body weight ratio
depressant effects of anesthesia on thermoregulation, this results in a substantial fall
in body temperature. To decrease the risk of hypothermia, every effort is made to
minimize heat loss and supplemental heating is provided using heating blankets. Use
surgical drapes, reduce the area of fur removal and minimize the quantity of skin
disinfectant applied to help decrease the chance of hypothermia.
100 a The diagnosis is based primarily on the clinical signs and history. Radiographs
may reveal enlarged costochondral junctions and abnormal epiphyseal growth
centers in the limbs.
b Initially, supportive care is given and, secondly, the diet is supplemented with
vitamin C. Use injectible ascorbic acid (50-100 mg/kg IM or SC q 12-24 hours).
Switch to oral supplementation once the patient improves. Administer vitamin C
orally {30-50 mg/kg q 12-24 hours) in liquid, capsule or tablet form. Provide fluid
therapy and gavage feedings as needed until the patient can eat on its own.
When recovery is complete, discontinue oral vitamin C supplementation. Provide a
diet rich in ascorbic acid by including half to one cup daily of fresh foods, such as
dark green leafy vegetables {kale, mustard greens, dandelion greens, Swiss chard,
cabbage). Alternatively, add vitamin C to the drinking water (100 mg/cup of water).
The disadvantage to this method of supplementation is that the water should be
changed at least once daily due to the rapidly decreasing potency of the vitamin when
exposed to light and water. In addition, the bitter taste vitamin C can impart may
decrease the guinea pig's water consumption. The guinea pig diet should also include
unlimited fresh grass hay.
Because vitamin C is labile, do not depend on guinea pig pelleted food as the sole
dietary source of this vitamin.
88
101, 102: Questions
101
101 A six-year-old female rabbit has a bloody vaginal discharge for the last two
months. The patient has resided as the only pet in the same household since eight
weeks of age. On physical examination, a palpable caudal abdominal mass effect is
noted and a hematocrit of 22% is found.
a What diagnostic tests would you now perform?
b What organ is shown (101)?
c What are your differential diagnoses for the enlarged uterus?
d Which is the most likely cause?
e What treatment plan would you recommend?
102
102 A lateral abdominal radiograph of a young ferret presented for lethargy,
anorexia and diarrhea is shown (102).
a What is your diagnosis?
b What is the surgical procedure to treat this condition?
c What is the prognosis?
89
101, I02: Answers
101 a Use radiographs to help define the location of the mass. If malignancy is part
of the differential diagnosis, examine the lung and liver radiographically for meta-
stasis. Use abdominal ultrasound to further define the location and architecture of
the mass effect.
b An abnormally enlarged uterus.
c They include uterine adenocarcinoma, benign uterine hyperplasia, pyometra, cystic
endometrial hyperplasia, uterine aneurysm and a uterus enlarged with fetuses.
d Uterine adenocarcinoma because it is a single pet with no history of breeding.
Uterine adenocarcinoma is the most common reproductive disease of unspayed
female rabbits over two years of age.
e If there is no evidence of metastasis, perform an ovariohysterectomy. At surgery,
biopsy the mesenteric lymph nodes and liver to rule out metastasis. If there is no
 aae  a i   u   i a e 'a s
metastasis, then the prognosis is very poor. Radiograph and/or ultrasound the patient
in three months and again at six months to look for metastasis. Rarely will metastasis
102 a Radiopaque foreign bodies in the small intestine.
b Perform abdominal exploratory surgery with careful palpation of the entire GI
tract, including the stomach. This detects other foreign bodies not visible on the
radiograph. If the foreign object is in the stomach, perform a routine gastrotomy.
Perform an enterotomy if the object is in the intestinal tract. Exteriorize the segment
of bowel containing the foreign body and isolate it by packing it off with moistened
gauze sponges or laparotomy pads. Gently milk intestinal contents away from the site
and have an assistant finger clamp' the bowel. Use sterilized bobby pins" (USA) or
hair grips in the absence of an assistant. Make an incision in the antemesenteric
through this opening. Remove any necrotic bowel, if present, and anastomose
healthy tissue. Close the bowel with S-0 monofilament, non-absorbable suture if
there is severe infection, otherwise a monofilament, absorbable synthetic suture
material may be used. It is not advisable to use chromic catgut in this species. Lavage
the bowel and replace it in the abdomen. Change sterile gloves and surgical
instruments, and lavage the abdomen with warm sterile saline. Perform a routine
closure of the abdomen with 4-0 or 5-0 monofilament, synthetic absorbable suture.
Feed the ferret within 12-24 hours after surgery. Peritonitis is rarely a complication
of a GI foreign body in ferrets. If peritonitis is observed, culture the abdomen for
aerobic and anerobic bacteria and flush copiously. Treat with drain placement or
leave as an open abdomen depending on the severity of the disease. Administer
antibiotics based on culture results if peritonitis is present. Otherwise, place ferrets
on a broad-spectrum antibiotic postsurgically.
c If the bowel is not necrotic and if severe peritonitis is not present, the prognosis is
excellent.
90
103, 104: Questions
103 A two-year-old female
103
neutered ferret has been pro-
ducing a green liquid mucus-
containing stool for three days
(103). The ferret has a de-
creased appetite, is moderately
lethargic, 5% dehydrated and
has a body temperature of
40.5°C. No abdominal pain is
noted on palaption. Vomiting
was seen three days ago, but
has not been observed since.
No other clinical signs are evi-
dent. A one-year-old neutered
male ferret adopted from a local ferret shelter was introduced into the household one
week previously. The new ferret remains clinically normal. The ferrets are caged
together, allowed only supervised exercise in the house and are fed a high-quality dry
feline growth diet.
a What diseases would you consider for this ferret?
b What clinical investigations would you perform?
c How would you care for the ferret until a diagnosis is reached?
104 Two previously healthy pet rabbits
104
housed together exhibit head tilt, ataxia,
nystagmus and tremors within the same
week in February. During mild weather
they are allowed free run in the yard
during the day and are brought indoors
in the evening. Otoscopic examination
was normal on both rabbits. The radio-
graph is of the skull of one of the rabbits 
(104).
a What are your differential diagnoses?
b Do the tympanic bullae appear normal
in the radiograph?
c What other diagnostic tests or addi-
tional information from the history
would help in establishing a diagnosis?
91
103, I04: Answers
103 a Viral enteritis, bacterial enteritis, proliferative colitis, intestinal lymphoma,
eosinophilic gastroenteritis, systemic disease such as renal or hepatic, intestinal
parasitism and enteritis due to toxin ingestion.
b A fecal examination to rule out intestinal parasitism. Obtain hematology to assess
immune response. Viral disease often results in a normal to depressed WBC count.
Bacterial disease may cause a leukophilia with a neutrophilia. Lymphoma in the
    n         
of 3,500 or a 60% or higher lymphocyte portion of the differential. The peripheral
absolute eosinophil count may exceed the normal high of 1,0o0 in ferrets with
eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Use radiography to assess intestinal gas patterns, liver size and any other
abdominal abnormalities. Perform serum biochemistries to rule out other systemic
disease. Fecal culture is occasionally helpful in diagnosing Camplobacter or
Salmonella infections. In cases of suspected eosinophilic gastroenteritis, proliferative
colitis or lymphoma, use endoscopy or exploratory surgery to obtain GI tissue
samples for histopathology.
Conduct a thorough and detailed history to determine if there is any potential for
toxin ingestion or exposure to other infected ferrets.
c If there is no vomiting, provide a combination of oral and subcutaneous electrolyte
fluids to replace dehydration deficit and continue maintenance fluids ( 100 ml/kg q 24
hours). Often, ferrets will accept fruit-flavored oral electrolyte replacement
solutions. Administer an oral broad-spectrum antibiotic, such as amoxicillin {15
mg/kg q 12 hours) or enrofloxacin (10 mg/kg q 12 hours), to cover the possibility of
bacterial enteritis. Use a highly palatable, high calorie food supplement syringe fed in
the amount of 10-20 ml/kg every 6-8 hours to maintain adequate calorie intake. In
the USA, bismuth subsalicylate can be used as an intestinal protectant {17 mg/kg {1
ml/kg) q 12 hours). In the UK, alternatives are: BCK granules or Kaopectate (Kaogel:
Parke Davis) (0.5 ml/kg q 12 hours). The primary source of calories should be fat as
opposed to carbohydrates.
The diagnosis in the ferret in this case was probably viral enteritis contracted from
the newly introduced ferret who experienced similar signs one month previously.
104 a Bacterial otitis media or interna, meningoencephalitis (bacterial, viral or proto-
zoal), encephalomalacia (cerebral vascular accidents, parasites or toxins) and trauma.
b They are normal. In this case, normal tympanic bullae help to rule out chronic
otitis media in which radiopaque caseous material and proliferative sclerotic bony
change in the bullae are frequently seen. Tympanic bullae can appear normal in cases
of acute otitis media.
C Hematology, serum biochemistries, cerebrospinal fluid tap and serology. Test
results in this case are as follows: serum biochemistry values within normal limits, a
WBC of 10,600 with a heterophil:lymphocyte percentage ratio (78:17) indicative 0f
an inflammatory process. Cytology and culture of the cerebrospinal fluid were not
diagnostic. Serology for Encephalitozoan cuniculi was negative. The outdoor history
suggests a potential exposure to areas where raccoons might have been. Raccoons
can pass Baylisascaris procyonis eggs in their feces and these eggs remain infective in
the soil for years. When a non-host species, such as the rabbit, ingests the eggs, the
larvae migrate to the brain where they continue to grow, causing progressive
meningoencephalitis and encephalomalacia. Confirm the diagnosis of cerebral larva
92
105-107: Questions
105
105 A breeding buck is in a rabbitry of about 100 New Zealand White rabbits (105).
It has developed a mucopurulent nasal discharge and a slight head tilt.
a What is the cause of this condition?
b If the owner wants to save the buck, what treatment would you recommend?
c What recommendations would you make concerning the rest of the herd?
106
106 A wild red fox has developed generalized alopecia and marked thickening of the
skin (106).
a What is your diagnosis for this skin condition?
b How would you treat it ?
c Is there a zoonotic potential with this disease?
107 An adult spider monkey has to be restrained for physical examination. The
owner is loosely holding the monkey by a light-weight leash attached to a leather
collar around its neck.
a What do you need to capture the animal?
b How should the owner assist you in its capture?
c How would you restrain a small- to medium-sized monkey?
93
105-I07: Answers
105 a The most likely cause of upper respiratory disease and torticollis in this rabbit
is infection with Pasteurella multocida.
b This disease can be controlled in many rabbits but it is difficult to achieve a
complete cure and recurrence of clinical signs can occur when treatment is
discontinued. Aggressive treatment early in the course of disease provides the best
chance for eliminating a P. multocida infection in a patient. Chronically affected
rabbits may require treatment for weeks to months. Obtain a deep nasal culture to
aid in the appropriate antibiotic choice. Enrofloxacin (10 mg/kg PO or SC q 12
hours) or trimethoprim/sulfadiazine (30 mg/kg SC or PO q 12 hours) are good first-
choice antibiotics with minimal side effects. Injectable procaine penicillin (40,000
iu/kg IM or SC q 24-72 hours for seven doses) can be used in rabbits that are
established on a high fiber diet without current signs of GI disease. Follow penicillin
injections with an oral antibiotic when long-term treatment is indicated. Do not use
beta lactam antibiotics orally. Pasteurellosis can be precipitated by a number of
factors including malnutrition, underlying disease, overcrowding, high environmental
temperatures, high air ammonia levels and poor ventilation. Control of these
variables will help to decrease the chance of disease.
C P. multocida infection is often endemic in a herd. Recommend that rabbits showing
signs of disease be isolated and not bred. To establish a Pasteurella-free herd, test
current and incoming breeders for P. multocida by culture and serology and breed
only negative rabbits. Remove young from infected does by Cesarean section and
foster them with Pasteurella-free does maintained under SPF conditions.
106 a Sarcoptic mange is very common in wild red foxes and is the most likely
diagnosis in this case. Skin scrapings confirm the diagnosis of Sarcoptes scabei.
Pruritus is often not evident. Other differential diagnoses to consider include
dermatophytosis, bacterial dermatitis, other ectoparasite infestation and nutritional
deficiencies.
b Ivermectin (0.2 mg/kg SC or PO) is the most effective treatment for sarcoptic
mange in the fox. Repeat this dose at two-week intervals for one to two additional
treatments. Keep the environment clean to prevent reinfestation. Do not release the
patient back to its native environment until the treatment is completed.
c Sarcoptic mange has zoonotic potential for humans and a number of other animal
species. Use scrupulous hygiene when handling wild animals with skin disease.
107 a The two most important items for capture are a net and leather gloves with
enough to prevent bite wounds and they should extend to at least mid-forearm.
b Ask the owner to leave the room during the procedure. If the owner insists on
staying, do not allow him/her to assist during the capture or restraint of the pet.
Owners often think they can soothe the animal or that they can hold the monkey
while you attempt to examine it. They cannot restrain frightened animals.
c Hold the monkey's arms behind its back with one hand and grasp the lower limbs
for control with the other hand.
94
108, 109: Questions
108
108 These two adult pet hamsters have developed chronic, non-pruritic generalized
alopecia with scaling and crusts most evident around the ears and feet (108). The
child in the household plays with the hamsters and the child was recently treated for
dermatophytosis.
a What are your differential diagnoses for the hamster's skin changes?
b What diagnostic tests would you perform?
c How would you treat the hamsters?
d What recommendations would you make to the owner?
109a
109 Rabbits become sexually mature from three and a half to nine months of age.
The smaller the breed, the earlier the onset of sexual maturity. Separate young
rabbits into same sex groups by 10-12 weeks of age to avoid unwanted litters. The
photograph shows five-week-old rabbits (109a).
a At what age can the kits be sexed and how would you do this?
b What is the gestation period of the rabbit?
c How soon can the doe be palpated for pregnancy?
d How should you cage a breeding pair of rabbits?
9.5
108, I09: Answers
108 a They include demodectic mange {Demodex aurati, D. criceti), dermato-
phytosis, low protein {under 16%) feed, bedding abrasion, systemic disorders
associated with ageing, including renal amyloidosis and renal neoplasia,
staphylococcal pyoderma, adrenocortical neoplasia and other endocrine disease.
b Examine a deep skin scraping microscopically. Prepare a mineral oil or KOH wet-
mount to assess for fungal hyphae. Culture the skin and hair for fungal and bacterial
pathogens and evaluate the diet and husbandry practices. Perform further diagnostic
tests as needed including radiography, ultrasonography, hematology, urinalysis and a
serum biochemistry panel. A heavy infestation of Demodex spp. was identified in this
case. Additionally, abundant growth of Trichopbyton mentagrophytes on
dermatophyte test medium was observed.
c Attempt to treat demodectic mange with ivermectin (0.2-1.0 mg/kg SC). Repeat the
ivermectin twice at 10-14 day intervals. This treatment often does not work because
ivermectin may not be effective. Use of amitraz is dangerous in hamsters because
clinically apparent when there is underlying primary disease such as adrenal gland
disease, neoplasia, severe environmental stress, malnutrition and other systemic
disease. Demodocosis is not zoonotic. T. mentagrapbytes or Microsporum canis are
the most common causes of dermatophyte infections in hamsters. Dermatophyte
infections on hamsters can be zoonotic. Treat dermatophytosis with griseofulvin
(25-30 mg/kg PO q 24 hours for 3-4 weeks). Treat localized infections with a topical
antifungal cream or lotion.
d Completely clean the cage and use non-toxic pelleted bedding. When handling,
wear gloves or wash hands with a germicidal hand soap afterwards.
109b
109 a The kits are best sexed at birth or
at weaning (five to eight weeks of age).
In the interim, it is difficult to exteriorize
the genitalia. Stretch the perineum to
expose the anogenital structures. The
male has a conical- to cylindrical-shaped
penis with a rounded to oval urethral
opening. The female has a vulva that
protrudes slightly with a slit-like opening
(109b). In sexually mature males, the
scrotal sacs may be seen lateral to the
perineum. Male rabbits can retract the testicles into the inguinal canal making sex
determination more difficult.
b Twenty-nine to 35 days, with a litter size ranging from 4 to 12.
c Fetuses can be palpated as early as 10 days postbreeding. At this stage they can be
felt as masses approximately 1-1.5 cm in diameter located in the caudal ventral
abdomen. At 18 days postbreeding, the fetuses are approximately 2.5-3 cm in length.
Palpation must be gentle to avoid damage to the fetuses. If necessary, use
radiography or ultrasonography after 21 days to determine pregnancy.
d Does are territorial and may kill a new rabbit introduced into the cage. For this
reason, it is important to bring the doe to the buck's cage for breeding. If the doe
does not accept the buck within a few minutes and fighting occurs, separate them.
Introduce them again at 12-24 hour intervals until one to two successful matings
ha ve occured.
96
110- 112: Questions
110 A dental abnormality is seen as an
110
incidental finding during a preoperative
examination on a pet rat prior to exci-
sion of a mammary tumor. A lateral
radiographic view of the patient's skull
is shown (110).
a How does the anisognathism of
rodents differ from that in carnivores,
rabbits, horses and cattle?
b What is the dental formula for rats
and mice?
c How does their dentition differ from
that of guinea pigs and chinchillas?
d What dental abnormality is shown in the radiograph and what are the three most
likely causes?
111 A three-month-old raccoon kept by a wildlife rehabilitator for four days has
bloody, foul-smelling diarrhea of 24 hour duration. The animal is severely
dehydrated and depressed. Hematology reveals a marked anemia and leukopenia.
Ascarid ova are found on a fecal examination. The rehabilitator has 14 other
raccoons at her home that were kept isolated from the new raccoon.
a What are the differential diagnoses?
b What is the most likely diagnosis?
c How would you manage the raccoon?
112 A mouse has a three-week history of
112
scaling and pruritus (112). Skin scrapings
and acetate strip samples are negative
for ectoparasites.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you confirm this diag-
nosis?
c Is there a zoonotic risk?
97
110-I 12: Answers
110 a In rodents the maxilla is narrower than the mandible, providing space for the
large masseter muscles which are required for gnawing. In carnivores and herbivores,
such as rabbits, horses and cattle, the jaw width relationship is reversed with the
mandible being narrower than the maxilla.
h
I1C0P0 M3
c Rats and mice are granivorous rather than herbivorous like chinchillas and guinea
pigs. The granivore diet is nutritionally concentrated, is relatively non-abrasive and
requires little grinding before it is swallowed. The cheek teeth are reduced in number
and size compared to the herbivorous species. Rats and mice have brachyodont
molar teeth that stop growing once they have erupted and the roots are fully formed.
d One of the rat's mandibular second molar teeth is missing. Absence of molar teeth
may be congenital, the result of periodontal disease or post-extraction. Caries is not
likely to be the cause because it is rare in rodents unless they are fed an unnatural
diet and are exposed to cariogenic bacteria. Loss of molars from external trauma is
also unlikely because they are protected by a thick layer of masseter muscle laterally.
111 a Canine distemper, raccoon parvovirus, parasitic enteritis, bacterial enteritis
and diarrhea due to dietary changes.
b Raccoon parvovirus. Raccoon parvovirus is related to canine parvovirus, mink
enteritis virus and feline panleukopenia. Raccoons are not susceptible to canine
parvovirus and raccoon parvovirus is species-specific. Clinical signs of raccoon
parvovirus include depression, anorexia, dehydration, diarrhea and leukopenia. The
diarrhea may be watery, mucoid or hemorrhagic. It is the most common cause of
severe diarrhea associated with leukopenia in wild raccoons. Confirm the diagnosis
by submitting blood or feces for IFA or ELISA testing.
c This disease is highly contagious to other raccoons and has a 80-100% mortality
rate. The incubation period is approximately seven days with death occuring 10-14
days after clinical signs are noted. Isolation and euthanasia of infected animals is
usually indicated. Follow the same treatment protocol used for dogs with parvovirus
infections. Use strict hygiene when handling the fecal material of wild raccoons due
to potential presence of the larvae of Baylisascaris procyonis. The ascarid ova found
on the fecal examination of this patient are most likely those of Baylisascaris. This
parasite does not usually cause clinical signs in the host animal; however, when the
uo aaraua ieui aaiel a suuy supnoui saiads iso-uou aq paisaaui aue bao
cause severe damage and even death by visceral larva migrans.
112 a Dermatophytosis is the most likely diagnosis. The distribution of lesions is not
pathognomonic, although facial lesions suggest dermatophytosis. Trichopbyton
mentagrophytes is frequently isolated in cases of murine dermatophytosis.
b Mount affected hairs in mineral oil and examine them microscopically. A KOH
preparation can also be used, but some hairs will appear positive if they are left in
this preparation for an extended period of time. Trichopbyton spp. do not fluoresce,
therefore a Wood's lamp examination is of no value. Confirm the diagnosis by
submitting hairs from the affected areas for fungal culture.
c Yes. The risk to humans is greater following exposure to infected reservoir host
species, such as pet mice and wild mice, than from exposure to an infected dog or
cat. However, the likelihood of human infection is less than that from a
Microsporum canis infection in a cat.
98
113-115: Questions
113 A six-month-old pet intact female rabbit is exhibiting increased frequency of
urination. She eliminates small amounts of urine in several selected areas of the room
where she is housed. The urine is reddish in color. The tables below show the results
of urinalysis and serum biochemistries.
a What are your differential diagnoses for 'red urine'?
b What is your diagnosis in this case?
c How would you treat the various causes of 'red urine'?
Urinalysis results
Serum chemistry results
Appeara nce
Cloudy
Glucose
7.56 mmol/l (135 mg/dl)
pH
8.5
BUN
18 mg/dl
Specific gra vity
1.02
Creatinine
106.08 μmol/l (1.2 mg/dl)
Protein
Trace
Sodium
140 mmol/l (140 mEq/dl)
Glucose
Negative
 Pota ssium
4.5 mmol/l (4.5 mEq/dl)
Ketone
Negative
Calcium
3.55 mmol/l (14.2 mg/dl)
Bilirubin
Negative
Phosphorus
1.152 mmol/l (3.6 mg/dl)
Blood
Negative
Total protein
57 g/l (5.7 g/dl)
WBC
Rare
Albumin
37 g/l (3.7 g/dl)
RBC
None
Globulin
20 g/ (2.0 g/dl)
Casts
None
Bilirubin total
4.5 g/l (0.45 g/dl)
Epith.
Rare
Alk. phos.
46.5 U/l
Crystals
Calcium
SGPT/ALT
37.3 U/l
carbonate
SGOT/AST
18.7 U/l
and triple
GGT
5.5 U/1
phosphate
Chloride
108 mmol/l (108 mEq/l)
Bacteria
Rare
CO2
20.7 mmol/l (20.7 mEq/l)
114 A squirrel monkey with a five-day
114
history of watery diarrhea is now
8-10% dehydrated.A fecal floatation
using sodium nitrate reveals this parasite
identified by trichrome stain (114).
a What is the organism?
b Could this be the causal agent of the
diarrhea?
c How would you treat the infection?
d What are the difficulties associated
with administration of the drug of
choice?
115 An eight-month-old female hamster has non-specific signs of lethargy and ataxia
of 24-36 hour duration. Since hamsters hoard food, the owner is not sure about her
dehydrated.
a What is the proper procedure for capture and restraint of the hamster?
b What are your differential diagnoses?
99
113-I 15: Answers
113 a It can be the result of blood from the urinary or female reproductive tract,
dietary pigments or porphyrin pigments. Hematuria occurs with urinary tract
infection, trauma, neoplasia, urolithiasis, bladder polyps or reproductive disease,
such as uterine aneurysm, adenocarcinoma or pyometra. Blood from the uterus pools
in the vagina and is expelled when the rabbit urinates. Uterine bleeding from
adenocarcinoma is sporadic and often appears as clots of blood within the voided
pigments can color the urine dark yellow to a deep red-orange. The factors that cause
porphyrin production are unknown. Some foods can cause urine color changes. Most
notable are beets which create urine that has a magenta hue.
b Both the serum biochemistry and the urinalysis values are normal. The red color of
the urine is due to porphyrin pigments. The frequency of urination in this sexually
mature animal is consistent with territorial marking.
c Treat cystitis and pyelonephritis with aggressive antibiotic and fluid therapy.
Remove uroliths and polyps surgically. Perform an ovariohysterectomy for uterine
disease. Adenocarcinoma is the most common uterine disease in the adult female
domestic rabbit. Radiograph or ultrasound the patient prior to an ovariohysterec-
tomy to screen for metastatic disease. No treatment is necessary for urine colored by
dietary or porphyrin pigments. An ovariohysterectomy was performed on this case to
 a        
weeks post-surgically. In some cases of territorial marking, additional behavior
modification may be necessary.
114a Giardia lamblia.
b Yes. Since other factors may be involved in the diarrhea, it is important to include a
CBC and serum biochemistry panel on this monkey. Other tests include examination
of fecal smears and fecal floats and fecal cultures.
c Metronidazole {15-30 mg/kg/day PO q 24 hours for 5 days). The disease is usually
self-limiting but treatment shortens its course. Warn the owners that this disease has
zoonotic potential.
d Only the oral form of metronidazole is effective and it has an extremely bitter taste.
It is not possible to *pill' a primate. Many primates can detect the taste of
 metronidazole, even in small quantities, in any type of food. Manual restraint is often
necessary to administer the drug via nasogastric tube.
hand. To avoid being bitten by a fractious patient, scoop it into a can or small box.
Do not pick up hamsters when they are sleeping, since many will bite in response to
being surprised. Once the hamster is captured, carefully scruff it by grasping the large
skin fold over the nape of the neck. This skin is loose and plentiful, and if a sufficient
amount is not grasped, the pet can turn and bite. Reposition your hold as needed to
minimize press ure that may ca use the eyes to bulge.
b Infectious disease, metabolic conditions (particularly renal or hepatic disorders),
neoplastic disease, digestive disorders (dental malocclusion, gastric foreign bodies),
trauma and toxicity. The described signs are non-specific, therefore further investi-
gation is necessary.
100
116- 118: Questions
116 How would you treat severe, life-threatening anaphylactic vaccination reactions
in ferrets?
117 A two-year-old ferret jill is dull, lethargic
117
and has a generalized alopecia (117).
a What are your differential diagnoses for the
alopecia?
b How would you treat these conditions?
118
118 The combination of ketamine and medetomidine provides good surgical
anesthesia in several species of small mammals (118). What other particularly
important advantage does it have?
101
116-118: Answers
116 Both canine distemper and rabies virus vaccines have been implicated. Most
anaphylactic reactions occur within 15 minutes of vaccine administration.A variety
of signs can be seen including clear to blood-tinged vomit, bloody diarrhea, dyspnea,
cyanosis, tachycardia and collapse. If the patient is not immediately treated, seizures,
coma and finally death can occur. Administer oxygen by endotracheal tube or
facemask and place an intravenous catheter. Administer epinephrine (0.25-1.0 ml of
a 1:10,000 dilution IV) and diphenhydramine hydrochloride (1.0-2.0 mg/kg IV). In
addition, give either hydrocortisone sodium succinate (25-40 mg/kg IV), or pred-
nisolone sodium succinate (5 mg/kg IV) along with lactated Ringer's solution with
added dextrose. If the intravenous route cannot be established, give the above
medications intraosseous or intramuscular. Advise the owner to remain with their
animal at the veterinary hospital for at least 30 minutes following vaccination to
observe for anaphylactic reactions. Animals that have had previous vaccine reactions
should either not receive future vaccinations or be premedicated with diphen-
hydramine hydrochloride at least one hour before vaccination and observed for at
least one hour afterwards.
117 a Adrenocortical disease (hyperplasia or neoplasia) and hyperestrogenism are the
most likely differential diagnoses. In the ferret, disease of the adrenal gland is not
related to the pituitary as in other species. It is usually a disease of ferrets three years
of age and older, although it has been reported in animals as young as 18 months.
Ferrets affected with adrenal disease may be either intact or neutered. The alopecia in
adrenocortical disease in the ferret is caused by an increased production of androgens
rather than an increase in corticosteroids as in other animals. Some neutered female
ferrets will exhibit an enlarged vulva as if in estrus in response to the abnormal
androgen production. Hyperestrogenism occurs when an intact jill remains unbred
and in estrus for an extended period of time. The most prominent sign of estrus is
vulvar swelling. The effects of prolonged exposure to high levels of endogenous
estrogen are alopecia and bone marrow suppression. Signs include petechial
hemorrhages on the skin and mucous membranes, pallor, lethargy and generalized
weakness.
b Manage adrenocortical neoplasia with adrenalectomy of the affected gland(s) or
mitotane therapy (see question 212 for a discussion of treatment). Obtain a CBC and
platelet count on ferrets with hyperestrogenism to determine the extent of disease. If
the PCV is 15% or lower, the prognosis for recovery is grave. Terminate the estrus
cycle with hormonal therapy {HCG at 100 iu, IM or GnRH at 20 mcg/ferret SC),
mate with a vasectomized male or an ovariohysterectomy. Hormonal therapy may
not be effective in the moderate to severely affected case, therefore perform an
ovariohysterectomy as soon as the patient is sta ble. Ferrets have no discerna ble blood
types, therefore it is possible to use multiple donors when performing blood
transfusions. Provide other supportive care as needed. Attempt to stimulate the bone
marrow with ana bolic steroids or synthetic erythropoietin used at feline dosages.
118 The medetomidine component of the anesthetic mixture is rapidly and
completely reversed using atipamezole. Since ketamine, when used alone, has
relatively little sedative effect in small rodents, reversal of medetomidine produces a
rapid lightening of the plane of anesthesia and oten a rapid return to consciousness.
This is a particular advantage in small mammals since it reduces the likelihood of
hypothermia developing in the postoperative period.
102
119, 120: Questions
119 A pet hamster has fallen off a table
119
and fractured its incisor teeth (119). The
pulp cavity is not visibly exposed.
a What is the dental formula of the
Golden hamster?
b The hamster has typical rodent incisor
dentition, but what form do the cheek
teeth take?
c How would you treat the fractured
right lower incisor?
120a
120b
120 A two-year-old pet female rat exhibits wheezing respiratory sounds and dyspnea.
The rat is euthanized and the lungs examined (120a, b).
 a Describe the gross pathology and histopathology.
b What is the likely etiology?
c What treatments can you use for this disease and what is the prognosis?
103
119, 120: Answers
119 a
I1 C0 P0 M3
1
0
3
Some sources classify the first cheek teeth as premolars not molars.
b Hamsters have brachyodont cheek teeth similar to rats and mice. Also, like rats and
mice, hamsters are granivorous rather than herbivorous.
c Administer analgesics immediately post-trauma. No other immediate treatment is
needed if the pulp chamber has not been exposed. Shorten the right upper incisor at
regular intervals {avoiding iatrogenic pulp exposure) until the lower tooth has grown
back into normal occlusion. Unfortunately, in some cases, the trauma damages the
germinal tissues at the root apex of the damaged tooth and it does not regrow. In
these cases continue to trim the opposing tooth or extract it. Use a dental burr in a
high-speed dental hand piece to trim the incisors. Do not trim rodent or rabbit teeth
with nail cutters. This practice commonly leads to iatrogenic pulp exposure which
can ultimately result in more serious tooth root disease.
120 a Grossly, the lungs show bronchopneumonia and areas of atelectasis due to
bronchial occlusion. The pleural surface is unevenly elevated due to bronchiolectasis.
Histopathologically, the lung tissue reveals peribronchial lymphoid hyperplasia and
neutrophil exudation within the bronchial lumina.
b These lesions are typical of murine respiratory mycoplasmosis caused by
Mycoplasma pulmonis. Infection is transmitted both horizontally and vertically and
is chronic for the life of the animal. It is enzootic in many rat colonies unless they
have originated from hysterectomy derivation. The disease may lie dormant for
varying periods and asymptomatic carriers exist. The agent may be isolated from
tracheal washings; however, special enriched media is required and subculturing is
often necessary. Most laboratories are not equipped to isolate M. pulmonis. A
positive antibody titer to M. pulmonis is indicative of infection.
c Treat rats with suspected M. puimonis infections with one or a combination of
these antibiotics: enrofloxacin (15 mg/kg PO q 12 hours), chloramphenicol (50
mg/kg SC q 8 hours or 1 g/l drinking water), tetracycline {20 mg/kg PO q 12 hours},
oxytetracycline (60 mg/kg SC q 72 hours) or tylosin (10-20 mg/kg IM q 24 hours 0r
100 mg/kg PO q 8-12 hours). It is difficult to achieve a complete cure and relapse is
common. The prognosis for controlling mild disease in a young rat is good. The
success of treatment decreases as the age of the rat, the duration of the disease and
the likelihood of secondary infection increase. Radiography will aid in determining
the extent of pulmonary invol vement and prognosis.
104
121, 122: Questions
121 Ovariohysterectomy is a common procedure in the pet rabbit.
a Why would you recommend ovariohysterectomy in non-breeding rabbits?
b What are some special considerations of ovariohysterectomy in a rabbit?
c How would you perform an ovariohysterectomy in a rabbit?
122a
122b
122 This mouse (122a) has had pruritus for four weeks. Acetate tape strippings
reveal only these objects (122b).
a What are the objects?
b What produced them?
c How would you treat the condition?
10.5
121, 122: Answers
121
121 a Uterine adenocarcinoma is found
in 30-80% of intact does over three
years of age, so ovariohysterectomy is a
preventive health measure. Ovario-
hysterectomy may prevent unwanted
sexually related behavior, such as
territoriality and urine marking.
b Prevent bruising and postoperative
complications by observing careful
handling of the delicate rabbit skin and
tissue.The mesovarium,mesosalpinx
and mesometrium are often very fatty
and friable in mature rabbits and tear easily if too much tension is applied. Do not
use clamps on these tissues. The rabbit has a duplex uterus with two uterine horns
and no uterine body (121). The vagina extends cranially, ending at the double cervix.
Identify the vagina properly and do not mistake it for a (non-existent) uterine body.
c In young rabbits make a small (2-4 cm) ventral midline incision centered between
the umbilicus and the rim of the pelvis. Create a larger incision if needed in older
animals with more developed reproductive organs or uterine pathology to fully
exteriorize the ovaries and uterus. Empty the bladder prior to surgery and avoid the
voluminous bowel when making the abdominal incision. Identify the duplex uterus
dorsal to the bladder in the caudal abdomen and elevate it without the use of a spay
hook. Isolate one ovary and double ligate the branching ovarian vessels with
synthetic absorbable suture. Identify and include the associated uterine tube and
infundibulum with the tissues to be removed. The mesometrium contains many
vessels distributed in a fan-like pattern. These are difficult to identify in fat animals,
but tie them off by ligatures placed in the mesometrium. Identify and double ligate
large uterine vessels close to the cervix on each side. Clamp, ligate and remove each
uterine horn as close to the cervix as possible. Alternatively, clamp and ligate the
vagina just caudal to the double cervix to assure that all uterine tissue is removed.
Oversew the vaginal stump to prevent the leakage of urine into the abdomen. Close
the abdominal wall with synthetic absorbable suture. Close the skin with synthetic
absorbable suture in a buried continuous intradermal pattern or with skin staples.
122 a The eggs of parasitic mites.
b They come from surface-living mites, such as Myobia musculi, or pelage mites such
as Myocoptes musculinus. Lesions are usually more severe with the surface living
parasites, probably due to the increased possibility of hypersensitivity reactions.
c Treat surface-living mites with ivermectin (0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO, SC or topically).
Repeat the treatment once or twice at two-week intervals. Use topical insecticides for
pelage mite infestations because ivermectin is ineffective. Repeat these treatments 
with the same frequency as described for surface mites. Exercise great caution when
using topical insecticides because of potential absorption of toxic amounts through
the mouse's thin skin or through grooming. Avoid using these products in debilitated
animals. Treat all mice within the same cage. Thoroughly clean the environment at
frequent intervals during treatment.
106
123, 124: Questions
123
123 An albino adult female mouse was anesthetized with a combination of ketamine
and xylazine to facilitate removal of a skin tumor. Approximately 30 minutes after
anesthesia induction, both eyes began to appear white. After one hour, the opacity
progressed to involve most of the pupillary region of the eye (123).
a What ocular changes are apparent?
b What caused these changes?
c What is the prognosis?
124 A two-year-old neutered male rabbit has
124
these intermittent thick, pudding-like stools
during the day (124). The soft stools are pro-
duced daily along with normal-sized dry drop-
pings. The rabbit is fed a commercial rabbit
pellet (16% fiber, 14% protein) free choice and
is given a teaspoon a day of rolled oats and one
salt free cracker.
a Why is this diet a likely cause for the soft
stools?
b What is the preferred diet for the adult non-
breeding pet rabbit?
front
ecklin
107
I23, 124: Answers
123 a There is an axial cataract primarily of the anterior cortical region of the lens.
b Xylazine is implicated as the causative agent of cataracts, although the exact
mechanism by which xylazine produces cataracts in rodents is unclear. Typically, the
cataracts begin as fine white opacities around the anterior *Y' sutures of the lens,
often followed by a diffuse, gray-white opacity that may spread to involve the entire
lens. Topical application of xylazine also produces similar lens opacities. Closing the
eyelids to prevent ocular surface drying appears to prevent cataracts from forming.
Therefore, it has been suggested that the opacities result from tear-film irregularities
and/or ocular surface drying which leads to relative dehydration of the anterior
chamber, disorganization of lens proteins and subsequent cataract formation. This
explanation is plausible due to the relatively large lens and very shallow anterior
chamber in rodents. Evidence for this hypothesis is found in the photograph because
            
suggesting the ocular surface has dried. Alternatively, xylazine induces cataracts in
rodents by directly affecting the hydration of the lens epithelial cells. It can do this by
either interfering with secretory cells that make components of the tear-film or by
impairing the function of the cells that regulate water movement across the cornea.
Finally, alpha-2 adrenergic agonists {i.e. xylazine) are potentially potent ocular
hypotensive agents and it is possible that the cataract results from a reduction in
aqueous humor production and subsequent relative dehydration of the lens proteins.
c The opacity usually persists from one to two hours and then usually completely
resolves within several hours to a day.
124 a Low-fiber diets (<18%) create cecal-colonic hypomotility. This predisposes the
animal to abnormal cecal fermentation due to prolonged retention of digesta in the
cecum. Low-fiber diets and those high in carbohydrates stimulate production of
volatile fatty acids resulting in pH alterations, ultimately changing the cecal
microflora. This loss of intestinal homeostasis causes soft stools in the rabbit. The
soft stools are actually liquid cecal contents which should have formed cecotropes
that the rabbit would normally ingest. Other signs include obesity and GI ileus
provide an environment in which pathogens such as Escherichia coli and Clostridium
by C. spiroforme, the bacteria responsible for enterotoxemia in the rabbit. Diets high
in fiber seem to have a protective effect against enteritis. The beneficial effect is
associated with the indigestible fiber component, lignocellulose. Digestible fiber
sources do not have this property. Fiber stimulates cecal-colonic motility. Other
effects of fiber are indirect. High-fiber diets naturally have a lower carbohydrate
concentration, which decreases the chance of caborhydrate overload enterotoxemia.
b Offer adult pet rabbits a good quality grass hay (marsh, orchard, timothy or
Bermuda) ad libitum. The protein and calcium content of alfalfa is greater than that
required by the adult rabbit. Feed a g0od-quality, high-fiber pellet (18-24% fiber) in
limited amounts to maintain normal body weight. Most adult non-breeding rabbits
can be maintained on unlimited grass hay and fresh herbage without pellets in their
diet. Offer fresh herbage at a rate of a minimum of 1 cup/kg body weight daily. Do
not feed foods high in starch (such as grain) or refined sugar.
108
125-127: Questions
125 What immediate treatment would you give a rodent or rabbit for fractured
incisor teeth with pulp exposure?
126 A diagram of the rabbit GI tract (126).
126
Name the labelled structures and describe the
special or unique features of each.
127 A client buys two hamsters from a pet store. Three weeks later she discovers a
litter of nine newborns in the cage. She has several questions that she would like you
to answer.
a Why did the pet store owner not tell her that one of the hamsters was pregnant
when she purchased them?
b She was told that she had two female hamsters. How can she tell what sex they
are?
Cc Should she leave the two original hamsters together to share in the rearing of the
young?
109
I25-I27: Answers
125 Pulp exposure, whether traumatic or iatrogenic in origin, requires proper
treatment to relieve pain and minimize later complications, such as chronic pulpitis
or root abscessation. Clean and disinfect the fractured tooth with dilute chlor-
hexidine or a similar agent. In the smallest species (mice, gerbils and hamsters), dry
the fractured tooth surface and apply a setting calcium hydroxide cement to seal the
pulp exposure. The very rapid metabolic rate of these species means that secondary
dentine is quickly laid down to seal the exposure site providing the pulp remains
viable. Administer antibiotics and analgesics as necessary. In larger species, perform a
partial pulpectomy. Make a slight undercut in the dentine, using a small round burr
and aseptic technique. Once pulpal hemorrhage has stopped, apply a small amount
of calcium hydroxide powder directly on to the surface of the remaining pulp. Use
setting calcium hydroxide cement to restore the tooth surface. This cement is usually
strong enough to remain in place while healing takes place. In rabbits, make a deeper
preparation and place a stronger restoration over a layer of calcium hydroxide
cement. Take care in selecting a restorative material in this situation as it must not
interfere with normal tooth wear or release toxic substances as the tooth and
restoration wear away. Recontour the fractured tooth surface to remove sharp edges
to make it more functional.
126 1 Cardia of the stomach. This area has a well developed sphincter that prevents
vomiting. The fundus is exocrine and secretes acid, intrinsic factor and pepsinogen.
The pH of the stomach of adult rabbits is usually <2.
2 Pancreas. The pancreas is diffuse in the mesentery of the small intestine. Multiple
ducts empty into the terminal duodenum separately from the bile duct.
3 Sacculus rotundus or cecal tonsil. This is the terminal part of the ileum and
contains many lymph follicles.
4 Cecum. The cecum comprises 40% of the GI tract of the rabbit. It is the organ
where the major bacterial fermentation of cellulose occurs.
5 Proximal colon. This is the first limb of the colon having rows of sacculations or
ha ustrae which control movement of ingesta out of or back into the cecum.
material into the descending colon. Retrograde peristalsis transports ingesta with less
fiber back to the cecum where cecotropes, containing vitamins, minerals and amino
acids are formed. Cecotropes are eliminated once or twice a day and ingested directly
from the anus.
127 a The gestation period in hamsters is 16 days, therefore the hamster was not
pregnant when purchased. Apparently, the owner has a hamster of each sex that have
successfully mated since they were acquired.
b It can be difficult to accurately determine the sex of young hamsters. The most
reliable way to sex them is by comparing the anogenital distance. Males have a
longer anogenital distance than females. In addition, male hamsters over three
months of age ha ve prominent scrotal sacs that extend ca udally as they mature.
c Male hamsters often cannibilize the young and female hamsters may aggressively
attack the male to protect her young. Postpartum estrus is usually infertile, but the
female will ovulate soon after the young are killed or removed. Recommend
separating the pair to prevent injuries and rebreeding. Remove the babies at three
110
128, 129: Questions
128
128 A hamster is sedated for examination of a perianal mass (128). The mass is an
abscess from which Stapbylococcus aureus is isolated in pure culture.
a What factors should you consider when deciding on antibiotic treatment of this
hamster?
b How would you manage this case?
129 A lateral radiographic view of the caudal skull
129
of a common marmoset (129).
a What metabolic bone disease is demonstrated in
this radiograph?
b What clinical signs might you see when this
condition is present?
c How would you confirm the diagnosis?
d How would you treat the condition?
111
128, I29: Answers
128 a Exercise great caution when using antibiotics in hamsters. They are very
sensitive to antibiotic-induced enterocolitis, which can be fatal. Mortality has been
reported after oral or parenteral use of many antibiotics including: penicillin,
ampicillin, cephalexin, cefoxitin, cephalothin, carbenicillin, lincomycin, clindamycin,
streptomycin, gentamicin, neomycin, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, tetracycline,
vancomycin and some trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole preparations. Other species
where antibiotic-induced enterocolitis is a significant problem include the rabbit,
guinea pig and chinchilla. Rats, mice and gerbils are rarely affected. Use enrofloxacin
in species where antibiotic-induced enterocolitis is of concern. Studies have shown it
to be safe in guinea pigs and rabbits, and anecdotal evidence suggests it is safe in the
hamster. The dose rate in the larger species is 5-10 mg/kg with ranges up to 85
mg/kg suggested in smaller species, such as mice. Consider the possibility of cartilage
damage if enrofloxacin is used in growing animals.
b Surgically debride the abscess, flush with an antiseptic solution and apply an
appropriate volume of a topical non-absorbable antibiotic. Mupirocin would be
suitable in this case, because it is not absorbed and is active against staphylococci.
Use an effective systemic antibiotic as indicated by the bacterial sensitivity and one
that is safe, such as enrofloxacin or trimethoprim/sulfamethizole.
129 a Bone resorption caused by excessive secretion of parathyroid hormone due to
secondary nutritional hyperparathyroidism, which is often seen in this species. In this
case, there was insufficient dietary intake of vitamin D: (New World primates require
vitamin D:, not Dz) which produced insufficient intestinal absorption of calcium. As
blood calcium concentration falls, parathyroid hormone concentration rises to
mobilize calcium from the bones into the circulation. Although low calcium intake
and kidney disease can also cause this type of bone resorption, the principal cause in
ca ptive common marmosets is lack of dietary vitamin D.
b When bone resorption becomes severe, captive primates become inactive and move
slowly about their cages due to pain, muscle weakness and pathologic fractures. The
teeth become loose resulting in eating difficulties.
c Radiograph the caudal skull and long bones. If possible, obtain a normal long bone
 or skull taken from a healthy monkey at necropsy. Take a radiograph with the
normal bone placed next to the patient. A comparison of bone density can be made
that is independent of between-film variations in exposure. Obtain a blood sample to
detect low serum calcium concentration. An ionized calcium concentration is a more
sensitive test than total serum calcium. Absolute confirmation of the diagnosis is
possible by measuring blood parathyroid concentration. Some test kits used in
humans are suitable. Parathyroid hormone concentration up to 10 times normal can
beseen.
d Although the need for vitamin D: rather than vitamin Dz is commonly understood,
other New World primates have a 1,25 (OH)2 vitamin D: receptor that is either
blocked by a protein or is much less sensitive to vitamin D:. The blood concentration
of vitamin D: needs to be high to compensate for the presence of this blocking
protein. Maintain a high blood concentration of vitamin D: in the marmoset by
administering approximately 1,100 iu/kg/day (compared to 11 iw/kg/day in dogs) of
vitamin Da. In addition, expose New World primates to unfiltered sunlight to
encourage production of vitamin D: in the skin. It is may be possible to provide some
UV light using daylight spectrum light bulbs.
112
130, 131: Questions
130 An adult rat has been exhibiting
130
signs of respiratory disease for several
weeks. It was treated unsuccessfully with
Oxytetracycline in the drinking water for
one week. The owner elects euthanasia
due to the rat's extreme respiratory
distress. Multiple abscesses are present
in the lungs of the rat at gross necropsy
(130).
a What agents are responsible for these
lung lesions?
b Was antimicrobial therapy a rational
choice in this case?
c If antimicrobial therapy was indicated,
was oxytetracycline a suita ble agent?
d Is administration of oxytetracycline in
the drinking water an effective route of
administration?
131
131 A five-year-old intact adult female rabbit has a decrease in appetite and exhibits
perineal staining (131). She is slightly overweight and the owner notices that she
makes a sound as if she is grinding her teeth periodically throughout the day.
a What are the differential diagnoses for the perineal staining?
b What diagnostic procedures should you perform?
c Why should non-breeding does be spayed?
d At what age should you perform the procedure?
113
130, I31: Answers
130 a Multiple abscesses are commonly seen as the end stage of several infectious
diseases. The likely etiologic agents are Corynebacterium kutscheri, Mycoplasma
puilmonis and the cilia associated respiratory (CAR) bacterium. Although each of
these agents is individually capable of causing disease, it is likely that more than one
is present. There may also be an underlying infection with Sendai virus or pneumonia
virus ofmice.
b Antibiotic therapy is a rational choice in individual rats kept as pets beca use of the
complex possible etiology with a high likelihood of bacterial involvement.
c Oxytetracycline is considered one possible therapy for mycoplasmal infections, and
is often effective against corynebacteria. Antibiotic susceptibility of CAR bacillus has
 not been investigated. Oxytetracycline was a rational therapeutic choice in this case.
d There is a common misconception that oral administration of tetracyclines is
effective for systemic therapy of rodents and rabbits. It has been conclusively shown
in rats, and also in rabbits, that oxytetracycline is not absorbed after oral adminis-
tration. It is likely that absorption is also inadequate in other rodents. One reason
oxytetracycline is administered in the drinking water is to ensure compliance for
long-term treatment. A more effective route of administration is to use injectable,
long-acting preparations of oxytetracycline (60 mg/kg q 72 hours). Use subcutaneous
injections due to the large volume of drug needed. There is no advantage to intra-
muscular administration over subcutaneous administration in terms of absorption.
Different preparations of long-acting oxytetracycline have been shown to vary greatly
in the degree of tissue irritation and blood concentration they induce.
a e um su oi asudsa ou si aan j s su aisuo
days. Other choices include oral or parenteral tylosin, chloramphenicol tetracycline
or enrofloxacin. Respiratory disease in rats can be difficult to eradicate completely
due to multiple etiologic agents, resistance to antibiotics and carriers in the colony.
Reoccurrence of signs is common after antibiotics are discontinued.
131 a They include uterine disease (pyometra, neoplasia, dead fetuses), pregnancy,
urinary disease {urolithiasis, neoplasia, cystitis, incontinence), neurologic disease or
often accompanies conditions that are painful, such as dental or abdominal disease.
b Radiograph the rabbit to assess the reproductive and urinary tracts and to detect
pulmonary metastasis of neoplastic disease. Continue with other diagnostic testing as
needed including ultrasonography, serum biochemistries, hematology, urinalysis and
urine culture. Use exploratory surgery as a diagnostic tool or as a treatment. This
patient was diagnosed with uterine adenocarcinoma without apparent pulmonary
metastasis. The vaginal discharge and tooth grinding resolved after an ovario-
hysterectomy was performed.
c Because a large percentage of rabbits develop some form of uterine disease by the
time they are middle-aged. The most common uterine disorder is adenocarcinoma.
This malignant neoplasia has the potential to metastasize. Other uterine diseases
include pyometra, mucometra, endometritis and uterine aneurysm.
d Spay rabbits between four months and two years of age to avoid uterine disease.
114
132-134: Questions
132 European hedgehogs are frequently victims of road traffic accidents and are
commonly presented for treatment. If such casualties are to be released back into the
wild, it is important to ensure that they will be able to survive.
a What is the adult dental formula for this species?
b What treatment would you give for fractured teeth?
c How would you stabilize a bilateral mandibular fracture in normal occlusion
without adding to the accompanying soft-tissue tra uma?
133a
133b
133 The lateral (133a) and a ventrodorsal
(133b) views of the thorax of an adult rabbit.
a Review the anatomy of the thoracic viscera
of the rabbit.
b What are the abnormalities seen in these
radiographs?
134 Three-year-old male rat siblings are housed in a large tank. Two of the rats are
in good body condition, but the third is obese. The obese rat has alopecia of the left
forelimb.
a What are your differential diagnoses for the alopecia?
b What investigations would help to make a diagnosis in this case?
c How would you manage the condition?
11.5
132-I34: Answers
132
132 a
I3C1P4M3
3
14
3
b Treat fractured teeth in the same
manner as for carnivores. Smooth and
polish minor surface damage, but if
there is pulp exposure extract the
affected teeth. Endodontic treatment is
theoretically possible but impractical in
such small teeth.
c Reduce the fractures and check
occlusion. If there are sufficient teeth on
either side of the fracture line to provide
anchorage, form intraoral acrylic splints in situ in the mouth. As the acrylic is setting,
check that normal occlusion is maintained. Splints can be carefully broken away
from the teeth once the jaw has healed. As an alternative approach, use enamel
bonded composite restorative material between intact rostral teeth to fix the
mandible and maxilla together until the fractures have healed (132). Fix the rostral
mandible in a slightly open position while still maintaining occlusion. The natural
gap between the maxillary first incisors, plus the slightly open jaw position, provide
space for the tongue to function, reducing the need for hand feeding. Carefully
remove the composite material and polish the teeth once the fractures have healed
Release the animal back into its natural habitat if the jaw functions adequately and
all other injuries have healed.
133 a The thymus is proximal and ventral to the heart extending to the thoracic inlet.
The esophagus, aorta, pulmonary vessels and lymph nodes lie in the mediastinal
space dorsal to the heart. The heart is located between the 4th and 6th pair of ribs
and lies to the left of midline. The lungs are divided into cranial, middle and caudal
  n s  a     a    s
caudal lobe is subdivided into lateral and medial lobes.
b The radiographs show an interstitial pattern. Hyperinflated lungs are seen on the
lateral view but not on the ventrodorsal view. The radiopaque area noted on the
ventrodorsal view is the diaphragm which is overlapped by a hyperinflated lung. The
pathological diagnosis was emphysema with chronic interstitial fibrosis. The
condition was caused by a previous episode of aspiration pneumonia.
134 a Dermatophytosis, ectoparasites, self-trauma and barbering by cagemates.
b The history rules out dermatophytosis and ectoparasites as causes of the alopecia,
because only one of the cagemates is affected. Examine hairs plucked from the
affected area mounted in mineral oil or place hairs in dermatophyte test media to rule
out dermatophytosis. Hairs with broken ends are indicative of trauma. It is
important to carefully observe the animals in their own habitat over a period of time.
In this case, the two healthy rats were restraining their brother and chewing the fur
from his leg.
C Management of behavioral problems such as this are difficult. The only course of
action is to remove one of the rats. However, the social dynamics here are complex
and the results of separation are unpredictable. In this case, the solution revealed
itself. One of the fitter rats died suddenly of respiratory disease some weeks later.
After this event, the obese rat lost weight and the hair on its leg grew back.
116
135-137: Questions
135
135 A litter of six Virginia opossums is hand-raised on canine milk substitute. Since
weaning three months ago, they have been offered grapes, banana, apple and canned
dog food in separate containers. This animal (135) is not walking correctly and is
depressed and weak. On physical examination, the long bones are malformed and
soft.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How did this condition develop?
c How would you treat it?
136 The owner of a three-year-old rab-
136
bit notices tiny white objects moving
about in the pet's fur. The rabbit has no
other clinical signs. A parasite was found
in coat brushings (136).
a What is this parasite?
b Where is the parasite usually found?
c What pathological significance may be
attached to finding these parasites in
coat brushings?
d How would you control the parasites?
137 A ferret is diagnosed with canine distemper virus. Two other ferrets in the house
were exposed to this ferret but are not showing signs of illness.
a How would you treat the disease and what is the prognosis?
b What would you tell the owner about the other ferrets?
c How would you prevent the disease?
117
135-I37: Answers
135 a Metabolic bone disease due to insufficient calcium in the diet. Confirm the
diagnosis with radiogra phs to reveal demineralized and malformed bones. Opossums
naturally move slowly and are not climbers or jumpers, therefore pathologic fractures
are uncommon. Collect blood from the lateral tail or cephalic vein to obtain a serum
calcium concentration. Normal serum calcium in the opossum is 2.4-2.8 mmol/l
(9.6-11.2 mg/dl)
b Opossums often prefer eating fruits and fulfill their caloric requirements with these
foods rather than eating the more nutritionally balanced dog food. Fruits have a poor
calcium to phosphorus ratio. Others in the cage may be subclinically affected and
should be examined thoroughly.
C By correcting the diet. An appropriate diet for the Virginia opossum consists of a
non-oily canned adult-formula dog food supplemented with a variety of vegetables,
whole mice and hard-boiled eggs. Administer both parenteral and oral calcium
supplementation and limit exercise. Place a lateral splint on fractured long bones.
Severely affected animals respond poorly to treatment and may not be releasable due
 to permanent bone deformities.
136 a The mite Listrophorus gibbus.
b This is a pelage or fur mite, and it lives within the coat.
c L. gibbus is rarely associated with clinical disease, although some instances of
apparent hypersensitivity to the mites have been recorded.
d As pelage mites these parasites are unresponsive to ivermectin therapy. Control
infestations using topical preparations containing selenium sulfide, lime sulfur or
pyrethrins. Clean and treat the environment and treat all the rabbits that are in
contact with this patient. Exercise great caution when using insecticides in rabbits.
Use powders as opposed to dips unless more aggressive treatment is needed. Avoid
the use of insecticides in anorectic, debilitated or obese animals with potential hepatic
disease. In the absence of clinical disease it is doubtful whether therapy is justified.
However, many owners are uncomfortable with the idea of leaving the mites on their
pets once the condition has been brought to their attention.
137 a There is no treatment for canine distemper virus infection. Aim treatment at
the secondary bacterial infections and give supportive care. The prognosis for this
disease is extremely gra ve. It is usually fatal.
b The other ferrets, if they were exposed to this ferret, are at risk for developing
canine distemper virus. If they have been properly vaccinated against canine
distemper virus within the last year, it is highly unlikely they will become infected.
Viral transmission is most commonly accomplished by aerosol exposure. Direct
contact with conjunctival and nasal exudates, urine, feces and the skin also cause
infection. Fomites are implicated in transmission. If the other ferrets are infected,
disease will be apparent 7-14 days after exposure.
c By vaccination against canine distemper virus. Vaccinate ferrets with a vaccine
approved for ferrets. To impart long-term protection, use a modified live virus. The
vaccine should be derived from non-canine cell lines. Otherwise there exists the
possibility that the ferret will contract canine distemper virus from a canine cell line
vaccine. Vaccinate ferrets every two to three weeks starting at age six weeks for a
total of three vaccinations until they are 16 weeks of age. Also, if the ferret has no
   n    h   A i h  
the first time even if it is over 16 weeks of age. Give boosters annually.
118
138, 139: Questions
138a
in an outdoor dirt-floored pen, they exhibit ataxia, tremors and torticollis. A year
ago, the pen had previously housed a young raccoon. A recent soil sample from the
 pen is examined by sedimentation and reveals larvated parasite eggs measuring
63-70 x 53-58 μm (138a).
a What is the most likely cause for the squirrel's disease?
b How would you confirm your diagnosis?
c Can this disease be controlled?
139 This clinically depressed young
139
adult raccoon is exhibiting ocular and
nasal discharge and has moist rales
(139). This wild animal is very easy
to handle. It was found in a suburban
backyard in an area of the US where
there is currently a raccoon rabies
epizootic. The captor notices a punc-
ture wound on her hand; however,
she does not think that she was bitten
by this raccoon.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What course of action should you
follow in this case?
119
138, 139: Answers
138b
138 a Cerebral larva migrans caused by
Baylisascaris procyonis larvae is the
most likely diagnosis. The eggs are
viable in the environment for years and
that was in the pen previously.
b The diagnosis is confirmed at ne-
cropsy. Examine the thorax and ab-
domen for larval granulomas. Examine
brain sections for larvae and character-
istic malacic inflammatory lesions. Place
a portion of the brain in two layers of
cheesecloth and suspend in a conical-shaped tube filled with warm saline for
approximately 12-24 hours. Examine the sediment microscopically for Baylisascaris
larvae.
c Control of this disease is difficult and it includes environmental decontamination.
The soil remains contaminated with viable eggs for years. Eggs can be transported to
the surface during gardening or by earthworms and insects. Bleach has little to no
effect on the eggs' viability. Treat small areas of contamination on resistant surfaces
with a 1:1 mixture of xylene:ethanol. Autoclave or flame metal cages and small
items. Flame large areas of soil or concrete with a porta ble flame gun. Turn, rake and
flame the soil several times. Treat raccoons with either pyrantel pamoate (10 mg/kg
PO), fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO q 24 hours for 3 days), or mebendazole (2s-40
mg/kg PO q 24 hours for 3-5 days). B. procyonis eggs (138b) resemble those of
Toxocara spp. After treatment, burn feces with expelled worms. Treat raccoons
weekly or biweekly for four weeks. Beca use of the zoonotic potential of B. procyonis,
advise clients to discourage the presence of raccoons into their yards and homes.
139 a The most likely diagnosis is canine distemper. This is a common disease of
wild raccoons in the USA. Diarrhea, neurologic signs and hyperkeratosis of the pads
can be present in advanced cases of canine distemper in raccoons. To confirm the
diagnosis, obtain conjunctival swabs for IFA testing or cytology to identify inclusion
bodies. Although less likely, rabies is also considered in this case. The neurological
signs of rabies and canine distemper in raccoons are indistinguishable and include
paresis, paralysis, self-mutilation, head tilt, facial twitches, circling and lack of fear of
humans. Raccoons may be asymptomatic in the early stages of a ra bies infection.
b The raccoon came from a rabies endemic area and the captor was possibly bitten,
therefore the safest course of action is euthanasia with submission of the head for
rabies examination.
120
140- 142: Questions
140 *Rats explode in laboratory'. This headline was seen recently in a British news-
pa per regarding an incident involving anesthetized rats.
a What chemical may have caused the explosion?
b At what point in the proceedings might the explosion have occurred?
c What steps would you take to prevent the recurrence of an incident such as this?
141 A two-year-old intact female chinchilla has areas of partial alopecia on the
lateral aspects of the limbs of four weeks duration. She is caged alone and her owner
has just started full-time employment.
a What are your differential diagnoses for this case?
b How would you confirm the diagnosis?
c What are the predisposing factors to self-trauma in the chinchilla?
142
142 Incisor malocclusion is a common problem in pet rabbits (142). Overgrowth can
be managed by trimming, but this procedure usually needs to be repeated at intervals
throughout the patient's life.
a What is an alternative method of managing non-functional incisor teeth?
b What investigations would be most useful in assessing the prognosis for this
procedure?
c What dietary changes would you recommend for rabbits that have no incisor teeth?
121
140-I42: Answers
140 a The explosion was caused by the use of anesthetic ether. Take great care when
using anesthetic ether to avoid generating sparks or excessive heat. This includes the
use of electrosurgery, laser surgery or sparks from any electrical equipment.
b In this case, the rats were killed using ether and immediately placed in a freezer.
This resulted in a build-up of ether fumes. When the freezer motor switched on, the
spark was sufficient to cause an explosion.
c Use a ventilated, spark-proofed fume cupboard prior to placing ether-killed animals
in the freezer. Although ether has been traditionally utilized in research facilities and
by some practitioners to reduce costs, the risk of explosion now severely limits its
use. In addition, ether causes an unpleasant irritation of the mucous membranes.
Other causes of explosions include dropped oxygen cylinders, valves of oxygen
cylinders contaminated with grease resulting in spontaneous ignition of the high-
pressure oil/oxygen aerosol and the use of electrosurgery on tissue that has been
prepared with alcohol.
141 a Dermatophytosis, fur slip and self-barbering.
b Microscopically examine epilated or plucked hairs from the affected area. The
distal tips of the hairs will be broken and damaged in cases of fur chewing. With fur
slip, the hairs appear normal because almost complete shedding occurs. Plucked hair
from dermatophytosis cases may be frayed or damaged. Mount the hairs either in
mineral oil or KOH to assess for fungal hyphae or spores.
c The predisposing factors include stress, chronic disease, malnutrition and the
absence of dust baths. Ectoparasite infestation is uncommon in chinchillas. Examples
of stress include gestation, cagemate death or disease, overcrowding or moving into a
new cage or location. There is also a theory that in some undiagnosed cases there
may be an inherited behavioral trait or endocrine disease. This chinchilla was
barbering due to the change in the household schedule caused by the owner going
back to work.
142 a Extraction.
b Use serum biochemistries and hematology to detect concurrent systemic disease.
Thoroughly examine and assess the condition of the cheek teeth. Clinical evaluation
with palpation and visual examination, even under anesthesia, will only reveal about
50% of the dental or oral lesions present. Radiography is an essential part of the
workup in these cases because it provides information about the tooth roots. Early
deformity. Any enlargement of angulation towards the root apex will make
extraction difficult.
c The dietary requirements following incisor extraction are basically the same as for
all rabbits, which includes good quality hay and fresh herbage. Cut bulky items, such
as carrot or celery, into thin strips so they can be picked up by the prehensile lips and
fit into the rabbit's mouth. The tongue is then used to move the material to the cheek
teeth for grinding. Most rabbits can graze normally and can manage long hay strands
easily. Advise owners to brush the coat frequently to remove dead hair because the
loss of incisors prevents the rabbit from performing this grooming procedure.
122
143, 144: Questions
143 With regard to the rabbit in question 142:
a How would you extract incisor teeth in the rabbit?
b What is the most common complication during incisor extraction and how would
you manage it?
144
144 This photograph {144) shows the right eye of a four-month-old female rabbit
which developed this progressive growth over the cornea in the last two weeks. The
ra bbit appears otherwise healthy and the left eye is normal.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What is the cause of this condition?
c How would you treat it?
123
I43, I44:Answers
143 a Examine the pre-operative lateral radiograph to assess the length and curvature
of the tooth roots. Anesthetize the patient and trim the main incisors so that 5-10 mm
of the crowns are visible. Treat any cheek tooth irregularities and oral mucosal lesions
Snp paine uao are kaui asneoag isi yaai sad aui ioxg 'aui siui ie
extraction of the main maxillary incisors. Clean the gingiva with an antiseptic solution.
periodontal ligaments. Avoid leverage on the tooth crowns because this can lead to root
fracture. After the teeth are loosened, lift them out of their sockets using fingers or a
small pair of forceps. The marked curvature of the main incisors makes elevation of
these teeth more difficult. Use a number 11 scalpel blade to separate the gingival
attachments and the medial and lateral periodontal attachments. Insert a fine dental
elevator medial to each of the teeth and apply slight lateral pressure for a minute or
two.Repeat this several times until the tooth is loosened. Grip the crown of the tooth
with fingers or forceps and rotate the tooth out of its socket along the line of eruption.
The tooth sockets usually fill with blood which clots rapidly. If hemorrhage persists or
if the gingiva was torn, close the wounds with a fine absorbable suture material.
Culture the tooth socket and administer antibiotics in cases where tooth root infection
is suspected. Use analgesia postoperatively. Provide food and water as soon as the
patient is ambulatory. Do not use soft food because it adheres to the wound area.
b For the novice, root fracture is quite common, particularly affecting the peg teeth.
Forewarn the owner of this possibility. The best way to manage these cases is to
extract the remaining incisors leaving the fractured root in place. Within six to eight
weeks the tooth has usually regrown and is then extracted at a second procedure. If
the tooth does not regrow, take radiographs to check for impaction. If this has
occured, perform an osteotomy to expose and remove the root remnant.
144 a Corneal membranous occlusion, or centripetal conjunctival migration, or
pseudopterygium. The disorder is usually progressive, may be unilateral or bilateral
and, in extreme cases, results in blindness due to occlusion of the pupil.
b Unknown, but it may represent a congenital symblepharon; however, it is also
known to occur in adult rabbits. The architecture of the membrane may be quite
complex and is usually lined with conjunctival epithelium on both surfaces.
Frequently, the membrane adheres only to the limbus and not the cornea. Rarely,
loose to moderately firm, focal adhesions to the peripheral cornea occur. No evidence
of inflammation is present in this eye and microbiologic cultures are negative for
Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, and Pasteurella spp. The Schirmer tear test is also normal
at 8 mm/minute {the normal mean + SD Schirmer tear test for the rabbit is 5 + 3
mm/min) suggesting a tear film disorder is not involved. Deeper intraocular
structures are normal.
c Excise the membrane. Some rabbits require a superficial keratectomy if there are
focal adhesions to the cornea. Preserve a small, perilimbal ring of conjunctival
epithelium as this is where the progenitor cells of the cornea are located. Recurrence
following excision is common. To prevent regrowth, anchor the cut edge of the
bulbar conjunctiva to the episclera at least 2 mm away from the limbus with a few,
fine absorbable sutures. Administration of topical corticosteroids such as a O.1%
dexamethasone and polymyxin B/neomycin combination three to four times daily for
10 days postoperatively may reduce the possibility of membrane regrowth. Use
steroids in rabbits with great caution. Use a broad-spectrum topical ophthalmic
antibiotic three to four times daily until the corneal defect has healed.
124
145, 146: Questions
145
depressed hamster (145). Internal hooks and filamentous processes are evident.
a Identify the eggs.
b Is this organism pathogenic for hamsters?
c How was the hamster infected?
d Is this organism zoonotic?
e How would you treat and control this parasitic infection?
146
146 A pet rabbit has a unilateral facial dermatitis (146). The lesion has become
progressively larger over the past two weeks. The rabbit appears otherwise normal
and does not appear to be in any discomfort.
a What is the etiology of the lesion on this rabbit's cheek?
b How would you manage this condition?
c What is the procedure for cannulating the lacrimal duct in the rabbit?
12.5
I45, I46: Answers
145 a Eggs of the tapeworm Hymenolepis nana.
b In large numbers, this organism causes intestinal occlusion, impaction and death in
hamsters.
c This parasite has both a direct and an indirect life cycle. The adult tapeworms live
in the small intestine. In the direct life cycle, gravid proglottids detach from the body
and disintegrate in the intestine releasing eggs which are immediately infective when
passed in the feces. Hamsters ingest these eggs which hatch in the small intestine and
the onchosperes {embryos) penetrate into the mucosa and lie in the lymph channels
of the villi. They develop into metacestodes (cysticercoids) which emerge from the
villi in five or six days, attach to the intestine and mature into adult tapeworms. In
the indirect life cycle, the eggs are ingested by insects (grain beetles, fleas, cock-
roaches) and develop into the next larval stage (cysticercoid/metacestode). The
 o     e     
Some of the eggs that are released when the proglottids disintegrate in the intestine
may hatch in the hamster and the onchosperes penetrate the intestinal villi.
Cysticercoids emerge in five or six days and develop into adult tapeworms without
ever leaving the hamster.
d H. nana infects rodents and humans. Humans are infected by ingesting the eggs or
the insect intermediate hosts. Autoinfection also occurs. Infection in humans is
inapparent to mild, but if massive numbers of worms are present, damage to the
intestinal mucosa produces enteritis. Only a moderate number of parasites are needed
to produce diarrhea, anorexia and abdominal pain in children.
e Praziquantel (5 mg/kg SC or 10 mg/kg PO q 14 days for two treatments) is the drug
of choice as it is active against both the larval and adult stages. Incinerate bedding
and feces from the hamster to prevent the spread of the eggs. Clean and sterilize or
replace the hamster cage. Break the life cycle by sanitation and insect control. Rodent
control is essential since wild rodents may also be a source of contamination.
146 a Tear overflow or epiphora, caused by an obstructed nasolacrimal duct. The
nasolacrimal duct of the rabbit is unusual in that it has two sharp bends along its
course. A build-up of purulent material at these duct deviations leads to obstruction.
In addition, these ducts pass close to the root apices of the premolars and incisors
and may become obstructed if there is tooth root disease.
b The best chance for a complete cure lies in aggressive therapy early in the course of
the disease. Perform skull radiographs to evaluate for dental disease. Clear the duct
by cannulation and irrigation with a sterile saline solution. Collect a few drops of the
flushed secretions exiting the nares by free catch on to a culturette for bacterial
culture and sensitivity. Use appropriate antibiotics both topically and systemically for
several weeks. Recheck the rabbit and flush the tear ducts with an antiseptic or
antibiotic solution at seven-to-ten day intervals until the condition resolves. Give a
guarded prognosis for a complete cure because in some rabbits the condition will
recur despite aggressive therapy.
c There is only one nasolacrimal cannaliculus and punctum in the rabbit located in
the lower lid. Achieve lacrimal duct cannulation without general anesthesia. Use a
local ophthalmic anesthetic to desensitize the eye. To visualize the punctum, either
pull the lower lid down and roll it outward or grasp the lid edge and gently pull it
laterally. Cannulation can be challenging in the presence of a persistent discharge and
ca use the lips of the punctum to 'pout' allowing better access to the duct.
126
147-149: Questions
147 An owner requests a stool culture
147
on his clinically normal African hedge-
hog (147). An infant in the household
recently developed an acute illness with
fever accompanied by diarrhea. The
infant was breast-fed and had no direct
contact with the hedgehog.
a What organism would you suspect and
what tests would you carry out?
b What protocols minimize the zoonotic
risk of owning an African hedgehog?
148 A three-month-old hamster is presented for a routine health examination. The
food dish contains a sunflower-based seed diet.
a What deficiencies and excesses exist with an all-seed diet?
b What recommendations would you make to correct the diet?
149
149 A six-month-old male guinea pig has alopecia accompanied by crusting and
flaking skin (149). The patient appears to be intensely pruritic and uncomfortable.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you confirm the diagnosis?
c Is this condition contagious to other pets?
d How would you treat this condition?
127
147-I49: Answers
147 a The illness of the child is consistent with salmonella infection. Salmonella
serotype Tilene has been documented by the National Center for Infectious Diseases,
CDC, USA, in two human cases in which the African hedgehog has been implicated
as the source of the infection. The incidence of Salmonella spp. in domestically raised
African hedgehogs is not known. It is important to specifically request both a
Salmonella culture and Salmonella serotyping. Most laboratories will not culture for
Salmonella unless specifically asked to do so.
household members by washing hands thoroughly after handling the pet. This is
particularly important before eating or handling food. Avoid contact with the pet's
feces. Perform microbiologic cultures on pet hedgehogs for Salmonella spp. at the
time of their annual examination or postpurchase examination if there is concern for
zoonotic disease; however, some species of Salmonella are non-pathogenic and a
negative culture does not necessarily mean that the pet is free of Salmonella. The
effectiveness of antibiotic treatment for the clearance of Salmonella has yet to be
evaluated in hedgehogs.
148 a A sunflower seed-based diet is deficient in calcium, protein, vitamin A, vitamin
D, riboflavin and vitamin Bi. A lack of sufficient protein can result in alopecia. This
type of diet also contains excessive amounts of fat (30% or higher) which can lead to
a functional vitamin E deficiency as well as obesity.
aas sd jo Aaua e iea aau m aui u anu aq snaiua are siais 9
fruit and some insects. In captivity, the hamster should be fed a pelleted rodent diet
that contains a minimum of 16% protein and a maximum of 5% fat. Avoid seed
diets or high-fat treat foods. For variety, up to 10% of the diet can consist of whole
grains, bread, fresh fruit and green leafy vegetables. Hamsters will take the food and
that will be consumed in one day to avoid spoilage. Hamsters can obtain water from
sipper bottles or shallow bowls that are secured to the cage.
149 a The likely diagnosis is infestation of the sarcoptiform mite, Trixacarus caviae.
The sarcoptic mite of dogs, Sarcoptes scabiei, can also affect the guinea pig in a
similar manner.
b Skin scrapings of affected areas will reveal the mite in its various life stages.
c The T. caviae mite is usually only contagious to other guinea pigs, but there have
species, including humans.
d Administer ivermectin (0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC or PO). Repeat this dose two more times
at 7-10 day intervals. This treatment is effective for the eradication of either T.
caviae or S. scabiei. Treat cagemates and have the owner thoroughly clean the cage
and cage furniture after each treatment. Advise the owner of the potential for
zoonotic disease in the case of S. scabiei.
Although it is usually unnecessary to provide topical therapy for these cases
because ivermectin is very effective, some patients are in extreme discomfort from the
intense pruritus or have a secondary bacterial dermatitis. In these cases, gently soften
and remove the majority of skin crusts with a warm bath. Sparingly apply a topical
antibiotic preparation appropriate for guinea pigs.
128
150, 151: Questions
150
150 A two-year-old male long-tailed macaque requires a physical examination,
vaccinations and evaluation of its herpes B virus status. The macaque is immobilized
with ketamine. The physical examination is normal.
a What is the purpose of the injection shown (150) and what substance is being
injected?
b Which vaccinations would you recommend?
c What would you tell the caretaker regarding these vaccines?
d What test(s) should determine the herpes B virus status of the monkey?
e What does a positive test mean?
f Is herpes B virus zoonotic?
151
151 A group of hand-raised, recently weaned grey squirrels live together in a large
cage at a wildlife rehabilitation center in the USA. This squirrel and some of the
others in the group have raised, flattened, sparsely haired nodules ranging in size
from 0.5-2 cm in diameter on their faces and bodies (151).
a What is your diagnosis?
b What can you do for the affected animals?
c What can be done to prevent disease transmission?
d What other species can be affected?
129
150, 151: Answers
150 a This is the intradermal subpalpebral injection site used for tuberculosis
hypersensitivity testing. Old mammalian tuberculin is the recommended antigen.
b Tetanus toxoid and measles virus vaccination.
c There are no vaccines labelled for use in primates, therefore it is an off-label use
of a drug. The measles vaccine is only available as a modified live vaccine and the
animal actually sheds the vaccine virus following vaccination. It is estimated that
the shedding period is 3-10 days post-inoculation. During this time, isolate the
macaque from infants under the age of 18 months, elderly people and people who
have never been vaccinated or exposed to the disease. Also, measles vaccination is
immunosuppressive to primates.
d Serologic testing is available for herpes B virus fat Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research, PO Box 28147, San Antonio, TX 78254, 210-673-3269).
e Evidence of exposure to the virus but not necessarily infection. A negative result
 only means there were no circulating antibodies to the virus at the time of testing.
Since an animal can be infected with herpes B virus and be seropositive or
seronegative at different times, a negative result has no meaning on the herpes B
virus status of the animal. Oral pharynx lesions can be cultured for the virus.
Positive culture indicates that the macaque is shedding virus from the oral cavity
and is infected. Negative culture results are more common and only indicate that no
virus was cultured at the time of sampling. Since herpes B virus is a latent virus, an
animal is considered infected for life.
f Consider all macaques potential carriers of herpes B virus regardless of test
results. Viral transmission from macaque to humans is accomplished via bite
wounds, scratches, exposure of human mucous membranes to fluids or secretions
 e aq u s  sad sai a a  sa an 
infection to humans. Ideally, do not permit contact between macaques and humans.
151 a Squirrel fibroma caused by a poxvirus. This is the most common cause of
nodular skin disease of squirrels in North America. Use cytology or histopathology
to differentiate this disease from neoplasia. Cutaneous Cuterebra infestation also
appears as multiple raised nodules, but the larva is easily visualized through the
central opening into its capsule.
b Affected animals can recover without treatment in four to six weeks. Institute
supportive care if they become anorectic. Anecdotal reports claim that the
administration of antibiotics and vitamin A aid in recovery due to the control of
secondary bacterial infections and support of damaged tissues.
c Isolate the affected squirrels. Institute an external parasite control program to
prevent disease transmission by biting insects, such as mosquitoes. Some wildlife
rehabilitation facilities recommend euthanizing affected animals as a control
measure.
d Poxviruses are relatively species specific, but this particular virus will affect
groundhogs and other species of squirrel, such as the fox squirrel and red squirrel.
130
152, 153: Questions
152a
152b
152 A progressive disease process has effected the left eye of a five-year-old female
rabbit (152a). The left eye is now blind and lacks a direct pupillary light reflex
(152b).
a What abnormalities are evident?
b What diagnostic evaluations would you consider?
cWhat are your treatment options?
153
153 Several young rabbits in a rabbitry developed anorexia and diarrhea. A fecal
flotation is performed and these organisms were recovered (153). Some of the
ellipsoidal organisms measured 28-40 x 16-25 μm and had a micropyle
(cap/operculum). Many other organisms are seen on the slide including ones without
micropyles. What are the organisms and could they be related to the anorexia and
diarrhea?
131
152,153:Answers
152 a The left globe is exophthalmic and deviates ventrally. The third eyelid pro-
trudes and a whitish plaque covers the corneal surface. Purulent material emanates
from a tract superior to the globe. These findings indicate a space occupying orbital
lesion, such as a retrobulbar abscess, with a septic component. The exophthalmos
causes an exposure keratopathy resulting in a whitish corneal plaque. The orbital
disease also affects the optic nerve resulting in blindness and the presence of the
afferent pupillary deficit.
b Perform a complete physical examination. Obtain a CBC, serum biochemistries and
skull radiographs. Perform a cytologic evaluation of the discharge. Obtain a
microbiologic culture of the tract. Use ocular and orbital ultrasonic examinations
 and, if available, it is additionally helpful to use an advanced imaging method, such
as a CT scan or MRI, to determine the extent of the pathologic involvement. Do a
thorough oral examination to rule out dental disease as a cause of a retrobulbar
abscess. Radiograph the dental arcades to identify molar malocclusion or associated
dentalabscess.
c The prognosis for this condition is guarded, particularly if Pasteurella sp. is
confirmed as the causative agent. Perform an exenteration (removal of the globe and
orbital contents) to remove as much diseased tissue as possible. Treat the patient
while it is in the hospital with appropriate systemic antibiotics based on micro-
biologic culture and sensitivity results and continue antibiotic therapy at home for
several weeks. Give a guarded prognosis even with aggressive therapy.
153 The organisms seen are coccidial oocysts representing several species of Eimeria.
Those measuring 28-40 x 16-25 μm are probably E. stiedae. It is an extremely
pathogenic protozoan parasite that lives in the bile duct epithelium of the rabbit. In
severe infections this parasite produces hepatic dysfunction and may cause death.
 Rabbits are infected by ingesting infective oocysts from the environment found in the 
food, water or bedding. Oocysts hatch and release sporozoites that penetrate the
intestinal mucosa and travel via the mesenteric lymph nodes and hepatic portal
system to the liver. Here they enter the epithelial cells of the bile ducts and liver
parenchymal cells. They multiply asexually (schizogony), rupture the cells and each
newly released organism invades a new cell and multiplies asexually again.
Eventually, asexual multiplication ceases and they undergo sexual reproduction in
the cells and produce oocysts that are passed unsporulated through the bile ducts
into the intestine. The oocysts pass out with the feces and must sporulate to the
infective stage in the environment. This takes at least two days, therefore reinfection
cannot take place through the eating of cecotropes. Disease and illness occur during
the asexual multiplication stages and the host may die before oocysts are shed in the
feces. The prepatent period is 18 days. Unfortunately, it is difficult to distinguish E.
intestinal coccidia may produce diarrhea, particularly in the young because they
multiply in the intestinal epithelium before producing oocysts which pass in the feces.
132
154, 155: Questions
154 To improve rabbit anesthesia,the use of premedications and injectable
anesthetics is recommended.
a What anesthetic premedications are useful in the rabbit and why?
b Ketamine, ketamine/diazepam and ketamine/xylazine are all used for chemical
restraint and light anesthesia in the rabbit. What are some limitations of each in the
rabbit?
c What problems are associated with the use of barbiturates or tiletamine/zolazepam
for anesthesia in the rabbit?
155 During a routine physical examination on a
155
four-year-old male castrate ferret, a large spleen
is palpated (155). The ferret appears to be other-
wise normal.
a What are your differential diagnoses?
b What is the most common cause of a large
spleen in a ferret?
133
154, I155: Answers
154 a Injectable anesthetic agents are useful to sedate rabbits for examination,
intravenous catheter placement or before induction with inhalant anesthesia. Handle
and restrain a sedated rabbit carefully to prevent injury to its delicate spine and legs.
Use tranquilizers such as acepromazine (0.1-1.0 mg/kg IM) in combination with
ketamine {20-30 mg/kg IM) to improve the quality of anesthesia produced.
Administer diazepam (2-10 mg/kg IM) to provide sedation and muscle relaxation.
When diazepam (0.5-1.0 mg/kg IM, IV) is used with ketamine (10-20 mg/kg IM, IV)
to improve the quality of anesthesia, enhance the effect by giving diazepam
approximately 30 minutes before ketamine. Alternatively, use the sedative analgesic,
xylazine {2-5 mg/kg IM, SC) with ketamine (35-50 mg/kg IM). Use xylazine only in
healthy animals. Its use is associated with muscle relaxation, peripheral vaso-
 constriction and decreases in the heart rate, arterial blood pressure and respiratory
rate.
Atropine is not routinely used as a premedication in rabbits. Some rabbits have
atropinesterase and, therefore, metabolize atropine rapidly. Glycopyrolate may prove
to be a more useful anticholinergic agent in rabbits.
b Ketamine (3s-50 mg/kg IM) produces sedation and chemical restraint but does not
Ketamine {35-50 mg/kg IM) in combination with xylazine (3-5 mg/kg) provides a
variable plane of anesthesia and may require supplemental inhalant anesthesia for
surgery. Decreases in blood pressure, respiratory rate, heart rate and body tempera-
ture are associated with ketamine and xylazine combinations. Local irritation is
reported following intramuscular administration of ketamine/xylazine. To avoid this,
divide the total dose and administer at several sites. A combination of ketamine
(20-40 mg/kg IM) and diazepam (5-10 mg/kg IM) provides a variable plane of
anesthesia. Supplement as needed with an inhalant anesthetic for endotracheal
intubation and surgery.
C Barbiturates have potent respiratory depressant effects in rabbits. Severe laryngo-
spasm can also be a problem at light levels of barbiturate anesthesia. Barbiturates
have a very narrow margin of safety. Tiletamine/zolazepam can cause renal toxicity
in rabbits, with the tiletamine implicated as the causative factor in a dose-dependent
manner.
155 a Extramedullary hematopoiesis, neoplasia, infection, hyperplasia, congestion
due to cardiac disease and portal hypertension.
b Extramedullary hematopoiesis. The cause of extramedullary hematopoiesis is not
known. It is a common, but benign, problem in many ferrets over three years of age.
Neoplastic conditions include lymphosarcoma, hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma and
metastasis from distant sites. Of these, lymphosarcoma is most common. Infection is
a rare cause of splenomegaly although it is commonly seen with Aleutian disease.
ferret.
134
156-158: Questions
156
156 A 10-month-old female guinea pig has a fetus protruding from her vagina (156).
The fetus is dead and the sow is weak and in shock.
a How would you treat the guinea pig?
b What is the cause of the condition?
157 A ferret had been diagnosed with pancreatic beta cell tumors. The owner is
trying to decide whether to treat the ferret with medicine or surgery. What do you
advise?
158 During the routine annual physical
158
examination of a chinchilla, a substan-
tial amount of fur easily epilates (1s8).
a What is the most likely cause of this
hair loss?
b How would you prevent it from hap-
pening?
13.5
156-158:Answers
156 a Initially, treat for shock and administer appropriate supportive care. Give an
intravenous or intraosseous balanced electrolyte solution with S% dextrose imme-
diately. Follow this with a rapidly acting corticosteroid, such as methylprednisolone
acetate, and antibiotics, intra venously. Correct hypothermia. Delay blood collection
until the sow is stable. Gently attempt to manually extract the fetus. Perform an
emergency Cesarean section if the fetus is wedged in the birth canal. An assistant
retropulses the fetus carefully through the birth canal while the surgeon gently
applies traction from within an opened uterus. Perform an ovariohysterectomy at this
point if the sow is stable.
b The most common cause of dystocia in sows is the inability of the pubic symphysis
to expand under the influence of the hormone relaxin. It then does not separate as
needed just prior to parturition. This condition occurs in sows bred for the first time
over the age of eight months. In addition, older, obese sows have larger fat pads in
their pelvic canals that can impede parturition.
157 Treatment for pancreatic beta cell tumors in ferrets consists of medication, surgery
or both. Surgery is primarily a debulking procedure as it rarely removes all of the
a  o so inq sis ai o ie   n  so
progression of this disease. Advise the owner that when insulinoma is diagnosed, the
patient will require management of this disease for the rest of its life. A recent study
revealed that ferrets receiving medical treatment for insulinomas lived an average of six
months postdiagnosis. However, some ferrets can live as long as two years on medical
therapy alone. Medical treatment most often consists of prednisone and/or diazoxide.
The owner should discontinue any sugary treats in the diet. The diet should consist of
frequent feedings of a high-quality cat or ferret food. Begin medical treatment when the
blood glucose concentration is below 3.66 mmol/l (65 mg/dl). All blood glucose
concentrations should be based on a fasting sample. Fast the ferret from four to no
more than six hours. If prednisone is given first, administer at 0.10-0.50 mg/kg PO q
12 hours. Begin treatment with a low dose gradually increasing the amount given as
dictated by the ferret's signs. Obtain fasting blood glucose samples every one to three
months. As the tumor spreads, it becomes increasingly resistant to the effects of the
prednisone. The second commonly used medication is diazoxide (5-30 mg/kg PO q 12
hours) which prevents the release of insulin. Administer both medications orally. Start
treatment with one medication and as resistance increases, add the other medication to
the treatment regimen. There are no contraindications in giving the medications concur-
rently. Since prednisone increases the workload on the heart, give cautiously in ferrets
with heart disease. It is useful to screen ferrets for insulinoma by obtaining routine
ae jo sea aai sou aay ai auo s xis aaaa sas ao po suns
Early detection and consequent treatment improves the long-term prognosis.
158 a Chinchillas are generally easy to handle but can be nervous. Since they rarely
bite, head restraint is not necessary. However, rough handling, scruffing or quick
grasps at a fleeing animal may result in a condition called *fur slip'.
b Wear light cotton or clean latex gloves when handling chinchillas to prevent hand
oils from damaging the delicate fur. Handle chinchillas by gently cupping the entire
animal in both hands, always supporting the rear quarters. If necessary, grasp the
base of the tail to stabilize the pet before cupping the free hand around the body.
      a    o  i s , 
owner a poor impression of the veterinarian.
136
159, 160: Questions
159 A seven-year-old intact female rabbit has a bilateral rear limb paresis and
inappetence progressing over a two-week period. The rabbit maintains a splay-legged
position, is weak on all four limbs and is reluctant to stand. Spinal reflexes are
normal in all four limbs. The ventrum and perineum are superficially ulcerated by
constant contact with urine.
a What are your differential diagnoses for generalized weakness in the rabbit?
b What are your differential diagnoses for chronic staining of the perineum?
c What diagnostic tests would you carry out?
160 A two-year-old female rabbit is anorectic
160
for three days. The rabbit is fed a diet consisting
primarily of pellets with hay and grain-based
treats given on occasion. The owner reports
that the rabbit refused to eat pellets for two
days, but continued to eat hay, treats and the
newspaper bedding in the cage before becoming
anorectic. The rabbit has produced scant, dry
feces since the onset of anorexia. It has a small
amount of palpable intestinal gas, but is
otherwise normal in appearance and attitude.
An abdominal radiograph is taken (160). What
is your diagnosis?
137
159, 160: Answers
159 a Metabolic diseases (i.e. renal failure and hepatic), neoplasia, ingested toxins,
mucoid enteropathy, severe infections, cerebrovascular accident, trauma, encephalitis
damage due to Encephalitozoon (Nosema) cuniculi or Baylisascaris spp., vertebral
spondylosis, spinal trauma or neoplasia. In this case, the apparent rear limb paresis is
due to generalized weakness caused by metabolic disea se.
b Cystitis, cystic calculi, reproductive disease {i.e. pyometra, uterine neoplasia), renal
disease, rabbit syphilis, obesity (perineal skin folds around the perineum trap urine),
urinary incontinence, spinal disease, CNS disease, systemic disease resulting in
generalized weakness and disease causing painful movement {i.e. arthritis, podo-
dermatitis).
c Hematology, serum biochemistries, urinalysis and abdominal radiographs. In this
case, CBC abnormalities included a non-regenerative anemia and hypoproteinemia.
The serum chemistry profile demonstrated an increased BUN and creatinine. A low
specific gravity was the only abnormality on urinalysis, indicating a diagnosis of
renal failure. It is important to perform a complete physical examination on all
rabbits presenting with rear limb paresis to differentiate neurologic disease from
generalized weakness.
160 The most likely diagnosis is GI stasis. This is often the end result of GI
hypomotility caused by a diet low in fiber and/or high in starch. When GI motility is
slowed, the stomach and the cecum do not empty properly and the material they
contain may become partially dehydrated. When the patient becomes anorectic,
complete GI stasis occurs resulting in further dehydration and impaction of the
stomach and cecal contents. Often there is a halo' of air around the gastric contents
seen on radiographs. This is frequently what is occurring when rabbits are diagnosed
with a gastric trichobezoar or *wool block'. The term *trichobezoar" is misleading
because the problem is not exclusively an accumulation of hair. Nearly every rabbit
has hair present in the gastric contents due to continual grooming. When the gastric
contents become dehydrated the hair, which represents only a portion of the stomach
 un a si s s pao go x e un o oq  'sa
true trichobezoar which is a tightly compacted mass composed of nearly 100% hair,
as seen in cats or ferrets.
It is typical to observe that rabbits crave high-fiber items, such as hay and paper,
when they experience GI motility problems. Feces decrease in size and eventually
cease altogether when the rabbit becomes anorectic. Early in the disease, these
patients will have little or no abdominal discomfort and will appear bright and alert.
Anorexia can eventually lead to hepatic lipidosis which will result in further
deterioration of the patient's condition. As the disease progresses large quantities of
painful gas build up through the entire GI tract.
GI obstructive disease does occur in rabbits. The most common causes include
rubber, plastic, small masses of dried ingesta mixed with hair or carpet fibers and
stricture of the GI tract from post-surgical adhesions. These patients are acutely and
severely depressed and exhibit abdominal discomfort. Radiography in these cases
reveals significant dilation of the stomach.
138
161, 162: Questions
161 With regard to the rabbit in 160:
a What are the major contributing factors to this condition?
b How would you treat this rabbit?
162 A four-month-old ferret is found outside. It
162
is weak, tachypneic and sneezing, and has a co-
pious mucoid nasal discharge, has chin swelling
and crusting and thickened foot pads (162).
The ferret is brought into a house where there
are two other ferrets. Despite supportive care,
the ferret develops ataxia and torticollis and is
now comatose.
a What are your differential diagnoses?
b What is your diagnosis?
c What tests would you perform?
139
161, 162: Answers
161 a The single most common contributing factor in GI motility problems in the
rabbit is low dietary fiber. The non-digestible fiber portion of the diet is essential to
promote normal GI tract motility. In addition, a high starch diet, ingestion of toxins
or inappropriate antibiotics can lead to changes in the cecal pH resulting in dysbiosis 
which in turn can ca use cecal impaction and lowered GI motility.
b Direct therapy towards restoring normal GI tract motility and correcting
under-
lying dietary problems. Rehydrate the stomach contents and stimulate GI motility
through administration of a high moisture and fiber diet, parenteral fluids and GI
motility drugs. Offer grass hay and fresh leafy greens, such as dandelion greens,
parsley, romaine lettuce, carrot top or kale. Many rabbits will eat these high fiber
foods eagerly avoiding the need for syringe feeding. If the rabbit refuses to eat on its
 own, administer appropriate assist feedings. Avoid the use of supplements that are
high in fat or starch. Avoid the use of psyllium powder or other fiber products that
draw water out of the colon. Due to the nature of the physiology of the proximal
colon, the use of these products may lead to cecal or colonic impaction. Typically
stools may not be produced for up to 72 hours after the institution of assist feeding.
After replacing fluid deficits, administer lactated Ringer's solution at a maintenance
level of 75-100 mg/kg/day SC, IV or IO. Administer drugs to promote GI tract
motility, such as metaclopramide (0.2-1.0 mg/kg SC or PO q 12 hours), or cisapride
(0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO q 12-24 hours) until normal stools are produced. Analgesics,
such as flunixin meglumine, may be helpful initially to reduce pain from excessive
GI gas. Surgery is rarely indicated in these cases. For prevention, recommend a diet
of free choice quality grass hay, fresh herbage and limited concentrate foods. Avoid
high starch treats.
162 a Canine distemper virus, influenza virus, bacterial pneumonia or mycotic
pneumonia.
b Canine distemper virus infection is the most likely diagnosis. Although the other
diseases can cause severe respiratory infection, only canine distemper virus causes
both respiratory and neurologic disease signs. Canine distemper virus also causes
chin swelling and crusting which are cardinal signs of this disease and appear before
thickened foot pads are apparent. Swelling and crusting may also be present in the
perineal and inguinal area of ferrets infected with canine distemper virus. This ferret
was found outside where it likely came in contact with infected animals and the
vaccine status of this ferret is unknown. If only neurologic signs were apparent,
rabies virus infection and listeriosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis
although these are rare diseases in ferrets.
c Perform a fluorescent antibody test for canine distemper virus antigen on con-
junctival smears, mucous membrane scrapings or blood smears to diagnose canine
distemper virus. This is useful only in the first few days of disease. The modified live
viral strains used for vaccination do not interfere with this testing method. To aid in
the diagnosis of canine distemper virus infection, perform hematology. As with other
viral infections, a leukopenia can be observed. Radiographs characterize the extent of
the pneumonia. Perform a lung wash to determine the cause of the pneumonia. A
         s
respiratory signs. Perform cytology on a cerebrospinal fluid tap to determine the cause
of the neurologic signs. Diagnose this disease definitively at postmortem. Canine
distemper virus inclusion bodies are generally found in the epithelial cells of the
trachea, urinary bladder, skin, GI tract, lymph nodes, spleen and salivary glands.
140
163, 164: Questions
163
    on        o  
elicited during joint palpation and it moves with a stiff gait. The incisors appear
normal, but the guinea pig has difficulty prehending its food. The skin has petechial
hemorrhages present on the right side of the neck and over the tarsal-metatarsal
joints.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What aspect of the husbandry is crucial in establishing a diagnosis ?
164 A four-year-old spayed female ferret is found unable to walk. On physical
examination, there is no voluntary motor movement in the hindlimbs. All reflexes are
assessed as normal and muscle atrophy is not apparent.
a What are your differential diagnoses?
b What tests could you performed to determine the cause of this condition?
141
163, 164: Answers
163 a Hypovitaminosis C, also known as scurvy. Guinea pigs, like humans, do not
produce their own vitamin C and require a dietary source. The minimum daily
requirement for vitamin C in the guinea pig is 10 mg/kg/day in the non-breeding
animal and 30 mg/kg/day in the pregnant and lactating sow. Signs of vitamin C
deficiency are consistent with damage to connective tissue, and include swollen
painful joints and costochondral junctions resulting in reluctance to move, crying in
pain when touched, poor coat condition, dysphagia and hemorrhage around joints,
muscles and skin. The angle of the teeth may change as they become loosened,
res ulting in malocclused and overgrown molars and the resultant inability to prehend
food. Some guinea pigs present with chronic mild upper respiratory signs and
increased ocular secretions, while others may present with diarrhea and inappetence.
b The diet is a crucial factor in this case. Owners are either unaware of the vitamin C
requirement of guinea pigs, or believe that commercial guinea pig pellets are an
adequate diet. Vitamin C is a water soluble vitamin and its potency decreases rapidly
in the feed, particularly if exposed to excessive heat or moisture. Most commercial
guinea pig pellets lose their vitamin C potency within 90 days after milling, therefore
it is important to determine the age of the food being fed. It is equally important to
know how the feed is stored. Pellets should be stored in a cool, dry area away from
direct sunlight. Rabbit or other rodent pellets are inappropriate as the sole diet for
             
ensure vitamin C supplementation is to give vitamin C rich foods daily, such as kale
Or other dark leafy greens.
164 a They include intervertebral disc disease, discospondylitis, hypoglycemia,
myelitis, diffuse muscular disease, diffuse skeletal disease, neoplasia, heart disease,
anemia, hyperthermia, metabolic disease, GI disease and Aleutian disease.
b Collapse and hindlimb paresis can be a non-specific sign of disease in ferrets.
Therefore, many diseases are considered when a ferret shows signs of paresis. The
differential diagnosis is not limited to neuromuscular disease processes. Diagnosis of
hindlimb paresis requires a thorough history, examination and possibly extensive
testing. Perform hematology and serum biochemistry. A low RBC count {anemia) in
ferrets is commonly caused by hyperestrogenism as seen in unspayed ferrets that
remain in estrus or, rarely, ferrets with adrenal gland disease. Severe GI ulcers can
also cause anemia. Renal disease and any chronic disease can result in anemia. An
elevated WBC count may indicate a severe infection or lymphoma leading to weak-
ness. A low blood glucose concentration is highly indicative of a pancreatic beta cell
tumor. A fasting blood glucose (4-6 hours) concentration below 3.92 mmol/l (70
mg/dl) is good evidence that an insulinoma is present, especially if the ferret is above
the age of three years. Ferrets with insulinoma commonly present with hindlimb
paresis. Rule out other metabolic diseases based on the serum biochemistry results.
Take radiographs to reveal the presence of cardiac disease and/or abdominal disease.
Determine if disc disease is present by taking spinal radiographs or perform a
myelogram.
This ferret was found to have a blood glucose concentration of 1.68 mmol/l (30
mg/dl) and an insulinoma was diagnosed. The ferret responded well initially to one
dose of oral glucose and was then maintained on prednisone.
142
165-167: Questions
165 A two-year-old male fer-
165
ret had progressive vision loss
over the past two months.
Both eyes appear the same
(the left eye is shown (165).
a What is your diagnosis?
b What etiologies have been
suggested for this problem in
ferrets?
166 A ferret develops episodes
166
of coughing and dyspnea. On
physical examination, it is
dehydrated and lethargic with
pale mucous membranes. Tho-
racic radiographs reveal en-
largement of the right ven-
tricle and increased interstitial
opacity throughout the lungs.
Before further diagnostics are
performed, the ferret dies. At
necropsy, two helminths meas-
uring 100 and 65 mm in length
are recovered from the right
ventricle (166).
a What are the worms?
b How was the ferret infected?
c What antemortem test can you carry out to confirm this infection?
d What treatment would you use for this infection?
167 A pet two-year-old male rabbit is shedding heavily and has patches of alopecia
around the neck and ears. The lesions are approximately circular, have an epidermal
collar and are mildly pruritic. The first lesions appeared two weeks ago and have
increased in size.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you confirm this diagnosis?
c How would you treat the lesions?
143
165-167: Answers
165 a Bilateral mature cataracts are present. Normal ferret visual acuity is relatively
poor {approximately 20/160), therefore if a ferret is adapted well to its environment
before it becomes blind, the signs of vision loss may be subtle. Cataracts are a very
common cause of blindness in ferrets with retinal degeneration the next most
the axial region of the posterior lens cortex. These often progress to involve the
anterior cortex and nucleus and, in some animals, the entire lens becomes opaque. In
ferrets with long-standing cataracts, the lens may luxate into the anterior chamber
and cause secondary glaucoma.
b Genetic and nutritional etiologies may be responsible for cataract development.
Test breedings of affected animals suggest that there is a genetic component because
offspring from X affected pairings may develop mature cataracts as early as 13-16
weeks of age. The exact mode of inheritance is unclear. A nutritional component is
 possibly involved in the genesis of cataracts in ferrets.
166 a Dirofilaria immitis, the dog heartworm.
b Ferrets are infected when mosquitoes bite them and deposit the infective third-stage
larvae. The worms migrate into subcutaneous tissues and muscles. They reach the
heart between 90 and 140 days postinfection.
c Microfilarial tests may be performed when heartworms are suspected, but only
20% of heartworm infections in ferrets are microfilaremic. Also, serum can be tested
by one of the commercially available antigen-detection kits that detect heartworm
antigen in the serum of dogs. While these tests are very specific and rarely give false-
positives, ferrets may have too few worms in the heart to produce enough antigen to
be detected by the tests. Therefore, false-negative results may occur when these tests
are used for ferrets. Cardiomegaly may be visualized on chest radiographs and
ultrasound may reveal the presence of worms.
d Infections may be treated with thiacetarsamide sodium (2.2 mg/kg q 12 hours for
two days). It may be helpful to use either prednisolone (2.2 mg/kg PO q 24 hours for
3 months) or heparin (100 U SC q 24 hours for 21 days) along with thiacetarsamide
to reduce the incidence of pulmonary emboli. To prevent infection effectively, ferrets
can also be placed on a monthly dose of ivermectin (6 μg/kg PO).
167 a The most likely diagnosis is dermatomycosis caused by Trichopbyton
mentagropbytes. Differential diagnoses include hair loss due to molting and
dermatitis due to ectoparasites or bacterial infection. Microsporum spp. has rarely
been isolated from rabbits.
b By cytology and culture. Demonstrate the fungal agent on KOH preparations or
fungal culture of skin scrapings and hairs from the infected area. T. mentagropbytes
does not fluoresce under Wood's light illumination. Microscopically infected hairs
contain large spores and mycelia. On DTM media, colonies are flat and yellow-
Orange on the underside.
      od 1     r 
 spray. Treat a generalized infection with griseofulvin (25 mg/kg PO q 24 hours for 14
days). Advise owners of the zoonotic potential of this disease. Treat other household
pets as needed and clean the environment thoroughly.
144
168, 169: Questions
168 Owners with rodent breeding colonies occasionally need to have the males
castrated or vasectomized.
a How would you perform a castration in a rodent?
b How would you perform a vasectomy in a rodent?
169 A five-month-old intact female guinea _pig
169a
has a hemorrhagic vaginal discharge. The
owner thinks the guinea pig is five to six weeks
pregnant. Only nine weeks ago the guinea pig
delivered and raised three normal pups.
a What are your differential diagnoses?
b What do the radiographic findings reveal
(169a, b)?
c How would you treat the guinea pig?
169b
14.5
168, 169: Answers
168a
168b
168 a The inguinal rings remain open throughout life in male mice, rats, guinea pigs
and hamsters. Prevent inguinal hernias by using castration techniques that
pad associated with each testis and spermatic cord. These structures make
visualization and ligation of structures within the cord difficult. Use a standard
closed castration technique in the smaller rodents. In larger rodents such as the
guinea pig, one approach is to perform an open castration technique modified to
close the inguinal ring. Place the anesthetized guinea pig in dorsal recumbency. Incise
longitudinally over the scrotum and exteriorize the testis with the tunic intact (168a).
Place a length of suture around the tunic and cord as close to the superficial inguinal
ring as possible. Leave the suture untied as it will later identify and ligate the tunic.
Incise the tunic distal to the untied suture, as shown. Clamp, ligate and remove the
structures of the spermatic cord distal to the ligatures. Use synthetic absorbable
suture. Allow the ligated stumps to slip back into the abdomen. Tie the suture that
was previously placed proximally around the tunic. This functionally closes the
superficial inguinal ring. Excise the distal tunic. Repeat the procedure on the other
side. Leave scrotal incisions open or close with synthetic absorbable suture in a
buried continuous intradermal pattern, or with skin staples or tissue adhesive.
b Perform vasectomy in rodents through bilateral scrotal incisions or via a supra-
pubic ventral midline incision. Make a small (2-3 cm) incision in the ventral midline
just cranial to the pubis and take care to avoid injury to the bladder. Reflect the
bladder caudoventrally, revealing the two vas deferens (168b). Double ligate each vas
and remove a section between the ligatures. Close the linea alba with 4-0 or 5-0
synthetic absorbable suture. Close the skin with the same type of suture material in a
buried continuous intradermal suture pattern, with Michel clips or skin sta ples.
169 a They include abortion, urinary tract infection, urinary tract calculi and genital
tract infection.
b An indistinct radiopaque mass in the caudal abdomen in the region of the urinary
bladder or uterus.
c Hospitalize the guinea pig for observation. Importantly, administer parental fluids
and nutritional support and begin antibiotics that are safe for guinea pigs. Perform
hematology and serum biochemistries. An ultrasound examination confirms the
presence of soft-tissue changes in the uterus. The mass in the uterus has no skeletal
features or active heart beats. The bladder appears normal. The diagnosis is intra-
 uterine disease and the owner elects for an ovariohysterectomy.
146
170, 171: Questions
170 This African hedgehog is displaying normal
170a
defensive behavior {170a). When threatened a
using the powerful orbicularis and panniculus
carnosus muscles, thus making examination
difficult.
a Describe several methods you could use to
coax a hedgehog to uncurl.
b How would you administer medications?
171
171 A pet rabbit has a severe conjunctivitis that has been present for several weeks
(171). Stapbylococcus epidermidis was found on a conjunctival swab culture. The
antibiotic sensitivity test indicated that chlortetracycline was the drug of choice. After
several weeks of topical treatment, there is no improvement in the ocular disease.
a Why might there be no response to therapy?
b How would you alter the treatment?
147
170, I7l: Answers
170b
170 a (1) Simply leave the pet undis-
turbed for several minutes on the table
and it may uncurl and try to escape. (2)
Hold the curled hedgehog in a gloved
hand and stroke heavily from front to
back over the caudal half of the body.
{3) Hold the hedgehog's head down-
wards over a flat surface and it may un-
roll to reach for that surface. (4) Bounce
the pet gently in cupped hands. (S) Place
the hedgehog in a shallow (2.5 cm deep)
container of warm water. This method
should not be used if the pet is exhibiting any respiratory signs.
Once the awake hedgehog uncurls, scoop the pet up off the table in open hands
and it will not usually curl up again. If all else fails, induce general anesthesia with
either injectable drugs or inhalants. Isoflurane introduced with a mask or anesthetic
chamber works well with rapid induction and recovery times.
Hedgehogs have spines that do not come out when handled. However, the spines
are quite irritating when the patient holds them firmly erect in a defensive position. It
gloves (170b).
b If the hedgehog is tractable or debilitated, you can grasp the loose skin behind the
ears and suspend the patient over a table. This prevents the pet from rolling up and
allows access to the mouth for administration of oral medications or feedings. In
hedgehogs that are difficult to handle, use injectable drugs that can be given
subcutaneously. Hedgehogs have an extensive subcutaneous space that contains a
large amount of fat. Subcutaneous injections are given even when the pet is tightly
curled into a ball. It is often not necessary to remove the animal from its cage. Mask
oral medications with sweet flavors and put them in the patient's food; however, be
aware that some pets will stop eating altogether if they sense there is a change in their
171 a Conjunctivitis is not the only problem here. The discharge is more likely to be
a sign of dacryocystitis. Consider the systemic health of the animal and its environ-
ment. Purulent conjunctivitis without bacterial involvement has been reported in
animals exposed to environmental pollutants, such as dust from overhead hay racks.
In addition, dacryocystitis can be associated with disease of the upper premolar and
incisor roots. Culturing a conjunctival sac may not be entirely reliable. In this case, S.
epidermidis may be part of the normal flora and is insignificant in the cause of the
disease. To obtain more valuable information on possible bacterial involvement in
cases of dacryocystitis, cannulate and flush the lacrimal duct with a sterile saline
solution and collect the fluid as it exits the nares for microbiologic culture.
b Cannulate the nasolacrimal duct and flush with an appropriate antibiotic. Systemic
antibiotics may also be necessary. Perform skull radiographs to evaluate for dental
disease. Make necessary environmental changes. Treat any other underlying disease
problems that may be affecting the overall health of the animal.
148
172, 173: Questions
172a
172b
172 An examination of the fundus of a rabbit (172a) and a guinea pig (172b) reveals
these images.
a What is your diagnosis for the rabbit?
b What is your diagnosis for the guinea pig?
173 An 18-month-old guinea pig is in respiratory distress. The pet is dyspneic with
increased respiratory rate and effort. The oral mucous membranes appear mildly
cyanotic and auscultation reveals muffled heart sounds with a respiratory wheeze and
congestion. The signs have been present for four days, but are worse today. Recently,
guinea pig lives in a plastic cage with a wire top.
a Could the recent changes in husbandry have contributed to the signs?
b What are your differential diagnoses for dyspnea in a guinea pig?
c What diagnostic procedures and therapy are indicated?
149
172, I73: Answers
172 a The fundus is normal for a rabbit. Lagomorphs possess a merangiotic retinal
vascular pattern where vessels emanate from the optic nerve head and pass hori-
zontally in association with the white medullary rays. The medullary rays represent
myelinated nerve fibers. The optic nerve of the rabbit is far superior which results in
a blind spot coincident with a view of the ground. This is a place from where few
rabbit predators approach. The optic disc has a deep physiologic cup that should not
be misdiagnosed as indicative of glaucoma.
-  s id  a    e og lo si s a q
giotic retinal vascular pattern similar to the horse, but clinically it is considered to be
anangiotic as retinal vessels are never observed. The orange stripes in the photograph
represent choroidal vessels visualized through the avascular retina.
173 a Cedar shavings have been implicated as a cause of respiratory distress in
guinea pigs due to the inhalation of high concentrations of various aromatic oils.
These oils can be irritating to mucous membranes. Patients housed in environments
with poor ventilation, such as aquariums or closed plastic cages, have an increased
exposure.
b Ammonia toxicity secondary to poor hygiene and reduced ventilation, heat stress,
bacterial or viral pneumonia, cardiac disease and neoplasia. Bacterial pneumonia
caused by Bordetella bronchiseptica would be the primary differential in this case
in respiratory disease of guinea pigs, but it may be secondary to other stressors, such
 as environmental conditions, hypovitaminosis C or other disease conditions.
c Obtain a thoracic radiograph to determine the degree of pulmonary disease as well
as any cardiac changes. Use extreme caution when restraining a dyspneic guinea pig
for diagnostic procedures.
.Do not place these patients in ventral recumbency. Use
from a thoracic aspiration. Submit blood for hematology and serum biochemistry.
Some animals suffering from toxicity due to aromatic oil inhalation will have
elevations in serum liver enzymes. Perform an ultrasound of the thorax if needed,
particularly in cases of cardiac disease or where an intrathoracic mass is suspected.
 Place the guinea pig in a well-ventilated cage with pelleted bedding made of a non-
    i  o   u   
broad-spectrum antibiotic, such as trimethoprim/sulfa,enrofloxacin or chloram-
phenicol. Use a diuretic, such as furosemide (2.2 mg/kg IV, SC, PO q 12 hours), to
aid in thoracic fluid removal. A bronchodilating agent may also be used. Administer
subcutaneous, intra venous or intraosseous fluids and gavage feedings of blenderized
guinea pig pellets and fresh greens along with supplemental vitamin C (30-50 mg/kg
ned aui aue 'luasad si sisouo ji uahxo apioid papaau ji dsnou zl b od
as little as possible and do not place it in a position that increases the pressure on the
thorax.
1.50
174, 175: Questions
174 A rat owner wishes to halt reproduction in her colony but does not want to spay
her animals.
a What is one alternative to an ovariohysterectomy that can be used to curtail
reproduction in female rodents?
b How would you perform this procedure?
175a
175b
175 A five-year-old male cotton-top tamarin is
found on the bottom of its cage. The monkey had
a history of chronic intermittent diarrhea.The
tamarin is now non-responsive, is in poor body
condition, has abdominal distension and is emit-
ting a foul-smelling, watery diarrhea. The monkey
is hypothermic (temperature 36.7°C) and 10%
dehydrated. The extreme abdominal distention
prevents palpation of the viscera. The radiographs
are shown (175a, b).
a What do these radiographs reveal?
c What is your diagnosis and why?
1.51
174, I75: Answers
174
174 a Perform ovariectomies in rodents
as an alternative to ovariohysterectomy.
Uterine disease is relatively infrequent in
rodents and the voluminous abdominal
contents in these animals make the ap-
proach to an ovariohysterectomy more
difficult.
b Place the anesthetized animal in ventral
recumbency. Clip and prepare the back
for sterile surgery from the mid-thoracic
to the caudal lumbar region. Keep the
patient warm as hypothermia occurs from
excessive clipping of hair or cooling by skin disinfectants. Several different surgical
incisions are described for ovariectomies, each dependent upon the species and size of
the rodent and surgeon preference. The ovaries are located in abdominal fat caudal to
the kidneys. In very small rodents, such as mice, perform a single, small skin incision
either longitudinally along the dorsal midline from the second to fifth lumbar vertebra
or transversely at the level of the second lumbar vertebra. Use a transverse incision at
the level of the flank glands in hamsters.With a single longitudinal incision,
undermine the skin on each side to allow bilateral approaches through the flank
muscles into the abdomen. In larger rats and guinea pigs, incise the skin caudal to the
last rib and lateral and ventral to the paralumbar muscles {174). In mice, view the
ovarian fat pads through the thin abdominal wall; this identifies where the abdomen is
entered. In other species, use blunt dissection to penetrate the muscles of the flank
lateral to the paralumbar muscles. Make a small incision into the peritoneum on each
side. Large fat accumulations fixed to the paralumbar muscles are easily confused with
periovarian fat, especially if the incisions are made too medially. Locate the ovaries
and their associated, freely movable fat lateral to this paralumbar fat. Avoid
disrupting ovarian tissue during surgery as detached portions could become func-
tional. Grasp the periovarian fat to exteriorize the ovary such that the ovary itself is
not handled. Some rodents have remnants of ovarian tissue associated with the uterine
tube. Therefore, removing the entire uterine tube and cranial tip of each uterine horn
prevents cycling. Ligate the ovarian vessels and locate the cranial tip of the uterine
horn and ligate on each side. Between the ligatures, remove the ovaries, uterine tubes
and cranial tips of each uterine horn. Close larger muscle incisions, such as those in
the guinea pig, with synthetic absorbable sutures. Close skin incisions using either
buried absorbable sutures, wound clips, staples or tissue adhesive.
175 a They reveal a loss of serosal margin detail throughout the abdomen. The entire
GI tract is distended. The loss of serosal margin detail is likely the result of abdom-
inal fluid or weight loss.
b For the greatly distended GI tract, either mechanical intestinal obstruction or ileus
with gas distention. Causes of obstructive bowel disease include neoplasia, foreign
body or stricture.
c Adenocarcinoma of the GI tract causing a functional obstruction is the most likely
diagnosis. This neoplastic disease is common in middle-aged cotton-top tamarins and
is often associated with chronic colitis. There can be multiple foci of adenocarcinoma
in the cecum, colon and rectum but the most common sites are the colorectal
junction and the ileum.
1.52
176, 177: Questions
176
176 A guinea pig has difficulty walking. Physical examination reveals this lesion
(176). The guinea pig is housed in a commercial wire cage that has a 1 x 2 cm mesh
bottom with a piece of carpet placed in one corner. The diet consists of pellets and
fresh vegetables. Water is availa ble from a sipper tube.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you treat the condition?
177 An 18-month-old male hamster has
177a
bilateral alopecia and pruritus (177a).
Skin scrapings reveal low numbers of
Demodex spp. The hamster exhibits
polyuria and polydipsia. Normal water
intake for this tiny desert species is less
than 10 ml/day. A meta bolic cage is used
to determine that the hamster is drinking
up to 75 ml/day and urinating nearly the
same amount.
a What differential diagnoses would you
consider?
b What diagnostic tests should you
perform?
c What is your diagnosis?
1.53
176, I77: Answers
176 a Pododermatitis. Predisposing factors to this condition include rough cage
flooring, unsanitary cage conditions, obesity, foot lacerations, hypovitaminosis C and
any debilitating disease.Stapbylococcus aureus is commonly isolated from these
lesions but is usually secondary to these other factors. The feet appear swollen and
discolored, and the foot pads are often cracked. If left untreated, the infection can
lead to cellulitis, osteomyelitis and the eventual death of the animal.
b Manage uncomplicated cases (no cracks or fissures in the foot pads) with topical
antibiotics, clean bedding and any additional husbandry improvements. Use
protective ointments with a heavy petroleum base to keep these lesions moist and
prevent cracks. Treat severe lesions more aggressively. Radiographs rule out
osteomyelitis. In severe cases, administer systemic antibiotics, surgically debulk
lesions, change bandages daily and soak affected limbs in a hypertonic or astringent
solution.
177b
177 a Renal disease {including renal
amyloidosis), demodectic mange,
adrenal disease, hepatic disease, other
endocrine disease or nutritional deficien-
cies. Demodectic mange causes hair loss
and skin thickening. Adrenal disease can
cause polyuria, polydipsia and hair loss
due to hormonal effects. Nutritional de-
ficiencies can cause a brittle, poor qual-
ity coat and patchy alopecia.
b Use serum biochemistry values, such as
BUN and creatinine, in your diagnosis of
renal disease. Manually express the blad-
der with great care or use cystocentesis
to collect a urine sample and perform a
complete urinalysis. Use multiple skin scrapings to demonstrate the relative number
of demodectic mites. Examine the hair roots to determine if there is active growth or
if they are in a telogen phase. Use radiography or ultrasonography to demonstrate
abnormalities of the abdominal organs.
c Adrenal gland disease. Free catch urinalysis reveals a low specific gravity. Renal
disease in this animal is less likely because serum biochemistry results indicate that
the BUN and creatinine concentrations are normal. The skin is normal to thin with a
significant number of broken or damaged hairs present. It was noted that most of the
hairs were in the late telogen or resting phase. Demodex mites were found on skin
scrapings but were present in low numbers. Scrapings of normal hamster skin often
contain a small number of demodex mites. Ultrasonography confirmed the evidence
of an enlarged adrenal gland and normal appearing kidneys (177b). The cystic
adrenal gland is pictured here on the cranial medial pole of the kidney. Resolution of
endocrine-associated clinical signs occurred when the adrenal gland was removed by
flank laparotomy. A diagnosis of demodecosis in hamsters should always be
investigated further. Infestation with large numbers of demodex mites is usually
secondary to conditions that result in immunosuppression.
1.54
178, 179: Questions
178 To improve airway access, it is important to be able to intubate rabbits. What
three methods can you use for rabbit endotracheal intubation?
179
179 A two-year-old male African hedgehog is experiencing a steady decline in
appetite (179). The diet consists of canned cat and dog food and some live insects.
a What condition is present in this hedgehog?
b How would you treat the condition?
c What are your recommendations to the owner to prevent it?
1.5.5
178, 179: Answers
178a
178 Perform endotracheal intubation in rabbits
using either a direct visualization, stylet-assisted
or blind technique. For each method, position the
rabbit in sternal recumbency with the neck
extended. Pull the tongue through the diastema on
one side so that it will not be cut or bruised by the
teeth or laryngoscope blade (178a).
The direct visualization technique is suita ble for
use in larger rabbits. Introduce the lighted
laryngoscope blade at the diastema and gently
178b
advance it over the base of the tongue until the
larynx is brought into view (178b). Swab the
larynx with a cotton-tipped applicator that has
been soaked with a topical anesthetic if laryngo-
spasm is a problem. Use a small amount of 1%
lidocaine (approximately 0.25 ml). Benzocaine-
containing spray has been associated with meth-
emoglobinemia in rabbits and rats. Gently pass
the endotracheal tube into the larynx and remove
the laryngoscope. Use a semi-rigid atraumatic
stylet to direct the tube for accurate placement.
Use the stylet-assisted technique in smaller rab-
bits because there is not enough room for simul-
animals a flat laryngoscope blade (Miller) is easiest to introduce into the mouth to
visualize the larynx. Pass a 3.5 or 5.0 Fr urinary catheter into the larynx, remove the
laryngoscope and advance the endotracheal tube over the catheter into the airway.
Quickly remove the catheter to prevent airway obstruction.
For the blind endotracheal intubation technique, position the animal with the neck
extended as described above. Pass the endotracheal tube along the dorsal midline of
the tongue toward the larynx. Listen for breath sounds and watch for condensation
in the tube. Slip the tube into the larynx as the glottis opens during inspiration. Loss
of breath sounds, loss of condensation and/or the presence of audible swallowing
indicate that the tube is in the esophagus. The rabbit may respond to proper tube
placement by moving or coughing. Confirm correct placement with the laryngoscope,
by auscultation of the chest during lung inflation, or by testing for air passage
through the tube.
179 a The receding gingiva, exposed root surfaces and bleeding gums indicate
advanced periodontal disease.
of the tooth roots and surrounding bone. Extract teeth that are loose. Scale and plane
the remaining teeth and exposed roots. Polish the teeth and use appropriate antibiotic
thera py. Institute an oral hygiene maintenance program.
c Dental disease in pet hedgehogs is most often caused by the accumulation of
plaque. Prevent dental disease by providing a sound diet that includes firm foods,
such as dry commercial cat food, hard-bodied insects and raw vegetables.
1.56
180, 181: Questions
180 It is useful to anesthetize rodents for a variety of clinical procedures.
a What are some of the challenges of rodent anesthesia?
b What is the main difficulty you would encounter with the use of ketamine alone for
anesthesia in rats, hamsters and mice?
c How would you use inhalant anesthesia in these species?
181
181 A three-year-old female rabbit is anorectic and constipated. Initially, it is treated
with intravenous chloramphenicol, an intravenous-balanced electrolyte solution and
multiple syringe feedings. The patient did well until four days later, when it develops
a dry, leather-like ear tip (181).
a What are your differential diagnoses for the necrotic ear tip?
b How would you manage the condition?
1.57
180, 181:Answers
180 a The small size of these animals makes anesthesia challenging. The small size
limits intramuscular and intravenous injection sites, causes difficulty in endotracheal
intubation and increases the likelihood of hypothermia while anesthetized. Standard
intraoperative monitoring is also challenging. Since species, strains and sexes may all
differ in their response to the various anesthetics, it is difficult to extrapolate between
different groups of rodents as to proper dosages of agents.
b Ketamine, used alone in rodents, causes such conditions as ataxia or cataleptoid
anesthesia with retention of high muscle tone. The quality of anesthesia does not
         n   
combined with ketamine for rodent anesthesia include acepromazine, diazepam and
xylazine. In some rodent species, the quality, depth and duration of anesthesia is
quite unpredictable, even when ketamine is supplemented with other injectable
medications. The regimens may induce excessive physiologic depression and prolong
recovery at a dose needed to attain a surgical plane of anesthesia. Additionally, the
use of multiple agents requires careful dose titration. Use a lower dose of each agent
when in combination compared to the dose that is appropriate when the agent is
used alone.
c Use isoflurane or halothane for rodent anesthesia. Isoflurane allows for a more
less of a cardiovascular depressant compared to halothane. Use inhalant anesthesia
ment with atropine {0.os mg/kg SC) may be useful in some species {i.e. rats and
guinea pigs) to decrease oral and respiratory secretions during induction with a
volatile anesthetic.
Use a flow-through induction chamber in unpremedicated or lightly sedated
rodents for anesthetic induction. Use a properly sized anesthesia mask and non-
rebreathing circuit if a rodent is heavily sedated, lightly anesthetized or otherwise
isoflurane concentrations of 3-5% and halothane concentrations of 3-4%. Use lower
concentrations for mask induction. Continuously monitor animals during induction
of anesthesia. Use the lowest concentration of the anesthetic agent that provides
adequate anesthesia and muscle relaxation to maintain anesthesia. This ranges from
0.5-1.5% for halothane and 1.0-2.5% for isoflurane. The percentage depends upon
the individual animal, other agents used and the method of administration.
181 a Phlebitis, trauma {especially in the long-eared breeds), disseminated intra-
vascular coagulation, frostbite, fly or insect bites and cold-agglutinin disease. In this
case, the most likely diagnosis is phlebitis with ischemic necrosis of the ear tip
resulting from the intravenous catheter. This is a common sequela resulting from the
use of aural intravenous catheters, especially in the short-eared breeds. Administra-
tion of irritating intravenous medications makes this condition more likely to occur.
b Surgically amputate the necrotic tissue. Place the patient on a broad-spectrum
antibiotic for seven days. In addition, prevent contact with flies or other insects.
1.58
182-184: Questions
182 Venipuncture in the chinchilla is often necessary. What techniques would you
use for collecting blood in the chinchilla?
183a
183b
183 A juvenile male rhesus macaque has a two-day history of weakness and reluc-
tance to use its thoracic limbs. Physical examination identifies instability at the ends
of the long bones plus swelling and bruising of the arms. Diagnostic procedures
include hematology and radiography (183a, b). Results of the hemogram are given in
the ta ble.
Values
Macaque
Normalvalues
PCV (%)
23
45.7-39.2
Hg(g/l)
82
12.5-14.4
MCV
62
72.4-77.6
WBC (× 10/ml)
8.5
6.5-11.7
Neutrophils (%)
83
28-61
Eosinophils (%)
2
0.7-5.8
Lymphocytes (%)
13
34-67
Monocytes (%)
2
0-2.8
a What abnormalities are present on the hemogram?
b What abnormalities are seen on the radiographs?
c What are the differential diagnoses?
d How would you confirm your diagnosis?
e How would you treat the macaque?
184 A 77 kg intact male potbellied boar has a three-day history of right forelimb
lameness and lethargy. On palpation, there is pain, swelling and crepitus in the right
elbow joint.
a What are your differential diagnoses?
b What diagnostic techniques would you use to evaluate the lameness?
c An intracondylar "T' fracture of the distal humerus was diagnosed. How would you
treat the condition?
d Is this a common problem?
1.59
182-184: Answers
182 The thick fur coat and relatively short front limbs renders venipuncture a chal-
lenge. In a laboratory setting, orbital sinus bleeding using a hematocrit tube is an
efficient method for collecting small quantities of blood. This is effective but perform
this only under general anesthesia. There is always the potential of damage to the
orbital sinus if performed incorrectly. Do not use this technique on client owned
animals.
In pet chinchillas, locate the small cephalic vein on the dorsum of the ante-
brachium. Do not shave the fur, rather, moisten the area with a small amount of
alcohol. The lateral saphenous vein, which runs diagonally across the cranial aspect
of the tarsus is perhaps the most convenient vein to access for both venipuncture and
catheterization. If needed, collect large quantities of blood from the jugular veins.
This is can be a challenge due to the chinchilla's short neck, thick fur and difficulties
with restraint. Sedation or anesthesia may be necessary. Use a 2S gauge needle
attached to a 1 or 3 ml syringe.
183 a The hemogram reveals anemia with microcytosis. The WBC is in the normal
range but the neutrophilia and lymphocytopenia may be explained as a stress
response.
 b The radiographs reveal laterally displaced and/or collapsing physeal fractures in the
distal femur, proximal tibia and distal tibia. A zone of rarefaction is present proximal
to a line of increased density (known as the white line or scurvy line) across the
metaphyseal region.
c Trauma or vitamin C deficiency are the two most likely differential diagnoses. The
radiographic lesions are most typical of hypovitaminosis C.
d By an analysis of the food and diet. Do a vitamin C assay on serum or the buffy
coat of centrifuged blood. Response to treatment is the most rapid and simplest way
to support the diagnosis of hypovitaminosis C.
e Use vitamin C and iron supplementation, cage rest and analgesics as needed.
Vitamin C contributes to the absorption, mobilization and use of iron. Hypovitamin-
osis C leads to microcytic, hypochromic anemia. Initially, give the monkey supportive
care, such as fluids and force feedings, until it is stronger.
184 a They include trauma, fracture, luxation, neoplasia of the bone or joints, in-
fection (septic arthritis) and degenerative joint disease.
b Use radiographs of the elbow and leg to determine the cause of the lameness. If no
fractures or luxations are observed, perform a culture and cytology of fluid recovered
from a joint aspiration.
c Treat this problem with surgical stabilization of the fracture. Reduce the fracture
fragments to provide joint congruency and fracture repair. Use a lag screw technique
through the condyles, followed by cross-pinning or plating of the humerus to provide
 good reduction and stabilization of this type of fracture.
d The bones of the forelegs are the most common place for fractures in potbellied
pigs.
160
185-187: Questions
185 An adult rat is found
185
dead in its cage unexpectedly.
It had been treated topically
by the owner for a minor
dermatological problem. The
stomach of the rat at necropsy
is shown.
a What is the probable cause
of death?
b How can the owner avoid
this outcome in the future?
186 In rabbits the cecum is essential in the digestive process.
a What is unique about the cecum of the rabbit?
b What is the result of the fermentation of foodstuffs in the cecum?
c What dietary factors regulate cecotrophy?
187 A five-month-old male hamster has a firm swelling on the left side of the face.
The owner noticed this two nights ago, and is now concerned because it appears to
 h o a  si d a  u   a
a What anatomic structures may be affected to produce these signs?
b What are your differential diagnoses for this problem?
c Under what circumstances would this condition be considered normal?
161
I85-187: Answers
185 a The cause of death is acute toxicity caused by ingestion of a dermatological
preparation. The owner had applied excessive quantities of the preparation to the
skin. Do not underestimate the toxic potential of topical preparations. Topical
Antibiotic toxicity in rodents is reported from combined bacitracin-neomycin-
polymyxin B dermatological preparations.
b Prevent this outcome by applying only a small quantity of medication to the skin
lesion using a cotton-tipped applicator. Handle the animal for a brief period and then
return it to its cage with a food treat to distract it. Use an Elizabethan collar to
186 a The rabbit has the largest cecum of any monogastric mammal. The cecum is a
large blind sac. It contains about 10 times the volume of the stomach and 40% of the
total volume of the GI tract. The serous membranes of the cecum are extremely thin
and delicate compared to those of other sections of the bowel, and may tear easily
when handled or sutured. It provides an anaerobic environment suitable for the
fermentation of ingesta by a highly complex population of microorga nisms.
b The result of fermentation in the cecum is called soft feces, night feces or ceco-
tropes. Cecotropes, which are rich in nutrients such as fatty acids, amino acids and
vitamins, are excreted separately from feces which are nutrient poor. By consuming
cecotropes, rabbits ingest nutrients that would otherwise be lost. They are eaten
directly from the rectum. The arrival of cecotropes at the anus triggers a neural
response which results in licking the anal area and consumption of the cecotropes.
Cecotropes are easily distinguished from feces. They are covered with a thin layer of
mucus, are soft and moist, and tend to stick together and have a strong odor. Feces
are hard, dry pellets.
c Cecotrope intake depends on the protein and fiber concentration of the diet.
Cecotrophy is greater if the ration contains less protein and/or more fiber. Rabbits
consume the total quantity of the produced cecotropes if the diet is energy deficient.
187 a Hamsters possess well-developed cheek pouches, which may appear as bulges
on the sides of the face when filled or when diseased. Abnormalities of the jaw or
teeth can also result in facial swelling.
b Normal food hoarding, food impaction, cheek pouch abscess or neoplasia, tooth
root abscess, molar malocclusion, abscess or neoplasia of the mandible. It may be
necessary to sedate the hamster in order to examine the area thoroughly.
c Hamsters normally hoard food by filling their cheek pouches and then hide their
food in a secure location for later consumption. This behavior is amplified when a
hamster is stressed or moved to a different environment. Other stressors that may
furnishings or provision of excess food after a period of food deprivation.
The physical examination of this patient revealed food in the cheek pouch with no
other abnormalities noted. The animal was recently moved to a new cage and then
placed in a different area of the house. The resulting insecurity probably caused the
hamster to hoard food more vigorously.
162
188- I90: Questions
188 It is known that rabbits benefit from postoperative pain relief.
a What are some signs of pain and distress in the rabbit?
b What are some analgesics that you can use safely in the rabbit?
189 During the last two
189a
weeks, a six-year-old female
guinea pig has shown aggres-
sion and sexual mounting
behavior towards its female
cagemate. The owner reports
a weight gain and bilateral,
multiloculated, round soft-
tissue structures are palpated
in the cranial abdomen. The
CBC is normal except for a
high percentage (6%) of the
cell type seen in 189a.
a What is the name of the
unusual cell type in 189a?
189b
b What are these cells and
what causes an increase in this
type of cell?
c What does the abdominal
ultrasound in 189b demon-
strate?
d What are your differential
diagnoses?
e How would you treat the
condition?
190 Ketamine, in combination with medetomidine or xylazine, is a useful anesthetic
for rodents and rabbits. What are three undesirable side-effects of this ketamine
combination.
163
[88-I90: Answers
188 a There are both behavioral and physiologic signs of pain in rabbits. Severe,
acute pain or fright is accompanied by a characteristic high-pitched squeal. Gener-
ally, any change in temperament or behavior from normal may be an indication of
pain or distress. Specific behavioral conditions include inability to sleep, decreased
activity, reluctance to move, timidity, depression, irritability, prolonged recumbency,
lameness and abdominal splinting. Rabbits with abdominal pain may lie stretched
out in the cage. A hunched posture and tooth grinding may also be seen in rabbits
with abdominal discomfort. Two very important signs to watch for are decreased
food and water intake. Physiologic findings that may indicate pain include
hyperventilation, tachycardia, fluctuations in blood pressure and hyperglycemia.
b Although not approved for use in this species, a number of drugs have been
reported efficacious or suggested for pain treatment in rabbits. These include opioid
agonists, opioid agonist-antagonists and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. All
have potential side-effects. Safe use requires an understanding of their pharmacologic
properties. The opioid agonist, morphine {2-5 mg/kg SC, IM) produces good
analgesia of 2-4 hours duration. Side-effects include ileus sedation and respiratory
depression. Opioid agonist-antagonists {less side-effects than agonists) that are
suggested for use in the rabbit include buprenorphine (0.03-0.05 mg/kg SC, IM),
butorphanol (0.1-0.5 mg/kg SC, IM) and nalbuphine 1-2 mg/kg IM, IV). Non-
steroidal inflammatory drugs, such as flunixin meglumine (0.3-1.0 mg/kg SC, IM),
may be useful for treating mild to moderate musculoskeletal pain or pain due to
inflammation.
189 a Foa-Kurloff cell or Kurloff body. The other cell is a neutrophil demonstrating
the typical red granules found in rabbits and guinea pigs.
b Kurloff bodies are unique to hystricomorph rodents. They are eosinophilic
intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies found in mononuclear leukocytes in the circulating
blood, spleen, thymus, bone marrow and placenta. They are more numerous in
females and tend to increase in number during pregnancy and after estrogen
administration.
C A large septated cystic mass caudal to the right kidney. The mass measures about 2
cm in diameter. The body of the uterus is thickened and one of the horns is filled
with fluid.
d They include cystic ovaries, cystic rete-ovarie or cystic neoplasia with secondary
uterine disease, such as pyometra, mucometra or hydrometra. In this case, cystic rete-
ovarie is the diagnosis.
e With an ovariohysterectomy. Cystic rete-ovarie have been associated with uterine
to estrogen production, endometrial changes may be the explanation for the
behavioral changes and the increase in Kurloff bodies.
190 Ketamine/medetomidine and ketamine/xylazine depresses respiratory and
cardiovascular function. The result is hypoxia, hypercapnia and a fall in blood
pressure. Thermoregulation is depressed and animals lose body heat. A specific side-
effect of these combinations is hyperglycemia. Also, a marked diuresis results both
from hyperglycemia and as a result of the inhibiting effects of xylazine or
medetomidine on ADH secretion. Reversal of the xylazine or medetomidine with
yohimbine or atipamezole respectively, often reverses many of these side-effects.
164
191, 192: Questions
191
191 The abdomen of a six-year-old ferret during an exploratory laparotomy (191). A
tumor of the right adrenal gland is present.
a What are some clinical signs that are seen in ferrets with adrenal gland tumors?
b Describe the surgery to remove the adrenal gland tumor. Why are right-sided
adrenal gland tumors more challenging to remove than left-sided tumors?
192 In late autumn, a juvenile European hedgehog weighing 300 g exhibits marked
dyspnea with open mouth breathing. There is some foam visible at the lip commis-
sures and the oral mucous membranes are cyanotic.
a What life-sa ving treatment would you initiate?
b What is your diagnosis ?
c What further treatment would you institute?
d What long-term management is needed?
16.5
191, 192: Answers
191 a Signs of adrenal gland disease in ferrets include bilaterally symmetrical
alopecia. Pruritus, sexual behavior and an increase in body odor are also present in
some ferrets with adrenal gland tumors. A specific sign of this type of tumor in the
female ferret is vulvar enlargement. Male ferrets may present with dysuria, a caudal
abdominal mass and urinary tract blockage due to cystic hyperplasia of the glandular
prostatic urethra.
b Perform an exploratory laparotomy. Visualize and palpate both adrenal glands.
The normal adrenal glands are 5-8 mm long, 45 mm wide and 3-4 mm thick. The
left adrenal gland is located craniomedial to the cranial pole of the kidney and is
usually surrounded in fat. The main blood supply to the left adrenal gland is the
phrenicoabdominal vein which courses ventrolaterally across it. When removing the
left adrenal, ligate this vein using hemostatic clips as the tissues are friable and may
not hold sutures well. Clamp the phrenicoabdominal vein medial and lateral to the
left adrenal gland. Gently dissect the gland away from the retroperitoneal tissues.
Control capillary bleeding with a hemostatic sponge. The right adrenal gland is more
difficult to remove since it is partially under the liver and is adherent to the caudal
vena cava, craniomedial to the cranial pole of the right kidney. Attempts to “tease'
the adrenal gland off the vena cava usually result in tearing of the vessel. Remove the
adrenal gland by placing hemostatic clips between it and the lateral wall of the vena
cava and carefully cut away the gland. Alternatively, debulk the adrenal gland by
incising its lateral surface and scooping it out of the subcapular contents. Be aware
that this method can result in severe bleeding and death if venous sinuses are present.
If both adrenal glands are abnormal, remove the larger of the two and do a subtotal
adrenalectomy of the other gland. Biopsy the liver and any abnormal abdominal
structures. Examine the pancreas for evidence of insulinoma. Close the abdomen in a
routine manner. Maintain the ferret on intra venous fluids postsurgically until stable.
Administer postoperative steroids if more than one adrenal gland is removed or if the
ferret is lethargic with no obvious cause.
192 a Use an oxygen cage or chamber to minimize stress when treating cyanosis.
Administer furosemide (2.5-5.0 mg/kg SC). Administer an injectable antibiotic such
as amoxicillin to cover the potential for bacterial disease.
b Lungworm infestation. In hedgehogs this is usually a mixed infestation of
Crenosoma striatum and Capillaria aeropbilia. A thorough history should establish if
paraquat poisoning, the most likely other diagnosis, is possible. The finding of
Capillaria eggs in the feces does not rule out paraquat poisoning because intestinal
Capillaria can produce such findings. Most commercial laboratories that deal with
bovine or ovine species should be able to analyze hedgehog feces. In heavy infesta-
tions, direct examinations of a wet preparation of feces under the microscope may
reveal Crenosoma larvae.
c Often there is a respiratory infection superimposed on the lungworm infection.
Bordetella bronchiseptica is frequently isolated at postmortem. To maximize the
patient is stable, administer ivermectin_(0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC). Alternatively, give
levamisole hydrochloride (10-20 mg/kg SC).
d A hedgehog weighing 300 g is too small to hibernate so it will need to be over-
wintered in a warm environment and provided food on a daily basis. To prevent a
recurrence of the respiratory disease, repeat the ivermectin or levamisole injection at
monthly intervals.
166
193, 194: Questions
193 Disease prophylaxis is accomplished in pet potbellied pigs via vaccination. What
vaccinations would you recommend for the pet potbellied pig?
194
194 A four-year-old male castrated ferret was examined because of progressive
stranguria and urinary incontinence of two weeks duration.The ferret also had a
two-month history of dorsal pruritus. Physical examination revealed a large, painful
bladder that is difficult to express. A radiograph is taken (194).
a What does the radiograph reveal?
b What are your differential diagnoses for stranguria associated with a large bladder
in ferrets?
c What tests would you carry out to diagnose the cause?
d How would you treat the condition?
167
193, 194: Answers
193 Although many of the porcine diseases share similar names as diseases in
domestic pets, never use dog and cat vaccines in pet potbellied pigs. For example,
Bordetella bronchiseptica, one of the bacterial pathogens responsible for kennel
cough in dogs, is a different strain from that which causes atrophic rhinitis in pigs.
There are far more diseases in pigs that have vaccines available than there are for
dogs and cats. However, not all of these diseases need be protected against in the
private or home environment.
Recommendations range from no vaccinations to multiple inoculations. Adapt the
vaccination protocol to the specific pet and its living conditions. Rabies virus vac-
rabies virus vaccination approved for pigs in the UsA. For single pig or isolated
households where there is no exposure of pet pigs to outside pigs, leptospirosis and
erysipelas are considered to be the minimal prophylaxis required. Initially vaccinate
at weaning and boost annually.
Breeder pigs may benefit from vaccinations against porcine parvo virus, as well as
the antidiarrheals, such as collibacillosis, rotavirus, Clostridium perfringins, TGE and
salmonellosis. Vaccinate the breeding sow six weeks prior to parturition.
In commercial or breeder colonies, respiratory disease is a significant problem.
Protect pigs by vaccinating against B. bronchiseptica, Pasteurella multocida types A
and D, Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae and Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae. Start
these vaccinations when the piglet is a week old.
Many companies produce polyvalent products that contain several of the above
vaccines in combination. When using any polyvalent vaccine, always follow label
instructions.
194 a The presence of a large bladder.
b Urinary tract calculi, urinary tract infection, neoplasia and constriction of the
urethral passageway due to diseased prostatic tissue along the urethra caused by
infection, cysts, hyperplasia or cancer. Urethral stricture in male ferrets with adrenal
gland disease is caused by enlargement of the prostatic tissue surrounding the
urethra.
c Collect urine by cystocentesis for urinalysis and bacterial culture and sensitivity
testing. Determine the plasma concentration of adrenal hormones to aid in the
diagnosis of adrenal gland disease. Use abdominal ultrasound to detect the cause of
the enlarged bladder and to detect any adrenal gland enlargement. In this case,
abdominal ultrasound revealed a large right adrenal gland and a swelling along the
urethra just distal to the bladder. Determination of plasma concentration of adrenal
hormones revealed high androstenedione and estrogen which is consistent with
adrenal gland disease in ferrets.
d Initial treatment includes administration of antibiotics and placement of a urinary
catheter and collection system under anesthesia. Once stable, perform an exploratory
laparotomy to remove the enlarged adrenal gland. In this case, the periurethral tissue
was bilaterally swollen just distal to the bladder. Incisional biopsy of the mass
revealed cystic prostatic tissue. No attempt was made to remove this tissue, because
without the presence of infection the swelling dissipates when the adrenal gland is
removed. The ferret recovered uneventfully, and the urinary catheter system was
removed 12 hours after surgery. The prognosis is guarded because prostatic enlarge-
ment may recur.
168
195-197: Questions
195 An adult female macaque develops an ulcerative lesion on her upper lip and
bilateral blepharoconjunctivitis. She aiso has a week-old infant with conjunctivitis
and periorbital lesions consisting of small, flattened blisters.
a What is the most likely etiology of the lesions?
b What are the most common presenting signs of this agent?
c What is the zoonotic significance of this agent?
196
160
160
140
140
120
120
100
100
80
80
60
60
40
40
20
20
Basal
Halothane
Pentobarbitol  Fentanyl/
fluanisone/
midazolam
Arterial pO:
Respiratoryrate
196 This graph shows the changes in arterial oxygen tension and respiratory rate
or fentanyl/fluanisone/midazolam. What do these changes illustrate?
197 An adult rabbit has discolored urine. A complete physical examination and
appropriate clinical pathology is performed and the diagnosis is uncomplicated
bacterial cystitis. A bacterial agent is isolated on urine culture that is sensitive to
trimethoprim/sulfadiazine. There is no improvement despite two weeks of treatment
using an oral trimethoprim/sulfa preparation once daily. What factors may be
ca using the treatment failure?
169
195-197: Answers
195 a The most likely etiologic agent is Herpesvirus simiae (B-virus).
b H. simiae is uncommonly associated with active disease. It is usually an
mild lesions consisting of small oral or mucocutaneous vesicles or ulcers. Also
observed in adult monkeys are disseminated infections or CNS lesions. H. simiae is
activated during pregnancy as evidenced by recovery of virus from genital swabs. H.
simiae disease in the infant macaque consists of ulcerative conjunctivitis, vesiculo-
ulcerative lesions on the face and head, and disseminated lesions in the liver and
adrenal medulla. Histopathologically, this is characterized by necrotic foci with
intranuclear inclusions and meningoencephalomyelitis throughout the brain and
spinalcord.
c H. simiae causes a fatal encephalomyelitis in people. The virus is transmitted to
humans during contact with macaque saliva, genital secretions, blood or mucus.
Virus shedding is intermittent and no clinical signs may be visible at the time of
shedding. But monkeys with this disease are considered infected for life. The most
important aspects of the guidelines for prevention of this disease in people are to
wear protective clothing, and immediately and vigorously cleanse monkey bites or
scratchwounds.
196 The rabbit anesthetized with halothane will almost certainly be receiving
60-100% oxygen as the carrier gas, and so naturally develops a marked elevation of
pO2, despite a reduction in respiratory rate. In contrast, rabbits receiving the
injectable anesthetics show both a fall in respiratory rate and a substantial fall in
pO2. This is due to failure to supplement the animals with oxygen. A common
misconception is that following use of an injected anesthetic, no special measures
need be taken to supply oxygen. Providing oxygen by face mask can be life-saving if
the animal has pre-existing respiratory disease. Although hypercapnia is not
prevented, prevention of hypoxia is of significant benefit.
197 The most common problem is that an inadequate dose and dosage frequency are
used. Smaller species may require a higher dose and more than once daily treatment.
Another problem is client compliance with the treatment regimen. It can be difficult
to administer oral medication to a pet, particularly if it is unpalatable. In addition,
some owners' personal schedules do not allow frequent dosing of medication.
It is necessary to use the appropriate antibiotic as shown on sensitivity testing. In
this case, trimethoprim/sulfadiazine was being used. However, sulfadiazine has been
shown to have a half-life of 40 minutes in some rabbits, and it has an inactive
metabolite. This means that for most of the day the only active antibiotic is
trimethoprim. This illustrates that although metabolic scaling can give a dosing
regime, major variations in the metabolism of an individual drug in a particular
species cannot always be predicted. Monitor all animals regularly during the
treatment period to determine efficacy of treatment and potential dangerous side-
effects. Rabbits and some rodents can develop fatal antibiotic-induced enterocolitis.
170
198, 199: Questions
198 The owner of a five-year-old guinea pig asks that a CBC and serum biochemistry
profile be performed to make sure that the pet is in good health.
a Why is it not appropriate to scruff the guinea pig, as is done with hamsters and
ferrets, to aid in examination?
b Which veins are accessible for venipuncture ?
c How would you collect the blood?
199
199 A gerbil has a large bleeding mass on its ventrum (199). This non-pruritic lesion
has been slowly increasing in size for three weeks. The gerbil is housed in a plastic
cage with wood sha vings for bedding.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What is your prognosis and how would you treat the condition?
c Masses such as these arise from what structure?
d Are there any other dermatological conditions associated with this structure in the
gerbil?
171
198, I99: Answers
198
198 a The guinea pig does not have excess skin over
the nape to allow scruffing. The skin is tightly
attached to the underlying tissues, particularly the
subcutaneous fat pad over the nape of the neck.
Guinea pigs appear to be more sensitive than other
species and exhibit a painful response to scruffing. In
addition, guinea pigs become distressed when they
are placed in dorsal recumbency. When examining
the ventrum of the awake patient, always keep the
head elevated. Some guinea pigs will become so
stressed that they will become unconscious during an
examination or when a diagnostic procedure is
attempted. Always have oxygen available for these
situations and advise the owner of potential under-
lying problems, such as cardiac disease, pulmonary
disease or anemia.
b The cephalic, lateral saphenous, femoral and
jugular veins can be accessed in the guinea pig.
Depending on the condition and co-operation of the
patient, it may be necessary to use sedation to obtain the sample.
c The procedure for bleeding from the cephalic, femoral or lateral saphenous vein is
very similar to that of other species. The photograph (198) shows the lateral
saphenous vein. Hold off the vein manually or with a tourniquet and use a 25-27
gauge needle and insulin syringe to obtain the sample. Once blood is observed in the
hub of the needle, release the pressure on the vein to allow more blood to enter the
area. Use gentle traction on the plunger of the syringe to avoid collapsing the vein.
An alternative method is to use the needle without a syringe attached and allow the
blood to flow directly from the hub into a collecting tube.
Approach the jugular vein with the sedated patient in dorsal recumbency. It is
difficult to palpate the vein due to the thick and muscular neck of the guinea pig. The
jugular vein lies in a furrow running from the thoracic inlet to the base of the ear.
Hold off the vein at the level of the thoracic inlet and use a 22-25 gauge needle
attached to a syringe to draw the blood sample.
199 a This mass is most likely a sebaceous gland adenoma. Sebaceous gland
adenocarcinoma is also a possibility but is found less frequently. Skin neoplasms
usually occur in aged gerbils.
b Sebaceous gland adenoma is a benign neoplasm and carries a good prognosis if
resected fully. The prognosis is guarded to poor for sebaceous gland adenocarcinoma
because metastasis to distant sites and local recurrence is common. Surgical removal
is the only treatment option.
c These masses often arise from the ventral scent gland of the gerbil.
 d The ventral scent gland can become inflamed when rubbed on abrasive surfaces. In
uaaq seq eunei-jias oi supeal puelg juaos aul jo uouoedug suaredde ruoue
reported.
172
200, 201: Questions
200
200 The owner of a pet shop has a six-month-old female ferret with abnormal eyes.
Both eyes appear similar and have been like this since they obtained the animal at 16
weeks of age. The right eye is shown (200).
a What is abnormal about the eye?
b What is your differential diagnosis?
c What causes this defect?
 201 It is necessary to perform thorough physical examinations on pet rabbits.
a How would you restrain a rabbit during a physical examination?
b How would you administer oral and parenteral medications in the rabbit?
173
200, 20l: Answers
200 a The eye is grossly smaller than normal (microphthalmic) and affected by a
bizarrely vacuolated, mature cataract. On close examination, the iris is thicker and
more lacy in appearance than normal. Histopathology demonstrates that the entire
eye is small and that iridal development is arrested. The ciliary body originates from 
the posterior surface of the iris rather than from its normal position posterior to the
iris root and the lens is comprised of large vacuoles and has extruded through the
posterior capsule into the vitreous. The retina is dysplastic in areas where traction
was applied to its surface (such as the peripheral retina near the ciliary body and the
optic nerve hea d).
b A differential diagnosis includes long-standing, lens-induced anterior uveitis and
subsequent phthisis bulbi. The animal's young age, the presence of bizarre vacuoles
in the lens and the lack of inflammation on histopathology indicates that this is a
congenital problem.
c Test breedings over four generations demonstrate this to be an autosomal dominant
trait. Other organ systems are grossly normal but it is unclear whether homozygotes
are viable. The degree of microphthalmia is variable but affected animals have
bilaterally abnormally small eyes. Retinal degeneration also accompanies the
microphthalmia because the retina develops normally until several weeks of age after
birth and then degenerates. To eliminate the disease, do not breed affected animals.
201
201 a A towel wrap is a simple method
of restraint (201). Place the rabbit on the
edge of an appropriately sized towel and
tightly fold up one side, then the back
and finally the second side. Make sure
the feet are tucked inside the wrap. To
keep the rabbit quiet during the wrap-
ping process, place a hand over the rab-
bit's eyes. The rabbit can then be restrain-
ed for examination, medication, and
minor procedures, such as tear duct
flushes, ear cleaning and mouth exam-
inations. A cat restraint bag can be used in a similar manner for larger breeds of
ra bbits.
b Some rabbits can be medicated orally by hiding crushed tablets or liquids in sweet
tasting substances such as apple sauce, fruit juice sweetened jam, molasses and fruit
or vegetable juice. Use the towel wrap to restrain the patient for direct administration
of oral medications or feedings. Some rabbits will take whole tablets if they are
pushed through to the back of the mouth.
Give subcutaneous injections anywhere along the dorsum. Intramuscular injections
are given in heavily muscled areas, such as the quadriceps, semimembranosus, semi-
tendinosus or lumbar muscles. Administer intravenous injections in the cephalic or
lateral saphenous veins. Do not routinely use the auricular artery or vein for
injections beca use of the potential for dermal slough.
174
202, 203: Questions
202 An adult female Virginia opossum is hit by a car and sustains a simple transverse
midshaft tibial fracture. She is in good body condition and has normal mucous
membrane color, but is depressed and has a pouch full of very small babies.
a Should the opossum be handled?
b Can anesthesia be used safely?
c How will you repair the fracture?
203
203 An adult guinea pig developed these lesions gradually over a period of two weeks
{203].
a What is your diagnosis?
b What organisms might be involved in these lesions?
c How would you treat this condition?
d What management changes would you ma ke?
175
202, 203: Answers
202
202 a Use minimal handling until the
patient is stabilized. The patient is not
only a wild animal in pain, but it is also
caring for young. Opossums may reject
their young if subjected to excessive
stress. Obtain a weight and place the
patient in a warmed cage or incubator
well padded with towels. Cover the cage
to allow for privacy. Administer subcu-
taneous fluids and corticosteroids to
 treat shock. Give an injectable antibiotic
if there is evidence of infection, such as
in the case of a open fracture. Use analgesics with caution in nursing mothers. If the
patient is eating and its behavior is normal, analgesics are probably not necessary.
restraint. Use general anesthesia to minimize stress on fractious or aggressive patients
to perform examinations and diagnostic testing.
b Anesthesia can be used safely on the stabilized opossum. Isoflurane is a safe and
effective anesthetic agent. Induce anesthesia with a mask or in an anesthetic chamber
and maintain with a mask or endotracheal tube. Other anesthetics used in this species
include halothane, metofane and ketamine and diazepam. This opossum was
anesthetized with isoflurane the day after admission into the hospital to allow for a
complete physical examination and radiography. She did not reject her young,
although this is a possibility that has to be weighed when considering anesthesia in
nursing mothers of this species.
c Use either internal or external fixation devices based on orthopedic principles. If a
nursing mother undergoes a long surgical procedure there is the potential that she
may reject her young post-surgically. In this animal, a lateral splint was applied
under isoflurane anesthesia (202). Recovery was uneventful. The patient readily
accepted a diet of canned dog food and canine milk substitute. She tolerated once a
day handling and cleaning and continued to nurse her young. The splint was
removed at four weeks when the fracture had healed. One week later she was
returned to the wild with her ten young hanging on her back.
203 a Cheilitis {inflammation of the lips). Lesions are usually limited to the com-
misures of the lips.
b The organism most commonly isolated from these lesions is Stap bylococcus aureus.
However, the pathogenesis of this condition is often multifactorial and a pox virus
has recently been isolated from similar lesions in guinea pigs in the UK. Predisposing
factors in this disease include abrasive foodstuffs or bedding (such as wood chip
bedding and poor quality wheat straw), water bottles with damaged nozzles, dental
disease and hypovitaminosis C. Feeding good quality grass hay is not a risk factor.
c Gently debride the affected areas, culture and then clean with a mild antiseptic
solution. Use topical and systemic antibiotics appropriate for the guinea pig. Treat
any dental disease present.
d Remove predisposing factors. Add half to one cup of dark leafy greens, such as
kale, dandelion greens, mustard greens, beet tops or collard greens, per guinea pig to
provide a natural source of vitamin C. Use additional vitamin C supplementation
176
204, 205: Questions
204 Improper husbandry can contribute to many clinical problems in the rabbit, such
as pododermatitis, respiratory disease and enteritis. What is a suitable environment
for a rabbit?
205
205 This wild European hedgehog is picked up out of the backyard by a concerned
homeowner (205). It has a number of non-pruritic, scaling lesions most prominently
 on the head. The lesions do not fluoresce under a Wood's lamp.
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you confirm this diagnosis?
c What treatment would you recommend for this condition?
d Is there a zoonotic potential for this disease?
177
204, 205: Answers
204
204 The optimal temperature range for
the rabbit is 16-21°C. They may be
housed indoors or outdoors. If housed
outdoors, protect the rabbit from the
elements, extremes in temperature, and
from predators.An appropriate cage size
should average about 0.30 m² per kilo-
gram of body weight. The best cage
material is galvanized wire or stainless
steel. Cages made of wood are destroyed
by chewing and are difficult to disinfect.
Provide flooring that can be kept clean
and dry. Wire mesh floors with 1 x 2.5 cm openings, allow feces and urine to fall
through to a drop pan (204). However, if the spacing of the wire is too wide, foot and
toe injuries can occur. Provide a cloth pad, newspaper or a box filled with bedding in
one area of the cage to give the pet a resting place off the wire. Solid-floored cages can
be used but are more difficult to keep clean. Change bedding such as straw, hay or
pelleted products at least twice a week to prevent feces and urine accumulation.
Rabbits tend to eliminate in one corner of the cage. They can be trained to use a
litter box by placing the box containing an absorbent bedding in preferred areas. Do
not use clay cat litter in the box because some rabbits will ingest this material and
develop a fatal gastric or intestinal impaction. Allow the rabbit a minimum of one to
two hours daily to exercise outside its cage in a supervised area. It is necessary to
'rabbit-proof areas to which the rabbit has access to prevent the destruction of
electrical cords or furniture. Rabbits enjoy a variety of toys as a means of satisfying
their need to chew and to combat boredom. Acceptable toys include untreated straw
mats or baskets, cardboard boxes or tubes, paper bags, untreated wood scraps, hard
plastic baby toys, hard rubber or metal balls containing bells, jar lids and cardboard
 or plastic boxes filled with hay or straw used for digging.
205 a This is a case of ringworm caused by Trichopbyton erinacei.
b Culture a scab from the lesion on dermatophyte test medium. A heavy growth of T.
erinacei is evidence of clinical disease. Other differential diagnoses include
ectoparasites and bacterial skin infection. About 25% of wild hedgehogs of this
species are asymptomatic carriers of T. erinacei.
c Administer griseofulvin (1s-50 mg/kg q 24 hours) for several weeks. For wild
hedgehogs accustomed to feeding from a bowl, advise the homeowner to give the
daily dose of medication in a little food. A chocolate flavored pediatric elixir is
particularly well accepted by hedgehogs. For captive hedgehogs, spray a solution of
enilconazole (Imaverol, Janssen) on the lesions to assist in clearing up the infection
and reduce the infectivity of the hedgehog to others. Use the spray once every 3-4
days for 3-4 applications. This product can also be used to treat the environment.
d Yes. T. erinacei can be transmitted to dogs and humans. In dogs, the lesions appear
on the lips or muzzle either from investigating hedgehogs found while walking or by
eating left-over food from a bowl at which an infected hedgehog has been feeding.
The lesions on humans can be intensely pruritic, but may not resemble classic ring-
worm and therefore not be recognized by a medical practitioner. People working
with wild hedgehogs can contract dermatophytosis without having encountered an
animal with obvious lesions due to the presence of asymptomatic carriers.
178
206-208: Questions
206
206 A rabbit living in an outdoor hutch is constantly shaking its head and scratching
its ears. There is crusting in the external ear canal. On physical examination, the skin
under the crusts is erythematous and moist. The organism shown is found on a
mineral oil scraping of the debris (206).
a What is the organism and is it responsible for the head shaking and ear scratching?
b How would you treat this condition?
207 A four-year-old ferret has increasing episodes of lethargy accompanied by
hypersalivation. On physical examination, no abnormalities are noted. The CBC and
serum biochemistry panel are normal except for a fasting blood glucose of 1.96
mmol/l (35 mg/dl). Radiographs are normal.
a What is your diagnosis?
b What other tests would you perform?
208 An African hedgehog requires anesthesia for removal of a mass on the foot.
Physical examination reveals an otherwise healthy animal.By what methods can
anesthesia be achieved in the hedgehog?
179
206-208: Answers
206 a The rabbit ear mite, Psoroptes cuniculi, which causes inflammation and
crusting in the external ear canal. This condition is sometimes called ‘canker'
Identify Psoroptes mites by their long legs with suckers on a long, jointed stalk on
pairs 1, 2, and 4 in the female and 1, 2, and 3 in the male.
b With ivermectin (0.20-0.40 mg/kg SC) or placed directly into the ear canal over the
lesion at 10-14 day intervals for three doses. The ears do not need to be cleaned
because the ulcerations will heal and the crusts fall out within 10-14 days of the
initial treatment. P. cuniculi causes a less severe form of otic acariasis in horses and
goats.
207 a Insulinoma (pancreatic beta cell tumor) is the most likely diagnosis. This is a
common disease in ferrets over the age of three years. Signs of this disease are related
to hypoglycemia and include intermittent lethargy, hypersalivation, weakness and
pawing at the mouth. Pawing at the mouth and hypersalivation may be indications of
nausea.
b Most ferrets with this disease have normal hematologic and serum biochemistry
parameters except for a lowered fasting blood glucose concentration. Ferrets should
be fasted a minimum of four hours to a maximum of six hours.Normal fasting
glucose concentration range is approximately 5.0-6.7 mmol/l (90-120 mg/dl). It may
be necessary to take more than one fasting sample to demonstrate a lowered blood
glucose concentration. A plasma insulin concentration may help to identify ferrets
with this disease. To interpret the results correctly, each laboratory must validate
their own test for use in ferrets. An inappropriately elevated plasma insulin
concentration in association with a low blood glucose concentration is indicative for
insulinoma. A normal blood insulin concentration does not mean that an insulinoma
is not present. A normal insulin concentration can be seen with a very low blood
glucose concentration in ferrets. Abdominal ultrasonography infrequently detects
pancreatic tumors. The definitive method to diagnose this disease is with exploratory
surgery.
208
208 Isoflurane provides the easiest and
most effective means of achieving anes-
thesia in many situations. Anesthetize
hedgehogs using an induction chamber
with 100% oxygen at an isoflurane
concentration of 3-5% (208). Once
induced, maintain the hedgehog with
either an endotracheal tube or face mask
at an isoflurane concentration of
0.5-3.0%. Although not generally
needed, atropine {0.02-0.04 mg/kg IM,
SC) can be used as a premedication.
Injectable anesthetic agents produce more prolonged and sometimes more difficult
recovery times than inhalant anesthesia. One choice is ketamine (5-20 mg/kg IM)
either alone or with diazepam (0.5-2.0 mg/kg IM). Another combination is
tiletamine/zolazepam (1-5 mg/kg of the combined drug IM). There is a large amount
of subcutaneous fat over the dorsum. Injection into this area can result in
unpredictable absorption
180
209, 210: Questions
209 A four-year-old female
209
guinea pig has a history of five
days of stranguria, hematuria
and lethargy. She is on a diet
 of guinea pig pellets, vitamin C
in the water and alfalfa cubes.
This radiograph of the abdo-
men revealed a 1 x 2 cm min-
eralized density in the urinary
bladder {209). Urinalysis via
cystocentesis is obtained
(below).
Urinalysis
Urine sediment
Color
Red
Epithelial cells
Transitional
Appearance
Opaque
Casts
None
Sp.gravity
1.020
Crystals
Amorphous and
pH
9.0
calcium carbonate
Protein
+5
(moderate amount)
Glucose
Negative
RBC
50-60/HPF
Ketone
Negative
WBC
10-20/HPF
Bilirubin
Negative
Bacteria
Few
Hemoglobin
4+
a What is your diagnosis?
b How would you carry out the surgical treatment of this problem?
c What are the densities most likely composed of?
d What is the prognosis?
210 Two young wild rabbits are found
210
in a suburban backyard (one of them is
shown (210)). They are normal in ap-
pearance with no outward signs of
trauma and their eyes are still closed.
a What advice can you give to the
captor?
b What formula can be used to feed the
 animals and how frequently should they
be fed?
C At what age will they open their eyes?
181
209, 210: Answers
209 a Calculi in the urinary bladder and right distal ureter.
b Exploratory laparotomy is the treatment of choice for this problem. Evaluate renal
function prior to surgery. Palpate the ureters for calculi. Attempts to dislodge a
calculus into the bladder are usually not successful. A ureterotomy may be done to
remove a calculus but postoperatively strictures can occur. If the ureteral calculus has
caused unilateral hydronephrosis, remove the kidney and ureter. Perform a
cystotomy to remove the calculus from the urinary bladder. Exteriorize the bladder
  xae i u i  a s ae   o h d 
bladder and remove the calculi. Culture the bladder wall. Lavage the bladder and
urethra. Close the bladder with S-0 or 6-0 monofilament, absorbable synthetic
suture in a continuous, one or two layer inverting pattern. The bladder wall is very
thin and care should be taken not to place any sutures in the lumen. Lavage the
abdomen and close it with 40 or 5-0 synthetic absorbable suture in a routine
pattern. Use systemic antibiotics that are safe for the guinea pig for at least three
weeks posts urgica lly.
c Most urinary tract calculi in guinea pigs are composed primarily of calcium carbon-
ate. Postsurgical management should be aimed at reducing the calcium in the diet,
ensuring adequate fluid intake and treating any underlying bacterial infections.
 Recommend removal of alfalfa hay and limiting guinea pig pellets, both of which are
high in digestible calcium. Use fresh grass hay instead of alfalfa hay. Use half a cup
daily of a high vitamin C food, such as kale, mustard green, green peppers or
cabbage for vitamin C supplementation. Stop the use of vitamin C in the water which
may cause the patient to drink less due to a bitter taste. Some guinea pigs will drink
more water if it is flavored with fruit juice, such as apple, cherry, pineapple or grape.
Use an antibiotic that is safe for guinea pigs and that is consistent with the culture
and sensitivity results. If no culture was taken or there was no growth, use an anti-
biotic, such as trimethoprim/sulfadiazine {30 mg/kg PO q 12 hours) or enrofloxacin
(10 mg/kg PO q 12 hours) for a minimum of three weeks postsurgically.
d Even with this therapy some guinea pigs will develop urinary tract calculi again,
therefore the prognosis should be guarded in cases of urinary tract calculi. Recom-
mend frequent rechecks with complete urinalysis. Perform periodic abdominal radio-
graphs.
210 a Does spend little time with their young so nests often appear deserted. They
nurse as little as five minutes a day divided between two feedings, usually in the early
morning and early evening hours. Recommend that the young rabbits be returned
immediately to the nest if it has been 24 hours or less since they were removed. They
will not be rejected by their mother due to the odor of humans. Nests can even be
reconstructed without danger of rejection.
b The doe's milk is very high in fat and solids which allows infrequent feedings.
Lamb milk replacer or canine milk substitute is mixed double strength or supple-
reproduce the fat and calorie concentration of the milk, necessitating more frequent
feedings for orphans. Feed with an eyedropper or feeding needle every six hours until
the eyes open. After the eyes open, feed every eight hours. Stimulate urination and
defecation by stroking the perineal area with a moist cotton ball.
c At 10-14 days of age.
182
211, 212: Questions
211
211 This two-year-old female rabbit is bred and 16 days later develops a ventra.
alopecia (211). The rabbit is fed a commercial rabbit pellet along with grass hay and
  a    i     a  s 
one hour daily. The skin appears grossly normal.
a What is the most likely cause of the alopecia?
b How would you make a diagnosis?
c How would you manage the condition?
d What is the reproductive cycle of the female rabbit?
212 A ferret has been diagnosed with adrenal gland disease.
a What treatment would you recommend?
b If the owner elects not to treat this disease, what potential health complications
could occur?
183
211, 212: Answers
211 a Pseudopregnancy or pregnancy. Both pregnant and pseudopregnant rabbits
will pull fur from their ventrum to construct a nest. The hair is pulled out intact and
is not chewed or frayed. Other differential diagnoses to consider for alopecia in the
rabbit include barbaring (either self or by cagemate), malnutrition, ectoparasites,
dermatophytosis, mecha nical due to rubbing, or endocrine.
b By abdominal palpation of the fetuses in the caudal ventral abdomen. In
pseudopregnancy, the uterus may be slightly enlarged. Other signs of pregnancy or
pseudopregnancy that may be seen include mammary gland and nipple development,
increased aggression, nest building, hoarding of “toys" and territorial marking with
urine. The rabbit can be rechecked in a week with a radiograph to determine if
fetuses are present. Pseudopregnancies may last as long as a pregnancy. Perform
other diagnostic tests such as skin scraping, and microbiological culture as needed.
c If the rabbit is pregnant, hair is normally pulled out to make a nest therefore no
treatment is necessary. It does not appear to be helpful to administer hormonal
therapy to shorten the pseudopregnancy period. This is a benign condition that will
resolve without therapy. Perform an ovariohysterectomy on females that are not to
be used for breeding as a permenant cure for repeated pseudopregnancies.
d Does are induced ovulators with no definable estrous cycle. Ova are released within
13 hours of copulation. Periods of receptivity of up to 10 days are controlled by
various factors, such as the photoperiod, ambient temperature and calorie intake.
There are one to two day periods of inactivity when new ovarian follicles replace the
old. Does can be receptive during pregnancy and lactation. There are a variety of
signs of receptivity in the doe, but none are completely reliable in all rabbits. These
signs include hyperemia and swelling of the vulva, increased territorial marking by
chin rubbing or urination and a lordosis response when touched over the rump.
212 a Abdominal exploratory surgery to remove the diseased adrenal gland (see
question191).
 Medical treatment is equivocal. Currently, recommendations are to administer
mitotane for medical treatment. Mitotane decreases the signs of disease in some
ferrets but its effects are usually not permanent. Use this drug with great caution in
ferrets with insulinoma. Mitotane severely decreases the endogenous cortisol pro-
duction such that ferrets with insulinoma can go into a serious hypoglycemic state
and lapse into a coma. Therefore, screen all ferrets for evidence of insulinoma before
instituting mitotane treatment. Use mitotane at 50 mg/kg PO q 24 hours for 7 days
as an induction dose, and then q 2-3 days as a maintenance dose.
b At the least, the ferret may be bald and if it is a female it may have an enlarged
vulva. The alopecia and enlarged vulva may resolve and recur spontaneously over
time. More serious complications include estrogen-induced bone marrow suppression
leading to anemia and pancytopenia. This is a rare complication of prolonged
adrenal gland disease in ferrets but is life threatening. Adrenal gland disease leads to
intense pruritus, although not a health complication, it is a side-effect that is difficult
to control in a ferret. A large adrenal gland, especially right sided, can increase in size
and put pressure on the vena cava. Finally, in male ferrets, a syndrome is recognized
where the prostatic tissue around the urethra near the neck of the bladder increases
in size under the influence of the androgens produced by the diseased adrenal gland.
184
213, 214: Questions
213
213 A four-year-old spayed female ferret progressively loses hair over its dorsum. On
physical examination, the structure shown is observed (213).
a What is the structure?
b Why is this significant in a spayed female ferret?
c What are your differential diagnoses and what tests would you perform to develop
a diagnosis? What is the most likely diagnosis?
214 Inhalant anesthesia is commonly used in ra bbits.
a Which inhalant anesthetics are used most commonly in the rabbit?
b How would you implement inhalant anesthesia in the rabbit?
18.5
213, 214: Answers
213 a A swollen vulva.
b A spayed female ferret should not have a swollen vulva. A swollen vulva is a
natural occurrence in intact female ferrets. It is an outward sign of estrus. A swollen
vulva in a spayed female ferret indicates she is not spayed, had an incomplete spay
 performed, or has endocrine disease present.
C Intact genital tract, ovarian remnants or adrenal gland disease.The differential
diagnoses for alopecia include adrenal gland disease, seasonal hair loss, ectoparasites,
other endocrine diseases and dermatophytosis. Alopecia and a swollen vulva in a
   s   a  a   e e  
abdominal ultrasound may detect an adrenal gland enlargement but frequently shows
no change. Radiographs are usually not useful in this regard. Screening blood tests
do not diagnosis this disease. The results of ACTH stimulation and dexamethasone
suppression tests are normal since this is not Cushing's disease and therefore
adrenal androgens is present with this disease. The best way to diagnose this disease
is to measure androgens such as androstenedione, DHEAS and 17-OH progesterone.
Exploratory surgery may be the only way to make a definitive diagnosis.
214 a Isoflurane or halothane. Advantages of isoflurane anesthesia over the use of
injectable anesthetics include the ability to rapidly change and control the plane of
anesthesia and rapid recovery. Isoflurane is generally less of a cardiovascular
depressant, has a more rapid onset of action and a more rapid elimination time than
halothane. Therefore, isoflurane is preferred over halothane. Because it is less potent
than halothane, a slightly higher concentration of isoflurane is required to reach a
given plane of anesthesia. Inhalant anesthesia disadvantages include the cost of the
agent and the requirement for an anesthetic machine, delivery system and careful
scavenging of waste anesthetic gases. An endotracheal tube allows for control of the
airway, facilitates ventilatory support, reduces environmental contamination with the
inhalant and is preferred to a mask.
b Before inhalant anesthetic induction, animals can be premedicated with a
tranquilizer such as acepromazine (0.1-0.5 mg/kg SC). For gas anesthetic induction,
place the rabbit in a flow-through anesthetic chamber or, in depressed, sedated or
easily restrained animals, use a mask and non-rebreathing circuit. Many rabbits
tolerate chamber inductions well, even without tranquilization. Chamber induction
without tranquilization allows only a short time for placement of the endotracheal
tube before the rabbit wakes up. In non-premedicated rabbits, induction may require
halothane or isoflurane at a concentration of 3-4%. Watch animals closely during
chamber induction to prevent anesthetic overdosage. Minimize the release of
anesthetic gases into the environment when using an induction chamber.
Alternatively, immobilize healthy animals with a combination of either ketamine
and diazepam or ketamine and xylazine. Deepen anesthesia as needed by controlling
the concentration of the inhalant. Isoflurane or halothane concentrations usually
range from 0.5-2.0% depending upon premedications, the condition of the animal
and the stimulus applied. If an endotracheal tube is in place, a small animal ventilator
may be used to support ventilation. Minimize system leaks and properly scavenge
waste anesthetic gases.
186
215, 216: Questions
215
215 This adult male prairie dog exhibits a chronic non-pruritic generalized alopecia
(215). The skin is lichenified with the presence of a few pustules. It lives with two
others in a large dog cage with hay as the bedding material. The two cagemates have
similar skin lesions but are less severely affected.
a What are the most likely causes of this problem?
c What is suitable housing and diet for a pet prairie dog?
 216 The dietary requirements of the captive African hedgehog are still poorly
understood.
b What is an appropriate diet for a pet African hedgehog at our present level of
knowledge?
187
215, 216: Answers
215 a Parasitic or fungal dermatitis with secondary bacterial infection is the most
common ca use of these lesions in prairie dogs.
b Perform skin scrapings, skin biopsies and bacterial and fungal cultures. In this case,
skin scrapings are negative for parasites. Fungal and bacterial cultures reveal heavy
growths of Trichophyton mentagrophytes and Staphlococcus aureus. These animals
were treated successfully with amoxicillin {10 mg/kg PO q 12 hours) for seven days
and griseofulvin (25-50 mg/kg PO q 12 hours) for 10-14 days. The signs were
completely resolved in four weeks. The hay may have been the source of the fungi in
this case. A different bedding material was selected and the problem did not recur.
Prairie dogs are hind gut fermenters with a GI physiology similar to that of guinea
pigs. Although amoxicillin was used successfully in this case, use caution when
selecting antibiotics for this species. There are no clinical studies currently available
that show the safety or efficacy of antibiotics in prairie dogs. Use guidelines for
antibiotic administration as set forth for rabbits. Other appropriate antibiotic choices
would include enrofloxacin or trimethoprim/sulfa preparations.
c Prairie dogs are ground dwelling rodents native to North America. In the wild,
prairie dogs live in large social groups within extensive “towns' consisting of miles of
interconnecting underground burrows. Captive prairie dogs need a large space for
exercise and an area to satisfy their desire to dig. Provide a large sandbox at least
1.2 m deep for supervised exercise. Protect the bottom and sides of outdoor en-
closures with heavy gauge wire mesh or concrete to prevent escape. Provide an
indoor cage at least 1.2 m? with a thick substrate of pelleted bedding, aspen wood
shavings or shredded newspaper. A nestbox filled with hay helps to satisfy the urge
to dig and hide in a dark burrow. Use a metal cage because prairie dogs will quickly
chew through wood.
An appropriate diet for a captive prairie dog consists of unlimited good-quality
grass hay, along with dark leafy greens, small amounts of fruit and other vegetables.
Feeding high calorie treats such as nuts, seeds, grains, sugars and dog or cat food can
result in obesity.
216 a Obesity is the most commonly observed diet-related disease. It can result in
secondary problems, such as lowered fertility rates and poor survivability of
neonates. Other diet-related illnesses include hepatic lipidosis, dental disease, poor
spine and hair condition, heavy scaling of the skin, nutritional secondary
hyperparathyroidism and hypervitaminosis A and D.
b In the wild, hedgehogs feed on a wide variety of insects, small animals, fruits and
vegetables. In captivity, maintain an average adult hedgehog on a daily diet
consisting of 25 g of dry reduced-calorie cat food or mixture of dry and canned food,
and 10 g of mixed fresh or thawed frozen vegetables. Three to four times per week,
add 5 g (3-5 insects) of live crickets or mealworms. Since hedgehogs can easily
  m      i  o 
adjust the amount fed appropriately. Feeding light or reduced-calorie cat food helps
to maintain the animal's weight without compromising the nutritional quality of the
diet. Live insects provide variety and behavioral enrichment for hedgehogs. Exercise
is vitally important for the hedgehog species kept in captivity. Provide a large area in
which the pet can exercise. Alternatively, use a large exercise wheel with a piece of
wire or plastic mesh fited on to the inner surface to prevent the feet from slipping
through and to provide traction.
188
assit1cation of
 cases
Chinchilla 27,36,71,77,87,141,158
Capuchin 73
182
Macaque 73, 150,183,195
Ferret 5,25,30,33,42,54,56,68,74,
Marmoset 32,67,73, 129
75,89,93,96,102,103,116,117,
Owl monkey 41
137,155,157,162,164,165,166,
Patas monkey 73
191,194,200,207,212,213
Spider monkey 67, 107
Fox, red 106
Squirrel monkey 47, 73, 114
Gerbil 39, 49,52, 80, 199
Tamarin 32,67,73
Guinea pig 7, 8, 10,14,20, 21, 22,35,
cotton-top 175
51,58,65,80,87,100,149,156,
golden lion 32
163,168,169,172,173,176,189,
Rabbit 2,3,6,15, 16,17,23, 28, 31,
198,203,209
37,40, 43, 45,48, 53, 55,57,62, 66,
Hamster 39, 59,80,108,115,119, 127,
70,72,79,83,85,88,90,91,97,98,
128,145,148,168,177,180,187
101, 104, 105,109, 113,121,124,
Hedgehog
125,126,131,133,136,142,143,
African 1, 11, 63, 147, 170, 179,
144,146,152,153,154,159,160,
208,216
161,167,171,172,178,181,186,
European 60, 81,94, 132, 192, 205
188, 190, 196,197, 201, 204,206,
Mouse 12, 20,24,26, 32,39, 50, 76,
210, 211,214
99,110,112,122,123,168,180
Racc0on 104, 111, 138, 139
Opossum 78, 135, 202
Rat 20,29,39,44,64,84,95,110,120,
Pig, potbellied 34, 38, 46, 61, 184, 193
130,134,140,168,174,180,185
Prairie dog 215
Rodent, general 18,39, 110, 125, 168,
Primates 13,67,73,82,86,92
180, 190
Apes, Great 67,73, 86
Skunk 9
Baboon 73
Squirrel 4,19,78,138,151
Abbreviations
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
I0
Intraosseous
BUN
Blood urea nitrogen
IP
Intraperitoneal
CAR
Cilia associated respiratory
iu
 International unit
CBC
Complete blood count
IV
Intravenous
CNS
Central nervous system
MCV
Mean corpuscular volume
CT
Computerized tomography
MRI
 Magnetic resonance imaging
ELISA
 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
PCV
Packed cell volume
assay
PO
Per os (by mouth)
Fr
French
b
Every
GI
Gastrointestinal
RBC
Red blood cell
GnRH
Gonadotropin releasing hormone
URI
 Upper respiratory infection
HCG
Human chorionic gondaotropin
SDAV
Sialodacryoadenitis virus
ID
Internal diameter
SC
Subcutaneous
IFA
Immunoflourescent antibody
WBC
White blood cell
IM
Intramuscular
189
All references are to question and answer
Chorioptes 63
numbers
Conjunctivitis 171, 195
Cortic0steroids 48, 116, 144, 156, 157,
Abscess 72,80,93,128,130
202
Acepromazine 38,154,180,214
Corynebacterium kutscheri 130
Adrenal gland disease 117, 177, 191,
Crenosoma striatum 192
194,212, 213
Cystitis 22,59,113,197
Alopecia {hair loss) 14,26, 51, 54,85,
Cystotomy 22,45,209
106,108,117,134,141,148,149,
167,177,191,211,212,213,215
Dacryocystitis 146, 171
Amoxicillin 74,93,103,192,215
Demodex mites 34, 52,108,177
Analgesics 21, 38,47, 53, 188
Dental disorders 16,17,21,59,87,90,
Anal gland 93
91,92, 110, 119, 125, 132,142, 143,
Anatomy 27, 31, 77,80, 109,121, 126,
179
133,172,186, 187
Dental formulae 77, 87, 90, 110, 119,
Anemia 2,101,111,117,183
132
Anesthesia 3,11,12,18,23,38,64,65,
Dermatitis 26, 34,49, 52,63,85, 94,
67,69,81,93,99,118,140,154,
106,108,141, 146,149,151, 167,
170,180,190, 196,202,208,214
205,215
Antibiotics, considerations for the use of
Dermatophytosis 94,108,112, 134,
7,120, 128, 130, 185, 197,202, 215
141,167,205, 215
Aspisculuris tetraptera76
Diarrhea 7,8,10, 30, 59, 60,71,92,
Atropine 38,154,180,208
102,103,111,114,116,128,153,
175
Balantidiumcaviae10
Diazepam 154,180, 208, 214
Barbering 134, 141, 211
Diazoxide 157
Barbiturates 154
Diet 8,19,22,27,31,40,47,58,90,
Baylisascaris procyonis 104, 111, 138
91,100, 124, 129,135,148, 157,
Bismuth subsalicylate 92, 103
161,163,179,202,209,210,215,
Blood collection, see Venipuncture
216
Blood volume 5, 84
Diphenhydramine hydrochloride 116
Bulla osteotomy 62
Dirofilaria immitis 166
Buprenorphine 21,38,53,188
Distemper virus, canine 42,116,137,
Butorphanol 3,21, 38, 53, 188
139, 162
Calcium metabolism 19, 40
Ear tip ischemic necrosis 181
Caparina triplis94
Ectoparasites (see also specific parasites)
Capillaria aerophilia 192
14,26,34,52,63,85,94,106,108,
Cardiac disease 1, 56, 166
122,134,136,141, 149,177,206
Castration 57,61, 168
Eimeria spp. 153
Cataracts 83, 95, 123, 165,200
Endoparasites (see also specific parasites)
Catheterization {IV, IO) 5, 11, 48
10,71,76,104,111,114, 138, 145,
Cheilitis 203
153,166,192
Cheyletiella parasitivorax 85
Endotracheal intubation 15, 38, 65, 178
Chloramphenicol 7, 120, 128, 130, 173
Enilconazole 205
190
Enrofloxacin 2,7,8,59,74,98,103,
Hypoglycemia, see Insulinoma
105,120,128,130,173,209
Hypovitaminosis C 21, 47, 58, 100,
Enteritis 7,59,60,103,111,124
163,183
Enucleation 6, 152
Epinephrine 116
Injections 68,170,201
Ether, use of 140
Insecticides 14,26,85,122,136
Eye disease, see Ocular disorders
Insulinoma 96,157, 164, 207, 212
Eye,fundus 78, 172
Intraperitoneal {IP) anesthesia 69
Isoflurane 23,38,69,72,81,180,202,
Fenbendazole 71,138
208,214
Fentanyl mixtures 3
Ivermectin 14,26,34,52,63,85,94,
Fibroma, squirrel (poxvirus) 151
106,108,122,149,166,192,206
Flank gland 80
Flunixin meglumine 53, 188
Ketamine 18,38,64,67,81,118,123,
Fractures 4,19,36,41,53,66,132,
154, 180, 190,208,214
184, 202
Kurloff body 189
Furosemide 48, 56, 173, 192
Lameness 163, 184
Gastrointestinal{GI} tract 7, 30, 31, S9,
Lavage S5
102,124,126,160, 161,162,175,
 Levamisole hydrochloride
192
185,186,187,215
Listrophorus gibbus 136
Gestation periods 109, 127
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
Giardia spp. 71, 114
(LCMV) 32
Gliricolla porcelli 14, 51
Lymphoma 30,75,103
Gona dotropin releasing hormone
(GnRH) 117
Mammary tumors 20, 84
Griseofulvin 108,167,205,215
Mast cell tumors 25, 54
Hair loss, see Alopecia
Mebendazole 138
Halothane 23,38,180, 196, 214
Medetomidine 118, 190
Handling techniques, see Restraint
Metabolic bone disease 19, 129, 135
techniques
Metronidazole 8, 71, 114
Harderian gland inflammation 44, 49
Mitotane 117,212
Heart disease, see Cardiac disorders
Morphine 188
Helicobacter mustelae 30
Mycoplasma pulmonis 120, 130
Heparin 166
Myocoptes musculinus 26,122
Hepatitis, callitrichid 32
Myobia musculi 26, 122
Herpesvirus simiae (herpes B virus)
Myxomatosis 98
infection 150, 195
Housing, see Hus bandry
Nalbuphine 188
Human chorionic gona dotropin (HCG)
Nasoesophageal tube, in rabbits S5
117
Nasolacrimal duct 77, 146
Husbandry 27,29,44,49,50,73,109,
Neoplastic disease (see also specific
127,172,204,210,215
disorders) 1, 20, 25, 30, 54, 75,84,
see also Diet
93,101,103,113,121,131, 175,
Hymenolepis nana 145
189, 199
Hyperestrogenism 51, 117
Neurologic disorders 48, 62, 66, 81,
Hyperpa rathyroidism, nutritional
104, 105,138,162
secondary 19,129,135
Notoedres spp. 24, 94
191
Nutrition, see Diet
Splenomegaly 1, 89, 155
Staphylococcus aureus 72,128,203, 215
Ocular disease 6, 21, 37,43, 44,49, 64.
Syphaciaobvelata76
77,83,95,123,144,146,152,165,
171, 195, 200
Tetracycline 120, 128, 130
Otitis 62,206
Thiacetarsamide sodium 166
Ovariectomy 24, 174
Tiletamine/zolazepam 67, 154, 208
Ovaries, cystic 51, 189
Torticollis 48,62, 104, 105, 138
Ovariohysterectomy 20, 35, 46, 101,
Treponema cuniculi (rabbit syphilis)70
113,117,121, 131, 169, 189
Trichobezoar 160
Oxytetracycline 120, 130
Trichophyton spp. 26, 51,94, 108,
112,167,205,215
Pain 21,53,188
Trimethoprim/sulfadiazine 92,93, 105,
Paralysis 66, 81,159,164
197, 209
Parvovirus, raccoon 111
Trixacarus caviae 51,149
Pasteurella multocida 6,43,72, 105
Tuberculosis testing 82, 150
146, 152
Tylosin 120, 130
Penicillin 70, 105
Perineum 7,58,59,93,128,131,159
Ulcer, oral, in non-human primates 195
Pododermatitis 7,28, 176
Urinary tract disorders 2, 22,45, 113,
Porphyrin pigments 44, 49, 113
159, 169,194,197,209
Praziquantel 145
Urolithiasis 22,45,209
Prednisolone 116,166
Uterine disorders 35,51,101,113,121,
Prednisone 157
131, 169
Pregnancy 88, 109, 127,211
Premedication 38,154, 214
Vaccination, anaphylaxis 116
Pruritus 14,26,94, 112, 122, 149, 167,
Vaccination, canine distemper virus 42,
177,191
116, 137
Psoroptes cuniculi 206
Vaccination, poliomyelitis virus 86
Pyrantel pamoate 138
Vaccination, potbellied pig 193
Vaccination, rabies 9, 42, 116
Rabies 9,42,116,139
Rectal prolapse 59, 60
Vaccination, tetanus 86, 150
Vasectomy 168
Renal disorders, in rabbits 2, 113, 159
Venipuncture 5, 11,13, 39,97,182,198
Reproduction 46,109, 127,211
Vitamin C 8,21,22,47,58,87,92,100,
Reproductive disorders 35, 51, 70, 88,
101, 113,131, 156, 169,189,211
163,173,183,203,209
Respiratory disorders 44, 56, 74, 105,
Vitamin D 40,129, 148
120,130,139,162,173,192
Restraint techniques 21, 68, 79, 107,
Wet tail 59
115,158,170, 198, 201
Ringtail 29
Xylazine 22, 38, 64,123, 154, 180,
190, 214
Salivary mucocele 33
Salmonellosis 60, 147
Zoonotic diseases 9,26,32, 34,60, 71,
Sarcoptes spp. 26,34, 94, 106, 149
85,92,106,108, 111,112,114, 138,
Scent glands 80, 199
139,145,147,149, 150, 167,195,
SDAV 44
205, 215
192