Duncan
ePrasse's
Veterinary
LaboratoryMedicine
CLINICAI
PATHOLOGY
FIFTH
EDITION
Kenneth S. Latimer
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
DUNCAN&PRASSE'S
VETERINARYLABORATORYMEDICINE:
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY
FifthEdition
Companion website
This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/latimer
The website includes:
· All images from the book for downloading in PowerPoint
· All references hyperlinked to PubMed
DUNCAN &PRASSE'S
VETERINARYLABORATORYMEDICINE:
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY
FifthEdition
KENNETH S. LATIMER
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition frst published 201l @ 201l by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Previous editions @ 1977, 1986, 1994, 2003 Iowa State University Press
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific, Technical and
Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered offce: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offices:
 212l State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 500l4-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, POl9 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxlord, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, Ior customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to
reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use ol specihc clients, is granted
by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base Iee is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system
978-0-8138-2014-9/2011.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and
product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective
owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed
to provide accurate and authoritative inlormation in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding
that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. I prolessional advice or other expert assstance is
required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Duncan & Prasse's veterinary laboratory medicine : clinical pathology / edited by] Kenneth S. Latimer. - 5th ed.
p. ; cm.
Duncan and Prasse's veterinary laboratory medicine
Veterinary laboratory medicine
Rev. ed. of: Duncan & Prasse's veterinary laboratory medicine / Kenneth S. Latimer, Edward a. Mahafley
Keith W. Prasse. 4th ed. 2003
Includes bibliographical relerences and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-2014-9 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary clinical pathology 1. Latimer,
Kenneth S. Il. Duncan, J Robert. III Latimer, Kenneth S. Duncan & Prasse's veterinary Jaboratory
medicine. IV Title: Duncan and Prasse's veterinary laboratory medicine. V Title: Veterinary laboratory medicine.
[DNLM: 1. Pathology, Veterinary-Outlines. 2. Pathology Clinical-Outlines. SF 772.6]
SF772.6.D86 2011
636.089'607-dc22
2010049553
A catalogue record for this book is available Irom the British Library.
Set in 9.5/ll.5 pt Berkeley by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness ol the
contents of this work and specihcally disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of ftness for a
particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies
contained herein may not be suitable Ior every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is
not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other prolessional services. If prolessional assistance is required, the
services of a competent prolessional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for
potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the
organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet
Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
1 2011
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
VIl
PREFACE
IX
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS XI
Chapter l.
ERYTHROCYTES
CHAPTeR 2.
LEUKOCYTES 45
CHaPTer 3.
HEMATOPOIETICNEOPLASIA
83
CHaPTer 4.
HEMOSTASIS
107
CHAPTER 5.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
145
CHAPTER 6.
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATES
173
ChaPter 7.
LIVER
211
CHAPTER 8.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
231
CHAPTER 9.
URINARY SYSTEM
253
ChaPTeR 10.
MusCLE
283
Chapter ll.
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
295
ChaPTer 12.
CYTOLOGY 331
ChaPter 13.
GENERatiNG AND INTerpRetiNG Test ResulTs: TeSt VauDIty, QualIty CONTrOL,
REFERENCE VALWES, AND BASIC EPIDEMIOLOGY 365
CASE STUDIES
383
INDEX 475
Companion website
 This book is accompanied by a companion website:
www.wiley.com/go/latimer
The website includes:
· All images from the book for downloading in PowerPoint
· All references hyperlinked to PubMed
CONTRIBUTINGAUTHORS
Perry J. Bain, DVM, PhD
Charles W. Brockus, DVM, PhD
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Pathologists
Internal Medicine
 Assistant Professor
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
 Department of Biomedical Sciences
Pathologists
 Large Animal Hospital
Charles River
 Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine at
Reno, NV 89511
Tufts University
North Grafton, MA 0l536
Ellen W. Evans, DVM, PhD
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Holly S. Bender, DVM, PhD
Pathologists
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Senior Director, Immunotoxicology Center of
Pathologists
Emphasis
 Professor
Pfizer, Inc.
 Department of Veterinary Pathology
Groton, CT 06340
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Iowa State University
Duncan C. Ferguson, VMD, PhD
Ames, 1A 50011
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
 Internal Medicine
Dorothee Bienzle, DVM, MSc, PhD
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Clinical Pharmacology
 Pathologists
Professor and Head
 Professor and Canada Research Chair in
Department of Veterinary Biosciences
Veterinary Pathology
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Pathobiology
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
 Ontario Veterinary College
Urbana, IL 61802
University of Guelph
Guelph, Ontario, Canada NlG 2Wl
Jeanne W. George, DVM, PhD
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Mary K. Boudreaux, DVM, PhD
Pathologists
Professor
Professor Emeritus
 Department of Pathobiology
 Department of Pathology, Microbiology and
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Immunology
Auburn University, AL 36849
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California-Davis
Denise I. Bounous, DVM, PhD
Davis, CA 95616
Medical Technologist (American Society of
Clinical Pathologists)
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Pathologists
Group Director, Drug Safety Evaluation
 Bristol-Myers Squibb
Princeton, NJ 08543
vii
vili
CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
Christopher R. Gregory, DVM, PhD
Elizabeth A. Spangler, DVM, PhD
Medical Technologist (American Society of
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Clinical Pathologists)
Pathologists
Associate Research Scientist
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Department of Small Animal Medicine
Internal Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Assistant Professor
The University of Georgia
 Department of Pathobiology
Athens, GA 30602
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University, AL 36849
Robert L. Hall, DVM, PhD
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Heather L. Tarpley, DVM
Pathologists
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Covance Laboratories, Ine.
Pathologists
Madison, W1 53704
Chestatee Animal Hospital
Dahlonega, GA 30533
Margarethe Hoenig, Dr med vet, PhD
Professor
Niraj K. Tripathi, BVScAH, MVSc, PhD
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
College of Veterinary Medicine
Pathologists
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Covance Laboratories, Inc.
Urbana, IL 61802
Madison, W1 53704
Paula M. Krimer, DVM, DVSc
Julie L. Webb, DVM
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Pathologists
Pathologists
Assistant Professor
Instructor
 Athens Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Department of Pathobiological Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Georgia
University of Wisconsin
Athens, GA 30602
Madison, W1 53706
Kenneth S. Latimer, DVM, PhD
Elizabeth G. Welles, DVM, PhD
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Pathologists
Pathologists
Covance Laboratories, Inc.
Professor
Vienna, VA 22182
 Department of Pathobiology
and
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Professor Emeritus
Auburn University
 Department of Pathology
Auburn, AL 36849
College of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Georgia
Shanon M. Zabolotzky, DVM
Athens, GA 30602
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
Pathologists
Pauline M. Rakich, DVM, PhD
Clinical Pathologist
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary
IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.
Pathologists
West Sacramento, CA 95605
Professor
 Athens Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
College of Veterinary Medicine
The University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602
PREFACE
The publication of the fifth edition of Duncan & Prasses Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical
 Pathology represents a collation and distillation of educational information about veterinary clinical
pathology that spans almost 40 years. Prior to retirement, Drs. Duncan and Prasse (Figure 1)
established a legacy of excellence in teaching, diagnostic service, and applied research in veterinary
clinical pathology that endures to the present day.
This textbook has evolved along with the specialty of veterinary clinical pathology. Since the initial
American College of Veterinary Pathologists (ACVP) certification of Drs. Duncan and Prasse in clinical
pathology, some of the new authors of this text now represent the third generation of veterinary
clinical pathologists. General authorship also has continued to expand and the expertise of all
coauthors has added a new dimension and considerable depth to the fifth edition of this textbook.
Hopefully, a new editor will continue this legacy in the future to educate another generation of
veterinary students, interns, residents, clinicians, and practitioners in the science, art, and practice of
interpreting laboratory data.
                 
Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine.
ix
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This fifth edition of edition of Duncan & Prasses Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical Pathology
would not have been possible without the assistance of several new and many repeat authors. Their
professional contributions to this textbook are gratefully acknowledged and will have a positive impact
on patient diagnostics and care. I would also like to recognize colleagues, clinical and anatomic
pathology residents, veterinary students, and practicing veterinarians who have continued to provide
the professional feedback that has improved the revision of this textbook. Kip Carter, MS, CMl, at The
          i   
Nancy Turner, and the production staff at Wiley-Blackwell provided the professional assistance that
was essential for the timely printing of this new edition. With the completion of this project, I can
once again enjoy life with the whippets at home, in the show ring, and on the lure coursing field.
    e     (    
Photography, Knoxville, IN.
DUNCAN&PRASSE'S
VETERINARYLABORATORYMEDICINE:
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY
FifthEdition
ChApter
ERYTHROCYTES
Charles W. Brockus, DVM, PhD
BASIC CONCEPTS OF ERYTHROCYTE FUNCTION, METABOLISM, PRODUCTION, AND
BREAKDOWN
1. THE ERYTHRON
A. This widely dispersed mass of erythroid cells includes circulating erythrocytes and bone marrow
 precursor, progenitor, and stem cells.
B. Its function is oxygen transport, which is mediated by hemoglobin.
C. Hemoglobin is transported in erythrocytes whose membrane, shape, cytoskeleton, and metabolic
processes ensure survival of the cell against the stresses of circulation and various injurious substances.
D. Hemoglobin consists of heme and globin, and each complete hemoglobin molecule is a tetramer.
1. Each heme moiety contains an iron atom in the 2* valence state (Fet).
2. A globin chain of specific amino acid sequence is attached to each heme group.
3. The complete hemoglobin molecule is a tetramer, containing four heme units and four globin
chains. The globin chains are identical pairs (dimers), designated as C-chains or &-chains.
Il. HEME SYNTHESIS
A. Heme synthesis is unidirectional and irreversible. It is controlled at the first step by the enzyme
 8-aminolevulinic acid synthase, whose synthesis is controlled by negative feedback from heme
concentration within the erythrocyte.
1. Lead inhibits most of the steps in heme synthesis to some degree. Lead also inhibits the delivery
of iron to the site of ferrochelatase activity.
2. Chloramphenicol may inhibit heme synthesis.
B. Porphyrins and their precursors are the intermediates of heme biosynthesis.
1. Certain enzyme deficiencies in the synthetic pathway can lead to excessive accumulation of
porphyrins and their precursors.
2.1
 These excesses of porphyrins and their precursors are called porphyrias.
3. Porphyrias vary in the intermediate products that accumulate and in their clinical
manifestations.
4. These excess porphyrins escape the erythrocyte and may be deposited in the tissues or excreted
in the urine and other body fluids.
C. After formation of protoporphyrin, iron is inserted into the molecule by ferrochelatase, and heme is
formed.
4
CHAPTER 1
Ill. GLobin SYNTheSiS
A. Each hemoglobin molecule is comprised of four globin chains, each of which binds to a heme group.
1. The hemoglobin type depends on the type of globin chains, which are determined by amino
acid sequences.
a. Embryonic, fetal, and adult hemoglobins are found in various animals.
b. The presence and number of each hemoglobin type vary with the species.
2. Heme and globin synthesis are balanced (increase in one results in an increase in the other).
B. Abnormalities in globin synthesis (i.e., hemoglobinopathies) have not been described in domestic
animals.
Iv. IroN MetabolisM
Body iron metabolism/content is based on an extrermely efficient system of conservation and recycling
that is regulated by the rate of duodenal absorption rather than excretion. Hepcidin is a recently
identified 25 amino acid peptide (bioactive form) produced within the liver and transported within the
blood by α-2-macroglobulin. It has been found to play a key role in mediation of iron metabolism. In
short, increased hepcidin is accompanied by a decrease in iron availability, whereas decreased Hepcidin
is associated with an increase in iron availability. Hepcidin is a component of the type II acute phase
response induced by interleukin-6 and controls plasma iron concentration by inhibiting iron export by
ferroportin from enterocytes and macrophages. Absorption is regulated by the amount of storage iron
(large iron stores decrease absorption) and rate of erythropoiesis (accelerated erythropoiesis increases
absorption). Less than 0.05% of the total body iron is acquired or lost each day.
A. Iron is transported in blood bound to the &globulin, transferrin.
1. Iron bound to transferrin is measured as serum iron (Sl). This is an unreliable measure of total
body iron stores.
a. Conditions with decreased SI
(1) Iron deficiency
(2) Acute and chronic inflammation or disease (including anemia of inflammatory disease)
(3) Hypoproteinemia
(4) Hypothyroidism
(5) Renal disease
b. Conditions with increased SI
(1) Hemolytic anemia
(2) Accidental lysis of erythrocytes during sampling (hemolysis)
(3) Glucocorticoid excess in the dog and horse. In contrast, SI is decreased in cattle with
glucocorticoid excess.
(4) Iron overload, which may be an acquired (e.g., iron toxicity) or hereditary (e.g.,
hemochromatosis in Salers cattle) condition. Iron overload in some birds (e.g., mynahs and
toucans) also may be hereditary
(5) Nonregenerative anemia
C. SI can be expressed as a percentage of total iron-binding capacity (TIBC, see below) and
reported as the perrent saturation.
2. TIBC is an indirect measurement of the amount of iron that transferrin will bind. An
immunologic method is available to quantitate transferrin, but is not used commonly
a. Only one-third of transferrin binding sites usually are occupied by iron. This is expressed as
percent saturation.
b. TIBC is increased in iron deficiency in most species except the dog.
ERYTHROCYTES
+
3. Transferrin can bind more iron than is normally present. Therefore, the numeric difference
between TIBC and SI is the amount of iron-binding capacity remaining on transferrin or the
unbound iron-binding capacity (UIBC).
B. Hepcidin has been found to be the main regulator of iron homeostasis; it is produced in the liver
and acts systemically in iron overloading (increased) or in response to anemia or hypoxia (decreased).
Hephaestin (an intestinal ceruloplasmin analog) and ceruloplasmin (synthesized in the liver) are both
copper-containing proteins involved in iron transport. Ceruloplasmin also is an acute phase
inflammatory reactant. Ferroportin l and divalent metal transporter l (DMTl) are necessary for
transfer of iron from intestinal epithelium and macrophages to serum transferrin. Hepcidin induces the
internalization and degradation of ferroportin, thereby inhibiting iron transport.
C. Iron is incorporated into hemoglobin during the last step of heme synthesis. Lack of intracellular
iron causes an increase in erythrocyte protoporphyrin concentration.
D. Iron is stored in macrophages as ferritin and hemosiderin
E. Ferritin is a water-soluble iron-protein complex
1. Ferritin is the more labile storage form of iron.
2. Small amounts circulate that can be measured as serum ferritin, which is an indirect
measurement of the storage iron pool. A species-specific immunoassay is required.
a. Serum ferritin concentration is decreased in iron deficiency
b. Serum ferritin concentration is increased in the following:
(1) Hemolytic anemia
(2) Iron overload
(3) Acute and chronic inflammation
(4) Liver disease
(5) Some neoplastic disorders (e.g., lymphoma, malignant histiocytosis)
(6) Malnutrition (cattle)
F. Hemosiderin is a more stable, but less available, storage form of iron that is comprised of native
and denatured ferritin and protein. It is not water-soluble and is stainable within tissues by Perl's or
 Prussian blue techniques.
G. Abnormalities in serum iron are related to absorptive fAilures, nutritional deficiencies, iron loss via
 hemorrhage, and aberrant iron metabolism with diversion to macrophages at the expense of
hematopoietic cells (which occurs in chronic disease processes and inflammation).
V. Erythrocyte MetabolisM
Metabolism is limited after the reticulocyte stage because mature erythrocytes lack mitochondria for
oxidative metabolism. Biochemical pathways found in mature erythrocytes are listed in Figure 1.1 with
their functions and associated abnormalities.
A. Embden-Meyerhof pathway
 d H p ()  a  sioa d  s a 1
essential for membrane function and integrity, whereas NADH is used to reduce methemoglobin.
d  (    d  i sa  
(PFK). Enzyme defciencies in this pathway can lead to hemolytic anemia (e.g., PK and PFK
deficiency anemias of dogs).
3. PK deficiency impairs ATP production, resulting in a macrocytic hypochromic anemia with 15%
to 50% reticulocytes, myelofibrosis, hemochromatosis, decreased erythrocyte lifespan, and
accumulation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) and 2,3 diphosphoglyceric acid (DPG). PK deficiency
Dog, Miniature Poodle, Pug, Chihuahua, and Beagle) and cats (Abyssinian and Somali).
O2
O2+O+2H
HO2
211O
SOD
GPx
HSO
GSSG
GR
 Pentose Phosphate Pathway
NADP
NADPH
Glucose
G-6-P
6PG
IIK
G6PD
NADP
IMB
ATP
GPI 
ADP
6PGD
NADPH-D
NADPH-
MB
F-6-P
Pathway
ATP
+CO2
PFK
TK--TA
Pentose PO4
ADP
▼
FDP
Aldolase
Meyerhof
TP1
DHAP
G3P
NAD + Pi 4-
Hh Fe+2
GAPD
NADH
Hb Fe+3
1,3-DPG
DPGM
2ADP
Methemoglobin Rcduction
—
Pathway
2,3-DPG
PGK
mbde
DPGP
Rapoport-Luebering Cycle
ATP
E
3PG
Pi
PGM
2ADP 2ATP
HK - Hexokinase
▼
GPI - Glucose phosphatc isomcrasc
PK
2PG
PEP
Pyruvate
PFK - Phosphofructokinase
Enolase
TPI - Triosephosphate isomerase
LDH
PGK - Phosphoglycerate kinase
NADH
GAPD -Giyceraldchydc phosphatc dchydrogcnasc
PGM - Phosphoglyceromutase
Lactate
NAD
PK - Pyruvate kinasc
LDH -Lactate dehydrogenase
CR - Glulathione reductase
G6PDGlucose-6-phosphale dehydrogenase
6PGD-6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase
TK-Transketolase
TA-Transaldolasc
DPGM -2,3-DPG phosphate
SOD- Supcroxidc disnutasc
GPx - Ghutathionc pcroxidasc
protect from oxidative injury.
ERYTHROCYTES
4. PFK deficiency results in decreased erythrocytic 2,3 DPG concentration, hematocrit (Het) that is
within the reference interval or decreased, persistent reticulocytosis, and alkalemia leading to
  s   sp   s n a  i
and some mixed-breed dogs).
B. Pentose phosphate pathway (Hexose-monophosphate pathway)
1. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is the rate-limiting enzyme in this anaerobic pathway
2. This pathway produces NADPH, which is a major reducing agent in the erythrocyte. NADPH
serves as a co-factor for the reduction of oxidized glutathione. Reduced glutathione neutralizes
oxidants that can denature hemoglobin.
3. A deficiency or defect in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase results in hemolytic anemia under
conditions of mild oxidative stress (e.g., glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in the horse
with eccentrocytes and Heinz bodies).
C. Methemoglobin reductase pathway
1. Hemoglobin is maintained in the reduced state (i.e., oxyhemoglobin; Fe't) necessary for
transport of oxygen by this pathway.
2. Enzyme deficiency results in methemoglobin accumulation. Methemoglobin (Fe?t) cannot
the blood and mucous membranes may appear brown.
3. NADH and NADPH methemoglobin reductases also are present. The former predominates in
normal conditions and the latter is activated by redox dyes (e.g., methylene blue).
4. Methemoglobin reductase deficiency results in cyanosis, methemoglobinemia, pO2 within the
reference interval, and exercise intolerance. This deficiency has been reported in dogs (American
Eskimo Dog, Poodle, Cocker Spaniel-Poodle cross, Chihuahua, and Borzoi).
D. Rapoport-Luebering pathway
1. This pathway allows formation of 2,3 diphosphoglycerate (2,3 DPG), which has a regulatory
role in oxygen transport. Increased 2,3 DPG favors oxygen release to tissues by lowering the
Oxygen affinity of hemoglobin.
2. Depending upon the species, some anemic animals usually have increased 2,3 DPG
 concentrations and deliver more oxygen to tissues with a lesser amount of hemoglobin (a
compensatory mechanism)
3. Animal erythrocytes vary in the concentration of 2,3 DPG and its reactivity with hemoglobin.
Dog, horse, and pig erythrocytes have high concentrations and reactivity, whereas cat and ruminant
erythrocytes have low concentrations and reactivity
Vl. ErYTHrokINETIcS
A. Stem cells, progenitor cells, and precursor cells (Figure 1.2)
1. Pluripotential and multipotential stem cells (CFU-GEMM or CD34+ cells)
a. These cells have the capacity for self-renewal and differentiate into progenitor cells.
b. Differentiation is controlled by growth-promoting stimuli produced by marrow stromal cells.
A variety of growth factors and cytokines are involved (SCF, IL-3, IL-9, IL-1l, and
erythropoietin).
c. When a stem cell differentiates, it loses some of its ability to self-replicate and also loses
 some of its potentiality.
2. Progenitor cells
a. Some early progenitor cells have the capability of differentiating into more than one cell line
(e.g., CFU-GEMM has the potential to differentiate into granulocytes, erythrocytes, monocytes, or
megakaryocytes).
T lymphocyte
Pluripotential
Lymphoid
stem cell
stem cell
B lymphocyte
BFU-E
CFU-E
Erythrocytes
CFU-G
Neutrophil
CFU-GM
Monocyte
CFU-M
Megakaryocyte
CFU-Meg
Platelets
Eosinophil
CFU-Eo
Myeloid stem cell
(CFU-GEMM)
Basophil
CFU-Bas
       s         
rmltipotential stem cells. Ihe lymphoid stem cell differentiates into I- and B-lymphocytes. Ihe myeloid stem cell
(CFU-GEMM) forms progenitor cells that include erythroid burst-forming units (BFU-E), which differentiate into
erythroid colony-forming units (CFU-E); granulocyte/monocyte colony-forming units (CFU-GM), which
differentiate into granulocyte colony-forming units (CFU-G) and monocyte colony-forming units (CFU-M);
megakaryocytic colony-forming units (CFU-Meg); eosinophil colony-forming units (CFU-Eo); and basophil
colony-forming units (CFU-Bas). Ihese colony-forrming units differentiate into precursor cells, then mature cells,
of the various cell lines.
ERYTHROCYTES
Rubriblast
Prorubricyte
Rubrieyte
Rubricyte
Rubricyte
Metarubricyte
Reticulocyte
Erythrocyte
FIGURE l.3. Sequence of erythropoiesis.
b. Other progenitor cells are unipotential (e.g., CFU-E can only differentiate into erythroid
cells).
c. Progenitor cells have limited capacity for self renewal and differentiate into precursor cells of
the various cell lines.
d. Progenitor cells are not recognizable morphologically with Romanowsky stains, but resemble
small lymphocytes.
3. Precursor cells
a. Precursor cells have no capacity for self-renewal but proliferate while differentiating into the
mature, functional cells.
b. These are the first cells that can be recognized as members of a particular cell line.
B. Erythropoiesis (Figure 1.3)
1. In mammals, erythropoiesis occurs extravascularly in bone marrow parenchyma. In avian
species, erythropoiesis occurs within the vascular sinuses of the bone marrow (intravascular or
intrasinusoidal development).
2. Characteristic morphologic changes take place during maturation from the rubriblast to the
mature erythrocyte (Figure 1.4).
a. Cells become smaller.
b. Nuclei become smaller and their chromatin is more aggregated:
(1) Cell division stops in the late rubricyte stage when a critical intracellular concentration
of hemoglobin is reached.
(2) The nucleus is extruded at the metarubricyte state, and a reticulocyte is formed in
mammals. In contrast, avian reticulocytes and mature erythrocytes retain their nuclei.
C.
Cytoplasmic color changes from blue to orange as hemoglobin is formed and RNA is lost.
3. In mammals, reticulocytes and erythrocytes migrate into the venous sinus of the bone marrow
through transient apertures in endothelial cell cytoplasm.
a. Reticulocytes of most species remain in the bone marrow for two to three days before release
and ultimately mature in the peripheral blood or spleen.
b. In health, the reticulocytes of cattle and horses mature in the bone marrow, mature
erythrocytes are released.
4. The time from stimulation of the erythropoietic progenitor cell until reticulocytes are released is
approximately five days.
5. Starting with the rubriblast, three to five divisions produce eight to 32 differentiated cells
6. The bone marrow has the capacity to increase erythropoiesis.
FIGURE 1.4. Normal hematopoietic cells and leukemic cells in bone marrow. A. myeloblast; B. promyelocyte; C
neutrophil myelocyte; D. neutrophil metarmyelocyte and segmenters; E. neutrophil metamyelocyte, band, and
segmenter; F rubriblast, rubricyte, metarubricyte, two neutrophil metamyelocytes, and a neutrophil segmenter; G.
two prorubricytes, four rubricytes, and an eosinophil; H. five rubricytes; l. five rubricytes, a metarubricyte, and a
polychromatophilic erythrocyte with a Howell-jolly body: J. immature megakaryocyte with blue, granular
cytoplasm; K. mature megakaryocyte with granular, pink cytoplasm (low magnification); L. promyelocytes in
canine myeloblastic leukermia; M. poorly differentited mast cells in feline mast cell leukermia; N. plasrma cells in
ERYTHROCYTEＳ
11
a. Erythrocyte production can be increased up to seven times the normal rate in humans
providing the necessary stimulation and nutrients are present. This capacity to increase
production varies with the animal species. It is greatest in birds and dogs and least in cattle and
horses.
b. An increase in the number of erythrocytes delivered to the blood occurs primarily via
increased stem cell input and, to a lesser extent, by a shortened maturation time.
c. Erythrocytes may be delivered to the circulation faster by earlier reticulocyte release and
skipped cell divisions. These processes do not increase the total number of erythrocytes
produced and are of temporary benefit.
7. Regulation of erythropoiesis
a. Erythropoietin (Epo)
(1) The majority of Epo is produced by peritubular interstitial cells of the kidney in response
to hypoxia, but the liver may account for 10% to 15% of Epo production by specific
hepatocytes and Ito cells.
(2) Actions of Epo
(a) Inhibition of apoptosis of newly formed progenitor cells and prorubricytes, allowing
them to differentiate into mature erythrocytes.
(b) Stimulation of hemoglobin synthesis in already dividing erythroid cells
(c) Switching of hemoglobin synthesis in sheep from one adult type to another
(i.e., HbA to HbC).
b. Interleukin-3 (IL-3) and colony-stimulating factors (GM-CSF and G-CSF).
(1) IL-3 is produced by activated T-lymphocytes; GM-CSF by activated T-lymphocytes,
macrophages, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts, and G-CSF by macrophages, monocytes,
neutrophils, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts.
(2) In concert with Epo, these factors stimulate the multiplication of a primitive erythroid
progenitor cell, BFU-E, and its differentiation into the CFU-E progenitor cell.
(3) The BFU-E progenitor cell is rather insensitive to Epo stimulation alone.
c. Androgens increase Epo release. In contrast, estrogens and corticosteroids decrease Epo
release, but their effect is probably not clinically significant.
d. Thyroid and pituitary hormones alter the tissue demands for oxygen, thereby changing the
requirement for erythropoiesis.
VIl. ERYTHROCYTE DESTRUCTION
A. The average erythrocyte lifespan in circulation varies with the species: cow, 160 days, sheep, 150
days; horse, 145 days; dog, 110 days; pig, 86 days; cat, 70 days; bird, approximately 35 days. Thus,
ruminant blood smears have infrequent reticulocytosis in health, while avian blood smears may have
4% to 5% reticulocytes in health. In certain disease states, anemia may develop more quickly in birds
and cats than in large animals because of the normally short erythrocyte lifespan.
B. Aging of erythrocytes is accompanied by changes in enzyme content and cell membrane structure
C. In health, senescent erythrocytes are removed from circulation by two routes
1. Phagocytosis by macrophages is the major route of senescent erythrocyte removal (Figure 1.5).
a. Within the phagosome, the erythrocyte releases its hemoglobin, which is split into heme and
globin.
b. Globin is broken down to its constituent amino acids, which are reutilized.
c. After releasing the iron, heme is cleaved by heme oxygenase, forming carbon monoxide and
biliverdin.
12
CHAPTER 1
RBC
Blood
(phagocytosis)
Macrophage
Hermoglobiri
Unconjugated
Globin
Bilirubin
FIGURE l.5. Pathway of phagocytic (extravascular) destruction of erythrocytes.
Blood
RBC
(intravascular hemolysis)
Kidney
Haptoglobin 
Free Hemoglobin
Hemoglobin-Haptoglobin 
￥
Methemoglobin
Globin
Heme
Hemopexin
Hemoglobinuria
Heme-Hemopexin
Bilirubin
Globin
Unconjugated Bilirubin
Hepatocyte
FlGURE l.o. Pathway of intravascular destruction of erythrocytes
d. Biliverdin is reduced by biliverdin reductase to bilirubin, which is excreted into the blood.
where it binds with albumin for transport to the liver. Birds lack biliverdin reductase; therefore, they
form biliverdin as an end product and not bilirubin. Biliverdin is green, which gives the
characteristic color to bruises in avian tissue.
2. Intravascular lysis with release of hemoglobin into plasma is a minor route of senescent
erythrocyte removal (Figure l.6).
a. Free hemoglobin in the plasma binds to the C2-globulin, haptoglobin. The hemoglobin-
haptoglobin complex is cleared from plasma by the liver, preventing loss of hemoglobin in the
 urine. Enough haptoglobin usually is present to bind 150 mg/dL of hemoglobin. Plasma appears
pink to red when 50 to 100 mg/dL of hemoglobin is present; therefore, discoloration of plasma
 precedes hemoglobinuria. In health, plasma discoloration is not observed.
b. If intravascular lysis is excessive, the serum haptoglobin may become saturated. The free
hemoglobin then dissociates into dimers, which can pass the glomerular flter. This does not
occur in health.
c. With time, free hemoglobin in the plasma is oxidized to methemoglobin, which dissociates to
 free ferriheme, which complexes with the B-globulin, hemopexin.
ERYTHROCYTES
13
d. The heme-hemopexin complexes are cleared by the liver, again preventing hemoglobin loss
in the urine
e. Hemoglobin that passes into the glomerular fltrate is absorbed by the proximal tubules and
catabolized to iron, bilirubin, and globin.
f. Unabsorbed hemoglobin passes into the urine, causing hemoglobinuria.
g. Tubular epithelial cells containing hemosiderin may slough into the urine, producing
hemosiderinuria
3. Similar routes of destruction occur in hemolytic anemia, but either extravascular or
intravascular hemolysis will predominate.
MeaNS Of EVALUAtING ErYTHrOCYTeS
1. HeMATocrIt (hCt), HeMoGLobIn (hb) CoNCENTraTIoN, AND RED blooD CEll (rBc)
CoUNt ARE INDICAToRS Of CIrCULAtING rBC MASS. CoMPUTeR GRAPHICS OF
Erythrocyte voluMe or Hb coNcentratIoNS.
A. Het is the percent of blood comprised of erythrocytes.
1. Centrifugal methods give a packed-cell volume (PCV), a very accurate measurement with small
inherent error (±l%).
a. Plasma obtained by this method can be used for other routine determinations.
(1) Plasma protein concentration using refractometry
(2) Plasma fibrinogen concentration using heat precipitation and refractometry
(3) Plasma color and transparency
(a) Normal plasma is clear and colorless (dog and cat) to light yellow (horse and cow)
(b)  Icteric plasma is yellow and clear.
(c) Hemoglobinemic plasma is pink to red and cdear.
(d) Lipemic plasma is whitish to pink and opaque.
b. The buffy coat zone, a white layer between the RBCs and plasma, is comprised of leukocytes
and platelets. Measurement of its width has been used to estimate white blood cell counts.
c. Microflaria may be detected by microscopic examination of the plasma just above the buffy
coat layer.
 2. Most automated cell counters, designed for human blood, calculate the Hct after determining
the RBC count and the mean corpuscular volume of the erythrocyte population. The formula for
this calculation is Hct % = (RBC/μL) x MCV (fL). The potential for error is greater than the PCV
method, because only dogs have an erythrocyte volume that is comparable to human RBCs. Other
domestic mammals have smaller erythrocytes than humans. However, newer and more advanced
hematology analyzers can be modified easily to identify blood cells of many different species. Birds
have elliptical, nucleated erythrocytes, which may interfere with automated RBC counts.
B. Hb concentration
1. Colorimetric determination by the cyanmethemoglobin technique or the newer cyanide-free
hemoglobinhydroxylamine complex method is used most frequently. Avian erythrocytes must be
lysed and the specimen must be centrifuged to remove free nuclei before Hb concentration can be
accurately determined and indices calculated.
a. The coeffcient of variation is approximately ±5%.
b. Heinz bodies, hemolysis, lipemia, and treatment with Oxyglobin? may cause false high values
2. Some automated instruments directly measure optical density of oxyhemoglobin.
and should be approximately one-third the Hct if erythrocytes are of normal size
14
CHAPTER 1
4. Determination of Hb concentration provides no clinical advantage over the Het other than
allowing the calculation of mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) and mean corpuscular
hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) (see below). However, Hb concentration may be slightly more
accurate in determining changes in circulating RBC mass when compared to Hct.
5. Newer hematology analyzers also generate a Hb concentration histogram.
C. RBC count
1. RBC counts, performed with a hemocytometer, have a large degree of error. Thus,
hemacytometer-derived RBC counts are of limited value, except in avian species.
2. Automatic counters, if standardized for mammalian blood, allow for more accurate RBC counts.
Automated counters are not well validated for avian blood, because all nucleated cells (RBCs,
WBCs, and thrombocytes) are counted.
3. The primary value of the RBC count is that it allows determination of MCV and MCH
(see below).
D. Factors affecting Hct, Hb concentration, and RBC count
1. Change in circulating RBC mass affects all three parameters.
a. Low values occur in anemia. Decreases in the three parameters may be disproportionate if
cell size and/or Hb content/cell also are altered.
b. Increased RBC mass (absolute polycythemia) causes high values
  r     s   
d. Sighthound breeds such as the Greyhound, Saluki, Whippet, and Afghan hound normally
have higher Hct/PCV values than other breeds, with values often found into the mid-60s.
2. Change in plasma volume affects all three parameters; therefore, interpretation must always be
made with knowledge of the patient's hydration status (Cases 6, 9, 18, 24)
a. Dehydration or fluid shifts to visceral organs cause increased values.
b. Overhydration with parenteral fluids causes a reduction in values, simulating anemia.
I. RED BLOOD CELL INDICES. RBC INDICES ARE HELPFUL IN THE CLASSIFICATION OF
CERTAIN ANEMlAS.
A. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) represents the red cell volume in femtoliters (fL)
1. (PCVxl0)+RBC count (millions) =MCV (femtoliters)
2. The MCV is determined directly by automatic cell counters.
3. Factors affecting MCV values
a. Reticulocytosis is the most common cause of macrocytosis (increased MCV) (Cases l, 2).
Reticulocytes, particularly early forms, are large cells.
b. Immature animals of most species have small erythrocytes and microcytosis (low MCV). This
also could reflect iron deficiency, which is more common in young animals.
c. Iron deficiency causes microcytosis (Case 5). An extra cell division occurs before the critical
cytoplasmic concentration of hemoglobin is reached that is necessary to stop DNA synthesis and
cell division. Smaller cells subsequently are produced.
d. Microcytosis occurs in dogs with portosystemic venous shunts (Case 13).
2. Healthy Asian breeds of dogs (Akita, Chow Chow, Shar Pei, and Shiba Inu) often have
microcytic erythrocytes.
f. Greyhounds normally have a higher MCV than non-greyhounds that may be due to their
  es l s s s
g. Interference with nucleic acid synthesis causes an inhibition of cell division and thereby
larger cells. Macrocytic anemia from an inherited, selective intestinal malabsorption of
cobalamin (vitamin B,2) has been documented in Giant Schnauzers.
h. Congenital macrocytosis occurs in Poodles.
ERYTHROCYTES
15
i. Hereditary stomatocytosis with macrocytosis has been observed in Alaskan Malamutes,
Drentse-Partrijshond, and Miniature Schnauzers.
 j. FeLV-infected cats often have macrocytic erythrocytes, possibly due to asynchronous
maturation.
k. Erythrocyte agglutination can cause a false increase in the MCV.
B. Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) represents how much Hb is present within an average
erythrocyte in picograms (pg)
1.(Hb concentation xl0)÷RBC count (millions) = MCH (picograms)
2. Factors affect the MCH and MCHC in a similar way (below); therefore, the MCH offers little
additional hematologic information concerning the patient.
3. MCH is influenced by MCV For example, smaller erythrocytes contain less Hb; therefore, they
have a decreased MCH.
4. In some cases of iron deficiency anemia, MCH may decrease before MCHC decreases
5. This index is not generally used in the classification of anemias. If the MCHC and MCH differ,
interpretation of the hemoglobin concentration should be based upon the MCHC, because the latter
value corrects for cell volume.
C. Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) represents the average Hb concentration per
average erythrocyte in grams of Hb/l00 mL of erythrocytes
1. Hb concentration (pg)×100] ÷ Het (%)= MCHC (g/dL)
2. The MCHC is the most accurate of the RBC indices because its calculation does not necessarily
require the RBC count. However, if the Hct is a calculated value (as is the case in automated
hematology analyzers), the accuracy of the MCHC may decrease.
3. The MCHC is used in the classification of anemias.
4. Factors affecting the MCHC
a. Increased MCHC is usually the result of in vitro or in vivo hemolysis or treatiment with
Oxyglobin?. Both intra- and extracellular Hb are measured in the hemoglobin procedure, but
the formula assumes all Hb is intracellular, giving a false high value (Case 3).
b. A true increase in MCHC does not normally occur; increased concentrations of hemoglobin
cannot be produced within the cell
c. Reticulocytes do not have their full component of hemoglobin; therefore, the MCHC may be
decreased in reticulocytosis (Cases l, 2).
d. Hypochromia (i.e., low MCHC) occurs in some cases of iron deficiency (Case 5).
(1) Iron-deficient cats may not have hypochromic erythrocytes.
(2) The MCHC may not be low in iron-deficient dogs when measured on some electronic
co unters.
D. Red cell distribution width (RDW)
1. This erythrocyte parameter can be determined by some automated cell counters.
2. The RDW is the coefficient of variation of the red cell volume distribution and is calculated by
the formula RDW = (SDmcv ÷ MCV)x100. It is an index of the degree of anisocytosis or variation
in size of the erythrocytes.
3. Anemias with significant microcytosis or macrocytosis have an increased RDW. Reticulocytosis
may result in an increased RDW.
IMl. PERIPHERAL BLOOD SMEAR
A. Staining and examination of the smear
1. New methylene blue (NMB). A drop of NMB between a coverslip and an air-dried blood smear
"a') anq us sdnoa sipioy uoedand suuaduou e si inq us pnluue 'pidai e san
nuclear DNA and RNA, cytoplasmic RNA, and basophil granules). Depending upon the distance
16
CHAPTER1
between the acidic groups, a blue or purple color may result. Eosinophil granules are unstained.
The reticulum of reticulocytes stains blue, but reticulocytes are best stained by mixing equal parts
of NMB and blood, holding at room temperature for l0 minutes, and then making the smear.
2. Romanowsky stains (e.g., Wright's stain, Diff-Quik?, Hemacolor?, etc.). These polychromic
preparations stain certain acidic groups blue (RNA) to purple (mast cell and basophil granules and
nuclear DNA), whereas basic groups stain red to orange (proteins, eosinophil granules).
3. Systematic evaluation of the stained blood smear
a. Low magnification. Select a thin area of the smear where the cells are evenly distributed, and
look for the following features:
(1) RBC rouleaux formation (described below)
(2) RBC agglutination (described below)
(3) Platelet aggregation, especially at the feathered edge of the smear (Chapter 4)
(4) Relative number of leukocytes
b. High-dry magnification. Confrm observations made at low magnification, and:
(1) Note the concentration of leukocytes and obtain an impression as to whether the white
blood cell (WBC) count is decreased, within the reference interval, or increased.
(2) Calculate a differential leukocyte count. This usually can be done at high-dry
magnification, but certain cells may require oil immersion magnification for identification.
(3) Look for nucleated erythrocytes (nRBCs) and polychromasia (reticulocytes).
c. Oil-immersion magnification
(1) Examine the erythrocyte morphology (described below).
(2) Conduct the differential leukocyte count at this magnifcation if diffculty is encountered
at high-dry magnification.
(3) Examine leukocyte morphology (Chapter 2).
(4) Estimate the adequacy of platelet numbers and evaluate their morphology (Chapter 4)
B. Erythrocyte morphology (Figure 1.7)
1. Normal morphology
a. Canine erythrocytes average 7μm in diameter, are uniform in size, and have central pallor
(biconcave disk).
b. Feline erythrocytes average 5.8μm in diameter, have mild anisocytosis (i.e., variation in
size), and exhibit very slight central pallor. Crenation is commonly observed. Howell-Jolly
bodies (nuclear remnants) occur in up to 1% of the erythrocytes. Rouleaux formation also may
be present.
c. Bovine erythrocytes average 5.5 μm in diameter. Anisocytosis is common, and central pallor
is usually slight. Crenation is common.
d. Equine erythrocytes average 5.7μm in diameter and lack central pallor. Rouleaux formation
is common.
2. Porcine erythrocytes average 6 μm in diameter and often exhibit poikilocytosis
FIGURE 1.7. Erythrocyte and platelet morphology. A. canine erythrocytes and platelets; B. feline erythrocytes and
platelets; C. equine erythrocytes in rouleaux and platelets; D. bovine erythrocytes and platelets; E. canine
reticulocytes (mew methylene blue stain); F polychromasia, leptocytes, and Howell-jolly body (dog); G.
metarubricytes (dog); H. hypochromasia (iron deficiency, dog); 1. spherocytes (immune-mediated anermia, dog): J
basophilic stippling (regenerative anemia, cow); K basophilic stippling (lead toxicosis, dog); L. autoagglutination
(immune-mediated anemia, dog); M. Heinz bodies (red maple toxicosis, horse); N. Heinz bodies in erythrocyte
ghosts (acetaminophen toxicosis, cat); O. eccentrocytes (onion toxicosis, dog); P keratocyte (dog); Q. echinocytes
(dog); R. acanthocytes (dog); S. schistocytes (dog); I. macroplatelet (shift platelet; dog); U. Mycoplasma haemofelis
d() ( s(
0
M
N
90
口
18
CHAPTER1
f. Ovine erythrocytes are similar to those of the cow but smaller. The average diameter is
4.5 μum.
g. Caprine erythrocytes are the smallest blood cells of the domestic animals. They are usually
less than 4 μm in diameter. Anisocytosis and poikilocytosis are common.
h. Camelidae (camel, llama, alpaca, etc.) erythrocytes are thin (approximately l.1 μm) and
ellipsoidal in shape with an average diameter of 6.5 μm, and usually have high erythrocyte
counts.
i. Avian erythrocytes are oval and nucleated with an average size 12 x 6μm.
 2. Rouleaux formations are groups of erythrocytes resembling stacks of coins. The degree of
rouleaux tends to positively correlate with the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and is usually
             s
can be a species characteristic or the result of disease. Rouleaux is common in horses that have a
decreased membrane charge in health. In certain diseases, normal membrane surface charge may be
partially masked by excess protein (hyperfibrinogenemia, hyperglobulinemia) that decreases the
repelling negative surface charges of the erythrocytes. Rouleaux and an increased ESR will be
observed. Microscopically, rouleaux can be distinguished from autoagglutination by its dispersion in
wet mounts when blood is diluted with physiologic saline solution.
a. Marked rouleaux formation is common in equine blood in health, but may be absent in the
blood of severely anemic or cachectic horses.
b. Moderate and mild rouleaux may be present in fline and canine blood in health,
respectively Marked rouleaux may be observed during inflammatory and neoplastic diseases.
c. Rouleaux formation is rare in ruminant blood in health and disease.
3. Agglutination is a grape-like aggregation of erythrocytes occurring in some blood specimens of
animals with immune- (antibody-) mediated anemia. Occasionally, it may be observed grossly (on
the sides of the blood collection tube) or microscopically (in an unstained wet mount or on a
stained blood smear). Agglutination is present if the erythrocytes remain clumped when blood is
diluted 50:50 to 10:90 with physiologic saline solution and viewed microscopically as a wet mount.
In anemic animals, agglutination is an indicator of an antibody-mediated effect, but the absence of
agglutination does not exclude immune-mediated anemia.
4. Anisocytosis is variation in the size of erythrocytes because of the presence of macrocytes and/
or microcytes among normocytes (normally-sized erythrocytes; Cases 1, 2, 5).
5. Macrocytes are large erythrocytes. Reticulocytes are usually macrocytic and polychromatophilic
conditions (e.g., macrocytosis of Poodles, FeLV infections, preleukemia of cats and dogs, erythroid
aplasia of cats, and vitamin Bi2 deficiency of Giant Schnauzers). If significant numbers of
 macrocytes are present, the MCV may be increased.
 6. Microcytes are small erythrocytes. They may be observed in iron and pyridoxine deficiency
anemias in association with a low MCV. Microcytes can include cell remnants in Heinz body and
 fragmentation anemias. Microcytes also are associated with portosystemic shunts (PsS) and
hyponatremia. Finally, microcytes may be observed in healthy Asian breeds of dogs (Akita, Chow
Chow, Shar Pei, and Shiba Inu).
 7. Spherocytes, associated with immune-mediated anemias, have a decreased MCV as a result of a
decreased membrane surface area. Spherocytes are globoid because the remaining smaller cell
membrane must enclose a normal amount of hemoglobin. Because spherocytes do not flatten well
on the blood smear, they appear smaller than normochromic, biconcave disk erythrocytes.
 8. Polychromasia refers to the blue-gray erythrocytes with residual RNA that are generally large
(macrocytic) and seen on routinely stained blood smears. Polychromatophilic erythrocytes (as
   s sn   an ( a m 
stain). Increased numbers of these cells are associated with increased erythropoietic activity and an
attempted regeneration in response to anemia (Cases 1, 2, 5, 25). The degree of regeneration
depends on the number of polychromatic erythrocytes (reticulocytes) relative to the degree of
ERYTHROCYTES
19
anemia. A few polychromic cells are normal in the dog and cat, less common in cattle, and not
usually seen in horses (in health or anemia).
9. Hypochromia is decreased cytoplasmic staining intensity and increased central pallor of
the erythrocyte caused by insuffcient Hb within the red cell. The most common cause of
hypochromia is iron deficiency, but it can also occur with lead toxicosis via inhibition of
hemoglobin synthesis. Hypochromia in avian blood smears has been observed with lead toxicosis
and inflammation.
substantial lag time between blood collection and analysis. Poikilocytes may be seen in young
healthy calves and goats (due to structural Hb switching), as well as pigs of any age. Poikilocytes
are considered an abnormality in other species where they can arise from trauma to the erythrocyte
 membrane associated with turbulent blood flow or intravascular fibrin deposition. Poikilocytes may
be removed prematurely from circulation, leading to hemolytic anemia. Specifc types of
poikilocytes include the following:
 I echinocytes contain spicules on the periphery of the erythrocyte. These are crenated
erythrocytes that are an in vitro artifact associated with changes in temperature, pH, drying, or
other interactions between the blood and smear preparation. Type II and Ill echinocytes (Burr
cells) have spicules covering the entire surface of the rounded erythrocyte which are attributed
to altered/fluxing electrolytes with expansion of the outer layer of the cell membrane. They
also have been observed in uremia, electrolyte depletion, lymphoma, doxorubicin toxicity, and
glomerulonephritis.
b. Keratocytes (helmet cells) are erythrocytes with one or two projections that form a ruptured
vesicle. These abnormalities often result from oxidative damage to the erythrocyte membrane,
as listed for Heinz body formation.
c. Schistocytes (schizocytes) are irregular erythrocyte fragments that result from shearing by
intravascular fbrin or by turbulent blood flow within the vasculature (Case ll). Schistocytes
are associated with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), hemangiosarcoma,
glomerulonephritis, congestive heart failure, myelofbrosis, chronic doxorubicin toxicosis, and
vasculitis, to name a few conditions
d. Acanthocytes are spiculated erythrocytes with two or more irregular, often blunted,
projections. These cells are thought to form as a result of altered lipid:cholesterol ratios in the
erythrocyte membrane. In animals,
, acanthocytes are associated with hemangiosarcoma
(especially involving the liver), glomerulonephritis, lymphoma, and liver diseases.
Fusocytes are elongated erythrocytes that are seen in healthy Angora goats.
f.E
Elliptocytes are oval cells that are seen in healthy camelids. A rare hereditary disease in
dogs with 4.1 band defciency of the erythrocyte membrane cytoskeleton has been reported to
have elliptocytosis. Occasionally, elliptocytes may be observed in iron deficiency.
0. Dacryocytes are teardrop-shaped erythrocytes that may result from the inability of the
erythrocyte to return to its pre-existing shape after deforming in the blood vessels (decreased
deformability). This change may be related to alterations in cytoskeleton proteins. If the “"tails"
of the dacryocytes are all in the same direction, this may be an artifact of blood smear
preparation. Dacryocytes are observed in blood smears of llamas with iron deficiency anemia.
h. Leptocytes are thin cells with an increased membrane:volume ratio; they may appear folded
due to the excess membrane. Leptocytes have been associated with portosystemic shunts (Case
13). Polychromatophilic erythrocytes (reticulocytes) may appear as leptocytes due to increased
cell membrane.
smears due to the distribution of Hb centrally and peripherally in the cell. Formation of target
cells may occur by increasing the amount of membrane via lipid and cholesterol insertion 0r
20
CHAPTER1
disease, iron deficiency anemia, and reticulocytosis.
j. Stomatocytes are a type of leptocyte that are bowl-shaped with oval areas of central pallor
 on blood smears. This change in shape results from expansion of the inner layer of the cell
membrane. These cells are observed in hereditary stomatocytosis of Alaskan Malamutes,
Drentse Partrijshond, and Miniature Schnauzers. Stomatocytes also can be artifacts in the thick
area of the smear.
k. Spherocytes are small dark microcytes that lack central pallor and have a reduced amount
of membrane per unit volume. They are readily detected only in the dog because of the normal
 abundance of central pallor. Spherocytes are observed most frequently in immune-mediated
hemolytic anemias (Case 2), but may also be seen following transfusions and in some stages of
 Heinz body anemia. They result from partial phagocytic removal of antibody-coated membrane
or "pitting" of Heinz bodies. Spherocytes are prematurely removed from circulation by splenic
macrophages because of their reduced ability to deform (i.e., loss of cell flexibility) and to
traverse the splenic microvasculature.
11. Basophilic stippling represents punctate aggregation of residual RNA in Romanowsky-stained
(Wright- or Diff-Quik-stained) cells. This often occurs in anemic sheep and cattle, and
            s
 u aa  ose ls sosn e u asdsn adde u q u p
of lead toxicosis when accompanied by metarubricytosis with minimal polychromasia (an
inappropriate response) in an animal with RBC indicators within reference values.
12. Howell-Jolly bodies are basophilic nuclear remnants within the cytoplasm of erythrocytes.
These structures are observed more frequently in accelerated erythropoiesis or post-
splenectomy.
13. The Heinz body is a round structure that protrudes from the membrane of the erythrocyte or
appears as a small refractile spot in the cytoplasm. Heinz bodies are comprised of denatured,
precipitated Hb caused by oxidation. They are often attached to the inner cell membrane (Case 3).
Because Heinz bodies are derived from hemoglobin, they are the same color as the remainder of the
cytoplasm and can be indistinct with Romanowsky staining. Following NMB staining, Heinz bodies
appear as dark basophilic bodies. Heinz bodies alter the cell membrane and decrease erythrocyte
deformability when traversing capillaries. They may result in intravascular hemolysis. The Heinz
body itself may be removed by splenic macrophages, leaving a spherocyte. Cats are more
susceptible to Heinz body formation (sometimes called erythrocyte refractile bodies or ER bodies in
this species). Feline Hb has a larger number (8 to ten) of sulfhydryl groups that increase
susceptibility to oxidation. Furthermore, the feline spleen is inefficient in removing these
structures. Up to l0% of feline erythrocytes may contain Heinz (ER) bodies in health. In birds,
Heinz bodies are smaller and more numerous within erythrocytes.
14. Eccentrocytes (hemi-ghost erythrocytes) are erythrocytes with the hemoglobin condensed in
one portion of the cell, leaving a clear or blister-like area in the remaining portion of the cell. They
are the result of oxidative injury with lipid peroxidation and cross-linking of the cell membrane
(Case 3).
15. Nucleated erythrocytes (nRBCs) in the stained blood smear include metarubricytes, rubricytes,
and earlier stages of erythroid development. The term “metarubricytosis" refers to the presence of
any nRBCs and represents a premature release of these cells into the circulation. The release of
 nRBCs in disease may be classifed as an appropriate or inappropriate response.
a. The release of nRBCs is an expected or appropriate response with an intense increase in
(Cases 1, 2, 5). Erythropoietin also may stimulate release of nRBCs during hypoxia, unrelated to
anemia.
b. For Camelidae, llamas often have high numbers of nRBCs in regenerative anemias
accompanied by absence of or mild polychromasia.
ERYTHROCYTES
21
 p  ssoin pa u s d q a sa 
deficiency, hemangiosarcoma, extramedullary hematopoiesis, myelophthisis, intervertebral disc
syndrome, hereditary macrocytosis of Poodles, endotoxemia, bone marrow trauma, bone marrow
necrosis, metastatic neoplasia of the marrow cavity, myelofibrosis, FeLV infection,
myelodysplastic syndrome, and leukemia, especially erythremic myelosis in cats.
d. nRBCs may be seen in high numbers in healthy pigs, especially in piglets less than three
weeks of age
2. Nucleated erythrocytes normally occur in birds.
f. Nucleated erythrocytes have been reported in normal Miniature Schnauzers.
16. Erythroplastids are anucleate fragments of erythrocyte cytoplasm occasionally found in avian
blood smears, while hematogones are free erythrocyte nuclei.
17. Parasites can occur within the erythrocyte (intracellular) or within depressions on the
membrane surface (epicellular), or within the plasma (extracellular):
a. Intracellular parasites include Hemoproteus spp., Leukocytozoon spp., and Plasmodium spp.
Babesia bovis, B. bigemina (cattle); Theileria mutans, T. annulata (cattle); Theileria cervi, (deer,
elk); Babesia canis, B. gibsoni (dogs); Babesia equi, B. caballi (horses); and Babesia ovis, B. motasi
(sheep).
b. Common epicellular parasites include Trypanosoma johnbakeri (birds), Mycoplasma haemofelis
(formerly Hemobartonella felis) (cats), M. haemocanis (formerly H. canis) (dogs),Mycoplasma
sp. (llamas).
C. Common extracellular parasites include flarids and trypanosomes.
(1) Microflariae: Dipetalonema reconditum (dogs), Dirofilaria immitis (dogs, rarely cats), and
Setaria sp. (horse).
(dogs); and Trypanosoma brucei, I. evansi (horses).
18.1
Distemper inclusions in canine erythrocytes are irregular to round to ring-shaped and stain
magenta with Romanowsky and Diff-Quik? stains (the inclusions may stain blue with other rapid
blood stains). They also may be observed in leukocytes. Distemper inclusions are transient.
IV. bLOOD REtICUlOCYTe EVALUATION
A. Reticulocytes are immature anuclear erythrocytes in mammals that contain residual RNA and
mitochondria, aggregated into a reticular pattern when stained with supravital stains (e.g., NMB stain)
(Figure 1.7). Reticulocytes correspond to polychromatophilic erythrocytes observed in Romanowsky-
e p e ae e  rn asdsn u d sa s sad ps
called shift reticulocytes. Reticulocytes in birds are nucleated and occasionally may appear more
rounded.
B. Quantitation of reticulocytes in circulation, by calculation of absolute reticulocyte numbers, is the
best indicator of the bone marrow erythroid response to anemia. Newer hematology analyzers have the
ability to segregate reticulocytes into age groups (time from release from bone marrow).
C. Species characteristics of reticulocytes
s-anq suuo) ssonnai adk aae jo (% on dn) siaqunu lus seq sop au 1
aggregates with supravital stains) in health (Figure 1.7).
2. Two types of reticulocytes occur in the cat.
a. Aggregate reticulocytes are similar to those of other species and account for up to 0.4% of
the erythrocytes in health. This type of reticulocyte is enumerated hematologically. Increased
22
CHAPTER1
aggregate reticulocytes reflect the current bone marrow response to anemia (i.e., increased
erythropoiesis or regeneration). Reticulocytosis is less dramatic than in the dog.
b. Punctate reticulocytes (containing small, blue-stained dots) are derived from aged aggregate
 reticulocytes and persist for at least two weeks. Like aggregate reticulocytes, they are increased
with increased erythropoiesis. Because punctate reticulocytes circulate for weeks and persist
after the aggregate reticulocyte count has returned to the reference interval, their enumeration is
of little benefit in assessing the current regenerative response. Punctate reticulocytes indicate a
bone marrow response to anemia oecurring as much as three to four weeks previously.
3. Reticulocytes are absent from the blood of ruminants in health because of the long erythrocyte
lifespan, but increase modestly in responding anemias.
4. Reticulocytes are absent in the blood of horses in both health and regenerative anemias.
5. Reticulocytosis is a prominent feature of healthy suckling pigs, but is less dramatic in adults
(1%). Reticulocyte counts increase in regenerative anemias.
6. Reticulocyte percentage in the blood of healthy birds is higher (4% to 5%) than mammals
because of a short erythrocyte lifespan (approximately 35 days). Polychromasia is more prominent
in younger birds than in adults but usually does not exceed 5%.
D. Means of reticulocyte enumeration
1. Reticulocyte percentage. Reticulocytes are counted in a NMB-stained blood smear and are
the bone marrow response because:
a. Reticulocytes released from the bone marrow into the blood of anemic animals are mixed
with fewer mature erythrocytes. Thus, a higher relative percentage of reticulocytes results.
b. Larger, more immature reticulocytes are released earlier (shift reticulocytes) in response to
anemia. These reticulocytes persist longer in the blood because it takes them more time to
mature. This results in a higher percentage of reticulocytes.
2. Corrected reticulocyte percentage
a. Formula: Observed reticulocyte percentage X(patient's Hct percentage + “normal" Hct percentage)
= corrected reticulocyte percentage
The “normal" hematocrit (Hct) is considered to be 45% in the dog and 37% in the cat.
b. This parame'ter corrects for (la) above but not for (lb).
C. Corrected reticulocyte percentages greater than 1% in the dog and greater than 0.4% in the
cat indicate bone marrow response to the anemic state. The corrected reticulocyte percentage
has not been validated for use in other animal species.
3. Absolute reticulocyte count
a. Formula: Reticulocyte percentage (converted to a decimal figure)x(total RBC count/μL)
=absolute reticulocyte count/jiL
b. This parameter corrects for item la (above) but does not correct for the effect described in
item lb (above).
c. An absolute reticulocyte count greater than 80,000/μuL in the dog and greater than 60,000 /μL
in the cat indicates a regenerative response. Depending on the reduction in Het, a very low Hct
should have a proportionately higher absolute reticulocyte count.
d. The following are estimated degrees of regeneration for dogs:
(1) None = 60,000/μL
(2) Slight = 150,000/μL
(3) Moderate = 300,000/μL
(4) Marked = more than 500,000/μL
e. The following are estimated degrees of regeneration (aggregate reticulocytes) for cats?
(1) None = less than 15,000/μL
(2) Slight = 50,000/μL
(3) Moderate = 100,000/μL
(4) Marked = more than 200,000/μL
ERYTHROCYTeS
23
f. Although not often used, similar estimates of regeneration for feline punctate reticulocytes
include the following:
(1) None = less than 200,000/μuL
(2) Slight = 500,000/μL
(3) Moderate = 1,000,000/μL
(4) Marked = 1,500,000/μL
4. Reticulocyte production index (RPl). This correction index is used in humans and also has
been used in the dog and cat to correct for items la and lb above. This parameter remains
controversial because definitive correlation studies have not been done in animals.
)  +()  x() s  = 
x [1 + blood maturation time]
b. Blood maturation times of reticulocytes at various Hcts are 45% = 1 day, 35% = 1.5 days,
25% = 2 days, and 15% = 2.5 days.
c. RPI values equal the increase in erythrocyte production (e.g., RPI of 3 equals three times
normal erythrocyte production). An RPl greater than 2 equals a regenerative response.
E. Interpretation of reticulocyte parameters
1. Absolute increases in reticulocytes indicate a responding bone marrow (regenerative anemia)
and that the cause of the anemia is extra-marrow (i.e., hemorrhage or hemolysis).
 2. Reticulocytosis is more intense in hemolytic than in external hemorrhagic anemias. Iron from
 disrupted erythrocytes is more readily available for erythropoiesis than the iron that is stored as
hemosiderin.
3. Reticulocytosis does not become clearly evident until 48 to 72 hours after the occurrence of
anemia. With normally responsive bone marrow, maximum reticulocytosis should be achieved
within seven days. However, reticulocytosis may be delayed in animals with various systemic
diseases and in aged animals.
4. Dogs have a greater reticulocyte response than cats.
5. Significant reticulocytosis does not develop in cattle with acute responding anemias until the
Hct is very low.
6. Reticulocytosis does not occur in the horse with any type of anemia.
7. Healthy suckling pigs have high reticulocyte counts.
8. Healthy birds often have a higher reticulocyte count (approximately 4% to 5%) than mammals
due to their short erythrocyte life span (25 to 40 days).
9. The lack of a reticulocyte response following anemia suggests that the bone marrow is not
responding (nonregenerative anemia). This may be due to insufficient time for reticulocytosis to
Occur, a deficiency in the existing reticulocyte response, or defective erythropoiesis.
V. boNe MaRRoW EXaMINATIoN
A. Indications for examination
1. Nonregenerative or nonresponding anemia
2. Persistent neutropenia
3. Unexplained thrombocytopenia
4. Suspicion of hematopoietic neoplasia
5. Suspicion of osteomyelitis, infltrative, or proliferative bone marrow disease
6. Fever of unknown origin
B. Technique
1. Bone marrow aspirates can be obtained from the liac crest, trochanteric fossa, sternum,
humerus, or rib of mammals using a special bone marrow or l8-gauge spinal needle. Aspirates are
24
CHAPTER 1
obtained from the sternal ridge (keel) or tibiotarsus in birds. Other prominent long bones of birds
are pneumatized and lack significant hematopoietic tissue
2. Particle smears are preferred because they are less likely to have blood contamination.
3. Core biopsies, obtained with special needles, may be taken from the above locations and provide
a better indication of overall cellularity than cytologic smears alone.
C. Examination of the stained bone marrow smear
1. Observe the relative number, size, and cellularity of the particles, including the proportion of
adipocytes (approximately 50%) and hematopoietic progenitor cells (approximately 50%). The
number and cellularity of particles is an estimation of the overall cellularity of the bone marrow,
however, low-cellularity aspirates may occur with incomplete sampling of the bone marrow.
Histologic examination of a bone marrow core biopsy is more accurate in assessing marrow
cellularity and in detecting stromal reactions (e.g., myelofibrosis).
2. Note the adequacy of megakaryocyte numbers, maturity, and morphology Immature
megakaryocytes have blue, granular cytoplasm, whereas mature megakaryocytes have pink, granular
cytoplasm.
3. The ratio of myeloid:nucleated erythroid cells (M:E ratio) may be estimated.
a. The M:E ratio is usually determined to assess the erythropoietic response to anemia. The
WBC count or, more specifically, the neutrophil count, is needed for proper interpretation of the
ratio.
b. If the WBC count is within the reference interval, any change in the M:E ratio is due to
changes in the erythroid series.
c. A high M:E ratio in an anemic animal with a WBC count within the reference interval
suggests erythroid hypoplasia
d. A high M:E ratio in an anemic animal with an increased WBC count is more difficult to
interpret because the increased ratio could result from myeloid (granulocytic) hyperplasia and/or
erythroid hypoplasia.
e. A low M:E ratio in an anemic animal with a WBC count within or above the reference
interval suggests early erythroid regeneration of inefective erythropoiesis.
maturation (Figure 1.5). In health, approximately 80% of the myeloid series should be
metamyelocytes, bands, and segmenters (nonproliferating, maturation, storage pool); 90% of the
erythroid series should be rubricytes and metarubricytes. A high percentage of immature forms
suggests hyperplasia, neoplasia, or maturation abnormality of the respective series. In the myeloid
series, depletion of the storage pool (which contains the more mature cells) can cause a shift
toward immaturity
5. Abnormal cells should be identified and described.
6. Perl's or Prussian blue staining for iron in bone marrow macrophages may be useful to
distinguish iron deficiency anemia (decreased iron stores) from the anemia of chronic disease
(increased iron stores). Perl's or Prussian blue staining detects hemosiderin (insoluble iron) but
does not detect ferritin (soluble iron that is removed during staining). Hemosiderin usually is not
observed in feline bone marrow.
Vl. ANTIGEN AND ANTIBODY DETECTION
A. General concepts concerning RBC antigens and antibodies
1. In domestic animals, anti-erythrocyte antibodies are a consequence of transfusions, cross-
placental transfer during pregnancy in the horse, vaccination with blood origin products.
autoimmune phenomena, and natural occurrence in the cat.
2. Antigen identification is helpful in parentage testing, identifying potentially compatible blood
donors (e.g., DEA-1.1-, 1.2-, and 1.3-negative dogs are best as blood donors), and identifying
ERYTHROCYTES 
25
matings likely to lead to isoimmunization and subsequent hemolytic disease of newborn animals
(neonatal isoerythrolysis) (e.g., Aa-negative mares bred to Aa-positive stallions are at greater risk
with the second foal)
3. Agglutination and hemolytic tests with specific antisera for each antigen are used for
identification. Some antigens (blood group subtypes) are more important than others in
determining animals at risk of hemolytic disorders. Blood from animals with the following blood
antigen types has the greatest potential to cause sensitization and subsequent reactions:
a. In the dog, DEA (dog erythrocyte antigen)-1.1 (Aaj), DEA-1.2 (Aa2), and DEA-1.3 (Aas) are
highly immunogenic and will sensitize recipients. Anti-DEA 1.l and anti-DEA 1.2 are not
naturally occurring, and their presence in blood requires prior exposure to these antigens.
Anti-DEA 1.l and anti-DEA 1.2 antibodies result in hemolytic reactions. Naturally occurring
anti-DEA-3 (Ba) antibodies result in early erythrocyte removal or hemolysis. Anti-DEA 5 (Da)
and anti-DEA-7 (Ir) antibodies occur naturally and result in increased erythrocyte removal.
b. Antibodies in mare colostrum to Aa and Qa blood types are most frequently involved in
neonatal isoerythrolysis.
c. Cattle have marked variability of erythrocyte antigens with 70 blood group factors.
d. Iype A and B antibodies occur naturally in the cat. Iype B cats with anti-A antibody may
have life-threatening hemolytic reactions when transfused with type A blood. Iype A cats with
anti-B antibodies have early erythrocyte removal when transfused with type B blood.
B. Detection of anti-erythrocyte antibodies
1. Blood cross matching
a. These tests are used to detect antibodies and determine when blood may be safely transfused
 b. The major cross match tests erythrocytes of the donor against serum of the recipient. This is
 a test to detect antibodies in the recipient that will react with donor cells. Incompatibilities in
the major cross match are clinically significant because of the systemic reaction caused by the
massive lysis of transfused cells
c. The minor cross match tests serum of the donor against erythrocytes of the recipient. This is
 a test to detect antibody in donor blood. Incompatibilities are not life threatening because the
 transfused antibody will be diluted in the recipient.
d. Incompatible cross matches usually indicate prior sensitization.
(1) Naturally occurring antibodies usually are not present in sufficient concentration in
naturally occurring anti-A antibodies.
(2) An incompatible cross match, therefore, indicates prior sensitization, except in the cat.
e. An incompatible cross match is indicated by agglutination in most species; however,
hemolysis predominates in the horse and cow.
2. Antiglobulin (Coombs') tests
a. Antiglobulin (Coombs') tests are used to confrm immune-mediated hemolysis of
erythrocytes.
b. The direct antiglobulin test (DAT) detects antibody and/or complement attached to the
 membrane of the patient's washed erythrocytes.
(1)  The antiglobulin reagent (Coombs' serum) may be prepared against any antibody type
(IgG, IgM) or complement (C3) or may be a mixture (IgG and C). Reagents that test for one
antibody or complement are monovalent. Reagents that test for multiple antibodies and/or
complement are polyvalent.
(2) Species-specific Coombs' serum must be used (e.g., rabbit anti-canine IgG for the dog).
c. The indirect antiglobulin test detects anti-erythrocyte antibody in the serum of the patient. In
this test, the patient's serum is tested against washed erythrocytes from the sire, offspring, or a
prospective blood donor animal. Supernatant (whey) from colostral milk may be used instead of
serum in postpartum mares or cows to detect potential reactions against the offspring's cells
26
CHAPTER 1
d. A newer cell-enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based method (direct enzyme-
linked antiglobulin test or DELAT test) has been described and used successfully to detect
antibodies in DAT-negative canine autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA). IgG, IgM, IgA, and
C, have been detected coating the RBC membrane in dogs; however, this test has been used
primarily as a research tool.
ANEMIA: DIAGNOSIS AND CLASSIFICATION
Anemia is an absolute decrease in the Hct, Hb concentration, and/or RBC count. Relative anemia may
 occur when the plasma volume is expanded (e.g., excessive parenteral fluid administration, pregnancy,
neonates) or when blood specimens are improperly obtained from intravenous fluid lines
(pseudoanemia).
I. DETERMINATION OF THE CAUSE OF ANEMIA. AS WITH ANY DISEASE, THE DIAGNOSIS OF
ANEMIa IsS MaDe FroM HIStoRICal INforIMaTIon, PHySICal FINDINGS, AND
LABORATORY FINDINGS.
A. History. The following findings may be important:
1.
 Drug administration or vaccination
2.1
Exposure to toxic chemicals or plants
3. Familial or herd occurrence of disease
4.
 Recent transfusions or colostral ingestion
5.
 Age at onset of clinical signs
6.1
History of prior blood disorder
7. Diet
8. Breed, signalment
9. Prior pregnancy of dam
10. Reproductive status (intact versus neutered)
B. Physical findings
  a po i an  on se oisd p p an jo a
reduce the workload on the heart. Typical clinical signs include the following:
a. Pale mucous membranes
b. Weakness, loss of stamina, exercise intolerance
C. Tachycardia and polypnea, particularly after exercise
d. Syncope, depression
d. Increased sensitivity to cold
2. Heart murmur caused by reduced viscosity and increased turbulence of blood flow
f. Weak or fluttering pulse
g. Shock, if one-third of the blood volume is lost rapidly
2. Icterus, hemoglobinuria, hemorrhage, melena, petechiae, or fever may be observed, depending
on the pathophysiologic mechanism involved
3. Clinical signs are less obvious if the onset of anemia is gradual and the animal has adapted to
the deereased erythrocyte mass and lowered oxygen transport capability In this scenario the anemia
upon presentation can be profound (Hct of less than 10%).
C. Laboratory findings. Laboratory confrmation is necessary because anemias are not always
accompanied by typical clinical signs. Mild anemia often is diagnosed from the laboratory data of a
sick animal when its presence was not previously suspected.
ERYTHROCYTES
27
1. The Hct is the easiest, most accurate method to detect anemia. The Hct value should be
interpreted with knowledge of the patient's hydration status and with consideration of any possible
influence of splenic contraction.
2. Hb concentration and RBC count may be used to further classify the anemia but usually are not
needed to confirm its presence.
3. Other laboratory procedures may be used to further characterize the anemia and arrive at a
specific diagnosis. These procedures are discussed below and earlier in this chapter.
Il.CLASSIFICATION
The cause of the anemia should be identified when possible because the term "anemia" per se does not
constitute a definitive diagnosis. Classification schemes are used for definitive diagnosis, although a
single classification may not be entirely satisfactory.
A. Classification according to size (MCV) and Hb concentration (MCHC) of the erythrocyte
1. The MCV categorizes the anemia as normocytic, macrocytic, or microcytic. The average
erythrocyte volume is within the reference interval, increased, or decreased, respectively.
2. The MCHC categorizes the anemia as normochromic, hypochromic, or hyperchromic. The Hb
concentration is within the reference interval if the erythrocytes are normochromic. Hb
concentration is decreased if the erythrocytes are hypochromic. Hyperchromasia is most often the
result of erythrocyte hemolysis or Oxyglobin? administration, because erythrocytes do not over-
produce hemoglobin. In rare circumstances, spherocytosis may be associated with hyperchromasia
because of decreased erythrocyte volume.
B. Classification according to bone marrow response
1. Regenerative anemia
a. The bone marrow actively responds to the anemia by increasing production of erythrocytes.
 b. Findings that denote regeneration of erythrocytes
(1) Polychromasia
(2) Reticulocytosis with anisocytosis and increased RDW
(3) Macrocytosis (increased MCV) and hypochromasia (decreased MCH and MCHC)
associated with reticulocytosis
(4) Basophilic stippling of erythrocytes in ruminants
a Pr n p o  p e y m ao r (
C. Species that are capable of the highest maximal reticulocyte response exhibit the most intense
regeneration; the Hct returns to the reference interval more rapidly. In decreasing order, the
ability of a species to mount a regenerative response is bird, dog, cat, cow, horse.
d. The presence of regeneration suggests an extramarrow etiology implying loss (e.g,
hemorrhage) or lysis (e.g., Heinz bodies, immune-mediated, or fragmentation) of erythrocytes of
sufficient duration (two to three days) for a regenerative response to be evident in the blood.
e. Bone marrow examination is rarely necessary to detect erythrocyte regeneration; however
erythroid hyperplasia should be evident if aspirates are taken.
f. Regeneration is difficult to detect in the horse because reticulocytes are not released into the
 blood. An increased MCV and RDW may suggest a regenerative response. Bone marrow
examination may be helpful but is not always conclusive, erythroid hyperplasia and increased
numbers of reticulocytes may be observed in the aspirates
g. Examples of regenerative anemias include hemolysis, hemorrhage, or regeneration after the
cause of a nonregenerative anemia has been resolved.
2. Nonregenerative anemia
  ao a i s n  po  an si  a 
of response could be the result of inadequate time for erythropoiesis to occur as well as
28
CHAPTER 1
conditions such as chronic inflammation, renal disease, and endocrine disorders. Horses do not
release reticulocytes into blood; therefore, all anemias appear nonregenerative in this species.
b. Polychromasia, reticulocytosis, and basophilic stippling (ruminants) are inadequate to absent.
c. During the frst two to three days after the onset of peracute or acute hemorrhage or
hemolysis, the anemia may appear nonregenerative.
d. Bone marrow examination occasionally may reveal the pathophysiologic mechanism or
etiology of some cases of nonregenerative anemia.
2. Examples of nonregenerative anemia include: anemia of inflammatory disease (AID), renal
failure, iron deficiency anemia, aplastic anemia, pure red cell aplasia, and endocrine disorders.
f. The cause of anemia may be multifactorial, which could affect the regenerative response. For
 example, acute hemorrhage may be minimally regenerative or nonregenerative if the underlying
cause is an inflammatory condition resulting in AID.
C. Classification according to major pathophysiologic mechanisms
1. Blood loss (hemorrhagic anemia)
2. Accelerated erythrocyte destruction (decreased erythrocytic life span) by intra- or extravascular
hemolysis
3. Reduced or defective erythropoiesis
1. CHaRaCTerIStICS Of AcUTe BloOD LoSS (CASEs 1, 25)
A. Clinical fndings
1. Direct visual evidence of hemorrhage usually is present, but occult hemorrhage may occur. When
laboratory fndings suggest hemorrhagic anemia and direct evidence of hemorrhage cannot be found,
sources of occult bleeding such as gastrointestinal hemorrhage should be considered.
Thrombocytopenia and clotting test abnormalities indicate the potential for hemorrhage.
Thrombocytopenia alone rarely results in hemorrhagic anemia. Autotransfusion may accompany
hemorrhage into body cavities.
Table l.1.
CAUSES OF BLOOD LOSS.
Acute hemorrhage
Chronic hemorrhage
GI ulcers
GI ulcers, neoplasms
Hemostasis defects
Hematuria
 Bracken ferm toxicosis
Hemophilia
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Neoplasia
Factor X deficiency
Gastrointestinal neoplasms
Hemophilia A and B
Vascular neoplasms
Rodenticide toxicosis
Parasitism
Sweet clover toxicosis
Ancylostomiasis
Neoplasia
Coccidiosis
Splenic hemangiosarcoma
Fleas, ticks, lice
 Splenic hemangioma
Hemonchosis
Thrombocytopenia
Strongylosis
Trauma
Vitamin K deficiency
Surgery
ERYTHROCYTES
29
2. Clinical signs depend upon the amount of blood lost, period of time during which bleeding
Occurred, and site of hemorrhage. Hemorrhage from multiple sites or delayed onset of hemorrhage
at sites of vascular intervention suggest clotting abnormalities (Chapter 4).
B. Laboratory findings
1. The Het initially is within the reference interval because all blood components (i.e., cells and
plasma) are lost in similar proportions. The animal may be in hypovolemic shock if more than 33%
of the blood volume is lost rapidly
2. Splenic contraction delivers high-Hct splenic blood (Hct = 80%) into the circulation, temporarily
increasing the Het.
3. Blood volume subsequently is restored by the addition of interstitial fluid beginning two to three
hours after the onset of hemorrhage and proceeding for 48 to 72 hours. This fluid shift causes
dilution of the erythrocyte mass and laboratory signs of anemia (i.e., reduced Het, RBC count, and
 Hb concentration) become evident. Hypoproteinemia (decreased plasma protein concentration) also
may be observed.
4. Platelet numbers usually increase during the first few hours after hemorrhage. Persistent
thrombocytosis may suggest continued blood loss.
5. Neutrophilie leukocytosis commonly occurs approximately three hours post-hemorhage.
6. Signs of increased erythrocyte production (e.g., polychromasia, reticulocytosis) become evident
by 48 to 72 hours and reach maximum values approximately seven days after the onset of
blood.
7. Plasma protein concentration begins to increase within two to three days and returns to the
reference interval before Hct, RBC count, and Hb concentrations normalize.
8. The entire hemogram returns to reference intervals in one to two weeks in the dog following a
single, acute, hemorrhagic episode. If reticulocytosis persists longer than two to three weeks
continuous bleeding should be suspected.
 9. Thrombocytopenia and subsequent hemorhage may occur with primary bone marrow failure;
the anemia in these cases appears nonregenerative.
Il. CHaraCTeRIStICS Of CHRONIC bLooD LoSS (CASE 5)
A. Clinical findings
1. Anemia develops slowly and hypovolemia does not occur.
2. The Hrt can reach low values before clinical signs of anemia become obvious because the slow
onset of anemia allows for physiologic adaptations.
B. Laboratory findings
1. A regenerative response occurs but is usually less intense than with acute blood loss.
2. Hypoproteinemia usually is observed.
3. Persistent thrombocytosis may be evident.
4. Iron deficiency anemia, characterized by microcytosis and hypochromasia, may develop over
time as body iron stores are depleted.
Ill. DIFFERENTIAL FEATURES OF ANEMIAS CAUSED BY EXTERNAL AND
INTERNAL HEMORRHAGE
A. External blood loss, including gastrointestinal bleeding, prevents reutilization of certain
components such as iron and plasma protein. These may be reabsorbed and recycled following internal
hemorrhage.
30
CHAPTER 1
B. Internal hemorrhage may be less severe and more intensely regenerative. Following internal
hemorrhage, some erythrocytes are reabsorbed by lymphatic vessels (autotransfusion), particularly
when hemorrhage occurs into body cavities. Remaining erythrocytes are lysed or phagocytosed. The
iron and amino acids from catabolized proteins are recycled.
ANEMIA FROM ACCELERaTED ERYTHROCYTE DESTRUCTION (HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA)
(TABLE 1.2)
1. CHaRaCTeRISTICS OF HEMOLYTIC ANemIa (CASES 2, 3)
A. Clinical findings
1. Clinical signs of hemorrhage are absent.
2. In acute hemolytic anemia, clinical signs related to the severity of anemia may be dramatic
because compensatory mechanisms develop more slowly.
3. Icterus may be seen in acute, severe hemolytic anemia.
 4. Hemoglobinuria and hemoglobinemia (red plasma) are seen if significant intravascular hemolysis
occurs.
5. Extravascular hemolysis is much more common than intravascular hemolysis.
B. Laboratory findings
hemorrhagic anemias. Iron from hemolyzed erythrocytes is more readily available for erythropoiesis
 than is storage iron or hemosiderin. When iron-containing blood is lost externally, body storage
iron must be mobilized for increased erythropoiesis, delaying regeneration.
2. Plasma protein concentration is within the reference interval or increased (hyperproteinemia)
Hemoglobinemia may be present with intravascular hemolysis, resulting in artifcial hyperchromasia
(increased MCH and MCHC) and hyperproteinemia.
3. Neutrophilic leukocytosis and monocytosis may occur.
4. Evidence of Hb degradation (e.g., hyperbilirubinemia, hemoglobinuria) may be present.
5. Abnormal erythrocyte morphology (e.g., Heinz bodies, erythrocytic parasites, spherocytes, or
poikilocytes) (Figure 1.7) may suggest the mechanism of hemolysis.
Il. DIFFERENTIATION OF THE CAUSES OF HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS
A helpful approach in diagnosing hemolytic anemias is to identify the site and mechanism of
erythrocyte destruction. Hemolysis can occur outside of the blood vessels following phagocytosis of
erythrocytes by macrophages (extravascular hemolysis), or hemolysis can occur within blood vessels
a    x o   s ( )
destruction usually predominates at one of these sites.
A. Extravascular hemolysis (phagocytosis) (Case 2) Erythrocytes are sequestered in spleen or liver,
where they are phagocytized or lysed. Hemoglobin is catabolized at the site of destruction.
1. Mechanisms of extravascular hemolysis
a. Antibody and/or Cb mediated (Case 2)
(1) Antibody binds to an erythrocyte membrane antigen or other antigen (including
haptens) tightly adsorbed to the erythrocyte membrane. Nonerythrocyte antigen-antibody
complexes may be non-specifically adsorbed to the cell membrane. Glycophorins, band 3,
and spectrin are the membrane antigens that usually are recognized by antibodies
(2) Cb is fixed into the erythrocyte membrane by the antigen-antibody reaction. Adsorbed
immune complexes may fix Csb and then elute from the cell, leaving only Cb deposited on
TABLE I.2.
CAUSES OF ACCELERATED ERYTHROCYTE DESTRUCTION.
Intravascular hemolysis*
Extravascular (phagocytic) hemolysis *
Bacteria
RBC parasites
Clostridium hemolyticum
Anaplasma spp.
Cl. novyi
Cytauxzoon spp.
Cl perfringens
Mycoplasma (formerly Eperythrozoon) spp.
E. coli (hemolytic uremic symdrome)
Mycoplasma (formerly Hemobartonella) spp.
Leptospira spp.
Theileria spp.
RBC parasites
Irypanosoma spp.
Babesia spp.
Immune -me diated
Chemicals and plants
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (dogs, cats)
Oxidants
Equine infectious anemia virus
Acetaminophen
Anaplasma spp. (formerly Ehrlichia)
Benzocaine
Feline leukemia virus
Brassica spp.
Lupus erythematosus
Copper, molybdenum deficiency
Hemangiosarcoma
Onions
Hematopoietic neoplasia
Phenothiazine
Penicillin
Phenazopyridine
RBC parasites
 Propylene glycol
Sarcocystis spp.
 Red maple
Intrinsic erythrocytic defects
Rye grass
Erythrocytic porphyria
Vitamin K
Hereditary stomatocytosis
Cephalosporins
Pyruvate kinase deficiency (dogs)
Ricin (castor bean)
 Fragmentation
Snake venoms
 Dissemminate d intravascular coagulation
Zinc
He artworms
Immune-mediated
Hemangiosarcoma
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (horses, cattle)
Vasculitis
Hemolytic disease of newborm (neonatal
Hemophagocytic syndrome
isoerythrolysis)
 Incompatible transfusions
Hypersplenism
Hypo-osmolality
Malignant histiocytosis
Selenium deficiency (cattle)
Cold hemoglobinuria
Hypotonic fhuids
Water intoxication
Fragmentation
Vena caval syndrome
 Hypophosphatemia
Hyperalimentation
 Postparturient hemoglobinuria
G-6-PD deficiency
GSH deficiency (sheep)
Hepatic failure (horses)
Phosphofructokinase deficiency (dogs)
*Many of the conditions listed in this table have both intravascular and phagocytic cormponents,
but are listed by the predominant type of hemolysis.
31
32
CHAPTER1
the membrane. The erythrocyte is an innocent bystander but is subsequently targeted for
phagocytic removal.
(3) Macrophages have receptors for both the Fc component of antibody and Cb. These
 receptors facilitate the recognition and attachment of macrophages to erythrocyte membranes
that are coated with antibody and/or Cb. Affected erythrocytes are completely or partially
phagocytosed. Spherocytes are formed by parial phagocytosis with subsequent resealing of
the erythrocyte's membrane. Because more membrane is removed than cell contents, the
spherocyte appears small and round, and lacks central pallor (Figure 1.7).
(4) Immune-mediated hemolytic anemias may be caused by the following mechanisms when
response.
(a) Unknown mechanisms, termed idiopathic autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA)
(b) Infectious agents such as FeLV, ElA virus, Ehrlirchia spp., or Mycoplasma haemofelis
(formerly Hemobartonella felis)
i) These agents may alter the erythrocyte membrane, exposing hidden antigens to
which the host produces antibody.
i) Some pathogens form immune complexes that adsorb to the cell and fix
complement (Cb).
iii) Cross-reacting antibody may be formed in response to infection.
(c) Some drugs, such as penicillin, adsorb to the erythrocyte membrane and act as
haptens in the production of anti-drug antibodies.
(d) Alterations in the immune system
i) Disturbances in T-cell function may disrupt immune regulation. T-cells from
ii) Coombs' positive anemia has been observed in some lymphoid malignancies
protozoal diseases, rickettsial diseases, Mycoplasma haemofelis (formerly
Hemobartonella felis), FIV, FIP, and other chronic inflammatory diseases.
(e) Immune-mediated anemia also may occur as a paraneoplastic syndrome with
 lymphoma and plasma cell myeloma.
(5) The direct antiglobulin or Coombs' test detects warm-active IgG alone, IgG plus C3, C
alone, and, rarely, cold-active IgM on the erythrocyte cell membrane. Cold-reactive IgM may
fix complement in the absence of IgG. This cold agglutinin disease is often associated with
autoagglutination, intravascular hemolysis, acute onset, and severe clinical signs. A newer
and more sensitive direct-enzyme linked antiglobulin test (DELAT) has identifed multiple
 s a o () s sn p ( ' ) s 
the erythrocyte membrane. A synergistic effect between the types of antibody and
complement may occur.
(6) Warm-active IgM occasionally fixes complement to C; severe intravascular hemolysis
occurs with activation of membrane attack complex.
(7) Cold autoagglutinins that bind to the erythrocyte membrane below l0°℃ to 15°C are
usually not significant and are observed in blood specimens from many healthy animals.
b. Decreased erythrocyte deformability
(1) Changes in the erythrocyte membrane, increase in internal viscosity, or decrease in
surface area to volume ratio predisposes affected erythrocytes to early removal from
 circulation. These less deformable erythrocytes are sequestered in the spleen and
phagocytosed by macrophages.
(2) Examples of decreased erythrocyte deformability (Figure 1.7)
(a) Schistocytes of microangiopathic anemia
(b)  Spherocytes of immune-mediated anemia
(c)Parasitized erythrocytes
(d) Eccentrocytes or Heinz body-containing erythrocytes
ERYTHROCYTES
33
c. Reduced glycolysis and ATP content of the erythrocyte
(1) Affected erythrocytes are predisposed to removal from the vasculature by splenic
macrophages.
(2) Reduction in glycolysis occurs with normal aging.
(3) This reduction is accelerated in hereditary pyruvate kinase and phosphofructokinase
 deficiency anemias.
d. Increased macrophage phagocytic activity
(1) When there is excessive macrophage phagocytic activity, normal erythrocytes also may be
phagocytosed.
(2) Increased phagocytic activity is associated with conditions causing splenomegaly.
Splenomegaly promotes excessive sequestration of erythrocytes and their exposure to
macrophages.
(3) In humans, this condition has been called “hypersplenism."
(4) Increased macrophage phagocytic activity also occurs in hemophagocytic syndrome and
malignant histiocytosis, resulting in cytopenias.
2. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of extravascular (phagocytic) hemolysis
a. The dinical course of disease is usually chronic with an insidious onset.
b. A regenerative response is associated with normal or increased plasma protein
concentration.
C.
Hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria are absent.
d. Hyperbilirubinemia occurs if the magnitude of the hemolysis is suffcient to exceed uptake,
conjugation, and excretion of bilirubin by the liver. Unconjugated bilirubin usually
 The bone marrow response may compensate for the destruction of erythrocytes in cases of
low-grade hemolysis. In such instances, the Het remains in the reference interval. This situation
is referred to as a "compensated hemolytic anemia."
f. Neutrophilia, monocytosis, and thrombocytosis commonly accompany extravascular
hemolysis.
g. Splenomegaly may result from increased macrophage activity and extramedullary
hematopoiesis.
h. Low-grade extravascular hemolysis occurs in many anemias that are primarily nonhemolytic
(e.g., anemia of chronic renal disease, iron-lack anemia). This is referred to as the “hemolytic
component" of these other types of anemia.
3. Aids in identification of the specifc cause of extravascular hemolysis
a. History of a particular breed and/or of affected littermates may suggest a hereditary cause of
hemolysis. Examples include the following:
(1) Phosphofructokinase deficiency of American Cocker Spaniel, English Springer Spaniel,
and mixed breed dogs with Spaniel heritage.
(2) Pyruvate kinase deficiency in dogs (Basenji, Beagle, Chihuahua, Dachshund, Pug,
  a    o   i  n 
(Abyssinian, Somali, and domestic short haired).
(3) Possible hereditary predisposition to hemolytic anemia also may exist in other dog
          
Setter, Old English Sheepdog, Poodle, and Whippet).
b. Additional laboratory findings
(1) Positive direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test against a specifc immunoglobulin or C on
patient's erythrocytes in immune-mediated anemia or a positive DELAT test even if the direct
antiglobulin test is negative.
(2)  Abnormal erythrocyte morphology occurs in a variety of anemias (Figure 1.7).
Erythrocytic parasites, spherocytes, schistocytes, and keratocytes suggest the potential for
34
CHAPTER1
B. Intravascular hemolysis (Case 3). Erythrocytes are destroyed within the circulation, releasing
hemoglobin into the plasma where it is either removed by the liver or excreted by the kidneys.
1. Mechanisms of intravascular hemolysis. The erythrocyte membrane must be significantly
disrupted to allow escape of the Hb molecule into the plasma. Most of the mechanisms of
intravascular hemolysis are extrinsic or extracorpuscular defects (i.e., the erythrocyte itself is
initially normal).
a. Complement-mediated lysis
(1) Complement (Cs) is deposited onto the erythrocyte membrane by surface antigen-
antibody reactions. If complement is activated to C, the membrane attack complex is
(2) Complement-mediated lysis occurs most commonly in immune-mediated anemias when
IgM is involved. IgM is very effective in fixing complement. In contrast, IgG fixes
complement poorly but may occasionally cause complement-mediated lysis.
(3) IgM-mediated complement lysis is the mechanism in most cases of hemolytic disease of
newborn foals (neonatal isoerythrolysis) and transfusion reactions (in cats and large animals).
Occasionally, a similar mechanism involving IgM may occur in autoimmune hemolytic
anemia.
(4) Complement fixation to Cs promotes phagocytosis but not intravascular lysis.
b. Physical injury
(1) Traumatic disruption of the erythrocyte membrane can occur from the shearing effect of
intravascular fibrin strands.
(2) Because fibrin usually is formed in small blood vessels, this type of anemia is called
"microangiopathic anemia."
(3) Examples of microangiopathic anemia include disseminated intravascular coagulation,
vasculitis, hemangiosarcoma, and heartworm disease.
(4) Schistocytes are fragmented erythrocytes whose membranes have been altered by trauma
(Figure 1.7). Their presence suggests shearing of erythrocyte membranes and the presence of
microangiopathic anemia
c. Oxidative injury (Case 3)
(1) Oxidants affect the erythrocyte in three ways:
(a) Denaturation of Hb with Heinz body formation
(b) Oxidation and cross-linking of membrane proteins with eccentrocyte formation
(c) Oxidation of hemoglobin iron (Fe?t) with the formation of methemoglobin (Fet).
This interferes with oxygen transport but does not cause anemia.
(2) Heinz body formation and oxidation of cell membranes can cause suffcient cellular
damage for hemoglobin to escape from the cytoplasm.
(3) If intravascular lysis does not occur, these altered cells are removed prematurely from
circulation by phagocytosis.
(4) The erythrocyte is protected from daily exposure to oxidants via two major pathways.
(a) Reduced glutathione, which neutralizes oxidants, is produced and maintained in the
reduced state by the pentose phosphate (hexose monophosphate) pathway. Deficiency of
enzymes and intermediates (e.g., glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase) in this pathway
can lead to membrane oxidation and Heinz body formation in the presence of excessive
exogenous oxidants.
(b) Iron is maintained in the reduced state by methemoglobin reductase; accumulation
of methemoglobin is minimized. Methemoglobin reductase deficiency has been reported
 in dogs and one horse.
(5) In most cases, the offending oxidant is drug- or diet-derived. Either the oxidant or its
intermediate metabolites directly oxidize or interfere with formation of reduced glutathione
(L'I amble) aaeuep anepixo isasans sairuasoa io saipoq zuaH (9)
d. Osmotic lysis
ERYTHROCYTES
35
(1) Hemolysis may be associated with hypophosphatemia, especially in patients with
diabetes.
(2) Membrane alterations insuffcient to allow leakage of Hb may alter permeability to the
extent that excess water is drawn into the normally hypertonic cell and lysis occurs.
(3) Hypotonic intravenous fluids cause osmotic lysis.
(4) Cold hemoglobinuria of cattle is thought to occur by this mechanism.
(5) Many of the causes listed under extravascular hemolysis (Table 1.2) may alter the
 membrane of some cells to the degree that osmotic lysis occurs prior to phagocytosis.
e. Membrane alterations by other mechanisms
(1) Castor beans contain ricin, which causes direct membrane lysis.
(2) Snake venoms have lytic properties.
(3) Bacterial toxins, such as the phospholipase of Clostridium novyi, directly attack
membrane lipids.
(4) Babesia spp. multiply in the erythrocyte and disrupt the membrane upon exiting
the cell.
f.  Intravascular causes of hemolysis do not lyse all affected erythrocytes; some altered cells may
remain in circulation and are subsequently removed by phagocytosis.
2. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of intravascular hemolytic anemia
a. Intravascular hemolysis usually presents as a peracute or acute disease.
b. History may reveal exposure to causative drugs or plants, recent transfusion of incompatible
blood, or recent ingestion of colostrum.
C. A regenerative response occurs, but it may not be evident in early stages because two to three
days are required before significant reticulocytosis occurs.
d. Hemoglobinemia (free Hb in the plasma) is the principal feature of intravascular hemolysis.
Hemoglobinemia is usually detected by the following:
(1) Red discoloration of plasma
(2) Increased MCHC and MCH
(3) Decreased serum haptoglobin and hemopexin concentrations
 Hemoglobinuria may occur 12 to 24 hours following hemolysis if the concentration of free
hemoglobin saturates the available haptoglobin and hemopexin and exceeds the capacity of the
renal tubular epithelial cells to absorb and metabolize any hemoglobin that passes the
glomerular flter.
f. Hemosiderinuria occurs if there is suffcient renal tubular epithelial cell absorption and
metabolism to form detectable hemosiderin.
g.Hyperbilirubinemia
(1) Bilirubin is not formed until 8 to l0 hours after the onset of the hemolytic episode
(2) Hyperbilirubinemia will occur if bilirubin formation is of sufficient magnitude to exceed
the capacity of the liver to remove bilirubin from plasma, conjugate it, and excrete it into
bile
(3) Unconjugated bilirubin is the predominant form early in the disease. Conjugated
bilirubin becomes more prominent with time and occasionally may be the major form present.
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is accompanied by bilirubinuria (Chapters 7 and 9).
h. Additional laboratory findings may include schistocytes, keratocytes, Heinz bodies,
eccentrocytes, erythrocytic parasites (Figure 1.7), positive direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test on
patient's erythrocytes, or antibody titer to or culture of potentially causative organisms.
ANEMIA FROM REDUCED OR DEFECTIVE ERYTHROPOIESIS (TABLE 1.3)
Anemias caused by reduced or defective erythropoiesis are nonregenerative. They are characterized by an
abnormal bone marrow that cannot maintain effective erythropoiesis. The clinical course is usually long
36
CHAPTER 1
TABLE 1.3.
CAUSES OF REDUCED OR DEFECTIVE ERYTHROPOIESIS.
 Reduced erythropoiesis
Defective erythropoiesis
Anemia of chronic disorders
Abnormal maturation
Chronic inflammation
Congenital dyserythropoiesis of Herefords
Neoplasia
 Dyserythropoiesis of English Springer Spaniels
Cytotoxic bone marrow damage
Erythremic myelosis
 Bracken ferm
Erythroleukemia
Cytotoxic cancer drugs
Macrocytosis of Poodles
Estrogen
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Furazolidone
 Disorders of heme synthesis
Phenylbutazone
Chloramphenicol toxicity
Radiation
Copper deficiency
Erythropoietin lack
Iron deficiency
Chronic renal disease
Lead poisoning
Hypoadrenocorticism
Molybdenum poisoning
Hypoandrogenism
Pyridoxine deficiency
Hypopituitarism
Disorders of mucleic acid symthesis
Hypothyroidism
Bt deficiency, malabsorption
Immume-me diated
Folic acid deficiency
 Pure red cell aplasia
Infections
Anaplasma (formerly Ehrlichia) spp.
Feline leukemia virus
Feline panleukopenia vinus
Parvovirus
Irichostrongyles (non-bloodsucking)
Myelophthisis
Lymphocytic leukemia
Metastatic neoplasia
Myelofbrosis
Myeloproliferative disorders
Osteopetrosis, osteosclerosis
and the onset insidious. Nonregenerative anemias, such as the anemia of inflammatory disease, are
observed commonly in veterinary medicine.
1. GENERaL CONSIDERATIONS
A. Mechanisms
1. Ability of the bone marrow to sustain erythrocytic mass requires the following items to be
adequate:
a. Precursor cells (i.e., multi- and unipotential stem cells)
b. Nutrients (e.g., iron and B vitamins)
C.
.Stimulation (eg, Epo, IL-3, G-CSF GM-CSF)
d.Microenvironment
2. Primary and secondary bone marrow failure
ERYTHROCYTES
37
a. Primary bone marrow failure from intramarrow disease results in inadequate production of
stem and progenitor cells.
b. Secondary bone marrow failure occurs from extramarrow causes such as lack of nutrients or
growth factors (Epo, colony stimulating factors, or cytokines).
3. Bone marrow failure may be selective for the erythroid series (e.g., pure red cell aplasia) or may
affect granulocytes and/or platelet-producing megakaryocytes leading to bicytopenia or
with granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia.
B. Bone marrow response
1. When the number of precursor cells or erythropoietic stimulation is inadequate, the erythroid
marrow is normo- to hypocellular.
2. Maturation abnormalities are associated with a hypercellular marrow and ineffective
erythropoiesis (i.e., failure of the erythrocytes produced to mature normally or to be delivered to
the blood). Maturation abnormalities are especially prominent in nutritional deficiencies,
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), leukemias, and hereditary dyserythropoiesis. Abnormal cells
such as microcytes, macrocytes, or nRBCs usually are observed in the stained blood film
3. All degrees of bone marrow failure can occur, from suboptimal response of the erythroid marrow
following hemorrhage or hemolysis to complete aplasia.
I. DIFFERENTIATION OF ANEIMIAS CAUSED BY REDUCED OR DEFECTIVE ERYTHROPOIESIS
This practical approach to the diagnosis of nonregenerative anemias is based on erythrocyte
morphology, blood neutrophil and platelet numbers, and bone marrow cellularity. These anemias can
be divided into the following hematologic patterns.
A. Normocytic, normochromic anemia with normal to increased neutrophil and platelet counts, and
an increased M:E ratio caused by hypocellular erythroid marrow (this is expected but not always
1. Anemia of erythropoietin lack caused by certain diseases:
a. Chronic renal disease (Cases 15, 19)
(1) The degree of anemia is roughly pmportional to the severity of the uremia.
(2)  Causes for the development of anemia
(a) Erythropoietin deficiency caused by destruction of the Epo-secreting peritubular
interstitial cells
(b) Hemolysis caused by factors in uremic plasma
(c) Gastrointestinal hemorrhage from abnormal platelet function and vascular lesions
(d) Inhibitors of erythropoiesis in uremic plasma
b. Endocrinopathies (e.g., hypoadrenocorticism, hypoandrogenism, and hypopituitarism)
(1) Some of these hormones (e.g., androgens) may enhance the action of erythropoietin.
(2) In other cases, the exact mechanism of anemia is unknown.
2. Anemia of inflammatory disease (AID) (Cases 7, 8, 10, 11)
a. AID (anemia of chronic disease [ACD], anemia of chronic disorders) occurs in chronic
 infectious, inflammatory, or neoplastic disorders. The onset of anemia may be as short as three
to 10 days.
 b. AID is mediated by hepcidin, a peptide made within and released by the liver in response to
inflammation and induced by the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6.
c. Diminished marrow responsiveness to erythropoietin, blunted erythropoietin release, and
 impaired availability of iron to the erythron are all involved in the pathogenesis of anemia.
d. Erythrocyte life span is shortened.
2. Laboratory findings in AID:
38
CHAPTER1
(1) Decreased to normal serum iron concentration
(2) Decreased to normal total iron-binding capacity
(3) Normal to increased serum ferritin concentration
(4) Normal to increased bone marrow macrophage iron stores
(5) Mild to moderate anemia (Hct 20% to 30%) that is usually nonprogressive
(6) Normocytic, normochromic erythrocyte indices
(7) Microcytosis and hypochromia rarely occur. Sequestration of iron must be markedly
prolonged to cause microcytosis and hypochromia in AID.
(8) Increased serum copper and zinc concentrations
(9) Variable serum erythropoietin concentration
(10) Increased serum hepcidin concentration
f. Signs of inflammatory or neoplastic disease often dominate the dlinical picture, obscuring
 signs of anemia.
0. If the primary disease process is alleviated, then recovery from AID follows.
3. Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-associated nonregenerative anemia
a. Erythroid stem and progenitor cells are selectively killed by FeLV.
b. The anemia may be macrocytic due to asynchronous maturation.
4. Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA)
a. Anemia is characterized by a selective loss of erythroid precursors in the bone marrow.
b. PRCA appears to be immune-mediated because it may respond to treatment with
 corticosteroids and/or lymphocytotoxic drugs.
c. Some cases of PRCA have been positive by Coombs' testing and have been designated as
"nonregenerative autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
d. Rarely, PRCA may be observed secondary to lymphoma.
 5. Unknown mechanisms of nonregenerative anemia
a. Trichostrongyle infection (non-blood sucking) in cattle and sheep
b. Liver disease
c. Vitamin E deficiency
(1) Dietary deficiency of vitamin E may produce a nonregenerative anemia in swine.
(2) The erythroid marrow is hyperplastic with evidence of dyserythropoiesis.
B. Normocytic, normochromic anemia with neutropenia (except in the case of myeloproliferative
disorders) and/or thrombocytopenia, variable M:E ratio. Generalized bone marrow hypocellularity and/
or proliferation of abnormal cells may be present. These types of anemia include the following:
1. Aplastic anemia or pancytopenia (Case 4)
a. This is a disease of the multipotential stem cell or bone marrow microenvironment that leads
 t0 pancytopenia and an acellular, fatty bone marrow.
b. Concomitant defciencies in erythropoiesis, granulopoiesis, and thrombopoiesis occur.
Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia usually precede the development of anemia because of the
shorter life span of leukocytes and platelets.
c. Causes of aplastic anemia
(1) Predictable or idiosyncratic drug reactions that can vary by species (e.g., late estrogen
toxicosis in dogs, chloramphenicol toxicosis in cats, phenylbutazone, trimethoprim-
sulfadiazine, albendazole)
(2) Chemical exposure and plant toxicosis (e.g., bracken fern in ruminants and horses)
(3) Irradiation
( ie  s  iaa a on s  n si n ()
(5) Infectious agents (e.g., FeLV in cats, ehrlichiosis in dogs)
2. Myelophthisic anemia
a. In myelophthisic anemia, the bone marrow is physically replaced by an abnormal
proliferation of stromal, inflammatory, or neoplastic cells. Examples of disease leading to
myelophthisic anemia:
ERYTHROCYTES
39
(1) Myeloproliferative disorders (e.g., hematopoietic malignancies, leukemias)
(2) Myelofbrosis
(3) Osteosclerosis
(4) Diffuse granulomatous osteomyelitis
(5) Metastatic cancer
b. Bone marrow aspirates may yield very few cells in some conditions (e.g., myelofibrosis) and
many cells in other instances (myeloproliferative disorders). Core biopsies are preferred to
diagnose stromal reactions
C. Leukoerythroblastic reactions (metarubricytosis without reticulocytosis and a neutrophilic
left shift in the absence of inflammation) may occur from disruption of marrow architecture
with disorderly release of myeloid and erythroid precursor cells.
d. A mild regenerative response, caused by isolated erythroid foci, may be observed in the early
 stages of myelophthisic anemia.
2. Dacryocytes (teardrop-shaped poikilocytes) are present in human blood smears, but have not
been recognized consistently in animal blood smears.
f. Myelophthisic anemia caused by myeloproliferative disorders often have a leukocytosis with a
leukemic blood picture.
3. Nonregenerative anemias caused by infectious agents
a. Acute ehrlichiosis may present as pancytopenia. In chronic ehrlichiosis, only mild
thrombocytopenia may be evident on the hemogram.
 b. FeLV infection occasionally may cause concomitant anemia and leukopenia, reulting in
pancytopenia. FeLV-induced anemias may be macrocytic.
c. Feline and canine parvoviral infections destroy hematopoietic cells, lymphoid cells.
and gastrointestinal crypt epithelial cells. Neutropenia is often evident on the leukogram.
Despite the destruction of hematopoietic cells by parvovirus, the anemia is usually masked
by relative polycythemia from dehydration secondary to vomiting, diarrhea, and lack of
fluid intake.
d. Canine parvoviral infection of suffcient duration can produce concurrent neutropenia and
nonregenerative anemia.
C. Microcytic, hypochromic anemia with variable neutrophil and platelet counts, and usually a
hypercellular marrow with a variable M:E ratio. Causes of this type of anemia include the following:
1. Iron deficiency (Case 5)
a. The most common cause of iron defciency is chronic hemorrhage, usually with external
blood loss.
 b. Young, rapidly growing animals consuming an all-milk diet may have transient dietary iron
deficiency resulting in mild anemia.
c. Iron defciency anemia is associated with ineffective erythropoiesis and a hyperplastic marrow
early in the disease process. With chronicity, the bone marrow becomes hypoplastic and both
microcytosis and hypochromia are more evident.
d. Laboratory findings in iron deficiency anemia
(1) Decreased serum iron concentration
(2) Variable total iron-binding capacity, but TIBC is often within the reference interval or
increased
(3) Low percent saturation of transferrin
(4) Decrease or absence of marrow macrophage iron stores
(5) Decreased serum ferritin concentration
(6) Increased free erythrocyte protoporphyrin
(7) Microcytosis. Microcytosis develops because the critical concentration of hemoglobin
necessary to stop cell division is not reached, and an extra division occurs. Microcytosis often
precedes hypochromasia.
(8) Hypochromasia is present in most species, but may not be observed in the cat.
40
CHAPTER 1
(9) Poilkilocytes (e.g., schistocytes, keratocytes). Poikilocytes are thought to result from
oxidation of membrane proteins.
(10) Hypercellular bone marrow in early disease with a disproportionate number of late
rubricytes and metarubricytes due to extra cell divisions.
(1l) Low serum Hepcidin concentration.
2. Pyridoxine deficiency. This vitamin is a cofactor in heme synthesis. Pyridoxine deficiency leads
t0 a failure to utilize iron and an iron-lack-type anemia.
3. Copper deficiency. Copper-containing ceruloplasmin and hephaestin are important in iron
absorption and transfer between intestine, macrophages, and transferrin. Therefore, copper
deficiency leads to iron deficiency.
4. Dyserythropoiesis in English Springer Spaniels. This disease is associated with polymyopathy
and cardiac disease and is characterized by a microcytic, nonregenerative anemia with
metarubricytosis and dysplastic change of nucleated erythroid cells.
5. Microcytosis without anemia occurs in the Asian dog breeds including the Akita
Chow Chow, Shar Pei, and Shiba Inu. Microcytosis also has been reported in a dog with hereditary
elliptocytosis.
6. Microcytosis with mild anemia is a common finding in portosystemic shunts (Pss) in the dog
(Case l3). Alterations in iron metabolism appear similar to those in the anemia of inflammatory
disease. Normal to decreased serum iron concentration and serum TIBC occur in nearly half of
affected dogs. Serum ferritin concentrations are normal to increased in conjunction with stainable
marrow and hepatic iron stores. One-third of cats with PSS exhibit microcytosis, but anemia usually
is not observed.
7. Members of the Camelidae family, including llamas, have elliptical erythrocytes. In iron
deficiency, these erythrocytes are microcytic and exhibit irregular or eccentric areas of
hypochromasia representing irregular Hb distribution within the cell
 8. Drugs or chemicals, including chloramphenicol and lead toxicoses, can block synthesis
of heme.
D. Macrocytic, normochromic anemia with variable neutrophil and platelet counts. M:E ratio is usually
low because of hypercellular erythroid marrow. Causes of macrocytic, normochromic anemia include
the following:
1. Ruminants grazing cobalt-deficient or molybdenum-rich pastures
2. Vitamin Bi2 and folic acid deficiencies
a. This type of anemia has not been produced experimentally in animals, but macrocytic
anemias that responded to these vitamins have been described (e.g., Giant Schnauzers).
b. Megaloblastoid erythroid precursors are observed in the bone marrow.
c. Enlarged, hypersegmented neutrophils may be observed in the blood smear.
d. The hypercellular bone marrow indicates ineffective erythropoiesis
3. Erythremic myelosis or erythroleukemia (Chapter 3)
4. Congenital dyserythropoiesis and progressive alopecia of polled Hereford calves. This disease is
characterized by a macrocytic, nonregenerative anemia with ineffective erythropoiesis.
5. FeLV infection. Cats may present with a macrocytic anemia, but the erythroid marrow is usually
hypocellular.
 6. Macrocytosis of Poodles. This hereditary condition is uncommon. Neither anemia nor
reticulocytosis occurs. Erythrocyte counts typically are within the low end of the reference interval
and MCVs often are very high (over l0o fL)
POLYCYTHEMIA
Polycythemia is an increase in the Hct, RBC count, and Hb concentration.
ERYTHROCYtES
41
I. SPURIOUS OR RELATIVE POLYCYTHEMIA. THE tOTAL RBC MASS IS NORMAL. CAUSES OF
RELATIVE POLYCYTHEMIA INClUDE THE FOLLOWING:
A. Dehydration (Cases 6, 9, 18, 24)
1. A decrease in plasma volume causes a relative increase in the Hct, RBC count, Hb concentration.
and plasma protein concentration.
2. Determination of dehydration is based on physical examination and not on laboratory tests.
3. Mechanisms of relative polycythemia
a. Water loss caused by vomiting, diarrhea, excessive diuresis, water deprivation, perspiration,
or febrile dehydration
b. Internal fluid loss in shock via increased vascular permeability
c. Loss of fluid by effusion into body cavities
4. The Hct of sick animals may fluctuate 2% to 5% daily as a consequence of changes in the
patient's hydration status.
B. Redistribution of erythrocytes
1. Excitement causes epinephrine release and splenic contraction. Splenic contraction delivers
  a n ( = i  s i-
2. This effect is common in the horse and cat.
Il. ABSOLUTE POLYCYTHEMIA
 Increased erythropoiesis expands the total RBC mass. Plasma volume and plasma protein concentration
are within the reference interval.
A. Primary absolute polycythemia (polycythemia vera or primary erythrocytosis) is a
myeloproliferative disorder of stem cells
1. Clinical pathology findings include the following:
a. Erythropoietin concentration is within the reference interval or decreased.
b. PO, is within the reference interval.
c. Thrombocytosis and leukocytosis occasionally accompany the erythrocytosis.
B. Secondary absolute polycythemia is caused by increased Epo secretion.
1. Appropriate, compensatory Epo secretion occurs during chronic hypoxia (low PO2) which
occurs in the following instances:
a. High altitude
b. Chronic pulmonary disease
c. Cardiovascular anomalies with right to left shunting of blood
2. Inappropriate Epo secretion (normal PO2, no hypoxia) occurs in some cases of hydronephrosis
or renal cysts, Epo-secreting neoplasms (embryonal nephroma, renal carcinoma, uterine leiomyoma,
cerebellar hemangioma, hepatoma, other endocrine neoplasms), and certain endocrinopathies (Case
27).
C. Animals with severe polycythemia may present for seizures because of blood sludging and CNS
ischemia.
REFERENCES
Abboud CN, Lichtman MA: 1995. Structure of the bone marrow. In: Beutler E, Lichtman MA, Coller
BS, Kipps TJ (eds): Williams Hematology, 5th ed. McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, pp. 25-38.
42
CHAPTER 1
Barker RN, Grufydd-Jones TJ, Stokes CR, et al: 1992. Autoimmune haemolysis in the dog:
Relationship between anemia and the levels of red blood cell bound immunoglobulins and complement
measured by an enzyme-linked antiglobulin test. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 34:1-20.
Campbell KL: 1990. Diagnosis and management of polycythemia in dogs. Compend Contin Edur Pratt
Vet 12:543-550.
Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Wiliams and Wikins, pp. 105-109.
Carney HC, England J: 1993. Feline hemobartonellosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prart 23:79-90.
Christopher MM, Lee SE: 1994. Red cell morphologic alterations in cats with hepatic disease. Vet Clin
Pathol 23:7-12.
Cook SM, Lothrop CD: 1994. Serum erythropoietin concentrations measured by radioimmunoassay in
normal, polycythemic, and anemic dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 8:18-25.
Day MJ: 2000. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalm's
Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 799-806.
Desnoyers M: 2oo0. Anemias associated with Heinz bodies. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds):
Edwards CJ, Fuller J: 1996. Oxidative stress in erythrocytes. Comp Haematol Int 6:24-31.
Franco DA, Lin TL, Leder JA: 1992. Bovine congenital erythropoietic porphyria. Compend Contin Educ
Prart Vet 14:822-825.
Fyfe JC, Giger U, Hall CA, et al: 1991. Inherited selective intestinal cobalamin malabsorption and
cobalamin deficiency in dogs. Pediatr Res 29:24-31.
Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins, pp. 154-162.
Giger U: 1992. Erythropoietin and its clinical use. Compend Contin Edur Prac Vet 14:25-34.
Giger U: 2000. Erythrocyte phosphofructokinase and pyruvate kinase deficiencies. In: Feldman BF,
Baltimore, pp. 1020-1025.
Giger U: 2000. Regenerative anemia caused by blood loss or hemolysis. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC
(eds): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine. Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 5th ed., Vol. 2. Philadelphia
WB Saunders Co, pp. 1784-1804.
 a i s poo a no s ai  a  id '  ' 
States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1230-1232
Hagemoser WA: 1993. Comments on reticulocyte lifespans. Vet Clin Pathol 22:4-5.
Harvey JW: 1997. The erythrocyte: Physiology metabolism, and biochemical disorders. In: Clinical
Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. San Diego, Academic Press, pp. 157-203.
Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Wiliams and Wilkins, pp. 1008-1011.
Holland CT, Canfeld PJ, Watson ADJ, et al: 199l. Dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy, and cardiac
disease in three related English springer spaniels. J Vet Intern Mod 5:151-159.
Jain NC: 1993. Essentials of Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger
ERYTHROCYTES
43
Kazmierski KJ, Ogilvie GK, Fettman MJ, et al: 2ool. Serum zinc, chromium, and iron concentrations
in dogs with lymphoma and osteosarcoma. J Vet Intern Med 15:585-588.
Kemna E, Tjalsma H, Willems H, et al: 2008. Hepcidin: from discovery to differential diagnosis.
Haematologica 93:90-97.
King LG, Giger U, Diserens D, et al: 1992. Anemia of chronic renal failure in dogs. J Vet Intern Med
6:264-270.
S              
(1986-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:783-788.
Kociba GJ: 2000. Macrocytosis. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary
Hematology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, pp. 196-199.
McConnico RS, Roberts MC, Tompkins M: 1992. Penicillin-induced immune-mediated hemolytic
anemia in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 20l:1402-1403.
Mair TS, Taylor EGR, Hillyer MH: 1990. Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia in eight horses. Vet Rec
126:51-53.
Means RT, Krantz SB: 1992. Progress in understanding the pathogenesis of the anemia of chronic
disease. Blood 80:1639-1647.
in dogs with congenital portosystemic vascular anomalies. J Vet Intern Med 8:55-56.
Morgan RV, Moore FM, Pearce LK, et al: 199l.Clinical and laboratory findings in small companion
animals with lead poisoning: 347 cases (1977-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1909:93-97.
Morin DE, Garry FB, Weiser MG, et al: 1992. Hematologic features of iron deficiency anemia in lamas.
Vet Pathol 29:400-404.
Ogawa E, Koboyaski K, Yoshiura N, et al: 1987. Bovine postparturient hemoglobinemia:
Hypophosphatemia and metabolic disorder in red blood cells. Am J Vet Res 48:13001303.
l e  da d o an i s po pe sue   a o  o
             
and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 778-782.
Rebar AH, Lewis HB, DeNicola DB, et al: l98l. Red cell fragmentation in the dog: An editorial review.
Vet Pathol 18:415-426.
Rottaman JB, English RV, Breitschwerdt EB, et al: 199l. Bone marrow hypoplasia in a cat treated with
griseofulvin. J Am Vet Med Assoc 354:429-431.
Smith JE: 1992. Iron metabolism in dogs and cats. Compend Contin Edur Prart Vet 14:39-43.
Steffen DJ, Elliott GS, Leipold HW, et al: 1992. Congenital dyserythropoiesis and progressive alopecia
in polled Hereford calves: Hematologic, biochemical, bone marrow cytology, electrophoretic, and flow
cytometric findings. JVet Diagn Invest 4:31-37.
Stone MS, Freden GO: 1990. Differentiation of anemia of inflammatory disease from anemia of iron
deficiency. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 12:963-966.
virus infection in tw0 cats. J Am Vet Med Assor 19l:93-96.
Tvedten H, Weiss D: 1999. The complete blood count and bone marrow examination: General
comments and selected techniques. In: Willard MD, Tvedten H, Turnwald GH (eds): Small Animal
Clinical Diagnosis by Laboratory Methods, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders, pp. 1l-30.
44
CHAPTER 1
Tvedten H, Weiss DJ: 20o0. Classification and laboratory evaluation of anemia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl
JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins, pp. 143-150.
laboratories. Vet Clin Pathol 13:27-31.
Comp Haematol Int 3:185-189.
 (        1    s
Vet Med Assoc 196:472-475.
CHAPteR
LEUKOCYTES
Julie L. Webb, DVM, and Kenneth S. Latimer, DVM, PhD
Essential coNcepts of leukocyte Morphology, functIon, productIon,
AND KINETICS
Mammalian leukocytes include the neutrophil, monocyte, eosinophil, basophil, and lymphocyte.
 Heterophils are the avian equivalent of mammalian neutrophils. All leukocytes participate in body
 defense, but each is functionally independent. A general outline of hematopoiesis, including
leukocytes, is presented in Figure 1.2 in Chapter 1.
1. NEUTROPHILS AND AVIAN HETEROPHILS
A. Morphology (Figure 2.1)
1. Mature neutrophils of mammals have multiple nuclear lobes separated by constrictions
(polymorphonuclear) and have colorless to pale pink cytoplasm. Avian heterophils have fewer
 nuclear lobes but prominent dull red cytoplasmic granulation.
2. Granules are of two types.
a.
 Primary or azurophilic granules
(1) Primary granules stain reddish-purple with Romanowsky stains but generally do not stain
and are not visible after the promyelocyte stage of development.
(2)  Formation ceases early and they subsequently are diluted by cellular division.
(3)  They are lysosomes and contain microbiocidal elements (myeloperoxidase, lysozyme,
defensins, and bacterial-permeability-inducing protein) and enzymes (acid hydrolases, neutral
proteases, napthol As-D choloracetate esterase, and elastase).
(4)  Avian heterophils lack significant myeloperoxidase activity.
(5) Ultrastructurally, primary granules are larger and more electron dense than secondary
granules.
b.
 Secondary or specific granules
(1) Neutrophil secondary granules usually are not visible with Romanowsky stains.
(2) Secondary granules of avian heterophils appear dull red and elongate with pointed ends.
(3)  Granule contents include microbiocidal elements (lactoferrin, lysozyme, cathelicidins) and
enzymes (collagenase, apolactoferrin plasminogen activator).
(4)  Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity is present in neutrophils of healthy cattle and horses;
neutrophils of other domestic mammals and birds lack ALP activity.
(5) Ultrastructurally, secondary granules are more electron lucent than primary granules.
3. The stages of neutrophil maturation (Figure 2.2; also see Figure l.7 in Chapter l)
45
A
              
Pelger-Huet anomaly; F avian heterophil, monocyte, and thrombocyte; continued.
46
FIGURE 2.1. continued. G. normal and toxic avian heterophils; H. canine eosinophil and basophil; 1. pair of
   a   n s      
porcine eosinophil; continued.
48
CHAPTE R2
M
o00
Q
FIGURE 2.l. continued. M. feline basophil; N. canine mature small lymphocyte; O. canine reactive lymphocyte or
irmrmunocyte; P three canine monocytes; Q. mast cell in the blood of a dog with enteritis.
a.Myeloblast
(1)  The nucleus is round to oval with dispersed chromatin and nucleoli.
(2)  The type I myeloblast lacks visible granules; the type II myeloblast may have a few (less
than 15) primary (azurophilic) cytoplasmic granules.
b. Promyelocyte (progranulocyte)
(1)  The nucleus is round to oval with dispersed chromatin; nucleoli or nucleolar rings may be
present.
LEUKOCYTES
49
Mybblasi
Promyclocyte
Myeloeyte
8
Myelocyte
Myelocyte..
Metamyelocyte
Segrmenter
FIGURE 2.2. Sequence of granulopoiesis.
(2) Many primary (azurophilic), cytoplasmic granules characterize this stage of development.
C.
Myelocyte
(1) The nucleus is oval with some agregation of chromatin, nucleoli are not visible.
(2)  Primary (azurophilic) granules lose their staining characteristics in this and subsequent
stages of maturation and are not visible.
d. Metamyelocyte
(1) The nucleus is thick and indented with bulbous ends.
(2) Chromatin is more agregated than in previous stages of development.
c. Band
(1)  The nucleus is U- or S-shaped and of uniform thickness, but not as thick as that of
metamyelocytes.
(2) Chromatin is more aggregated than that of metamyelocytes.
f. Segmenter
(1) The nucleus is separated into two to five lobes by constrictions. Filaments between
nuclear segments, which are common in human neutrophils, are rare in neutrophils and
heterophils of animals. The chromatin is very densely aggregated.
s pe squ enu  ds aaq a snu puis an (
nuclear lobes.
(3)  The cytoplasm of bovine neutrophils is orange to pink with Romanowsky stains. The
cytoplasm of other mammalian neutrophils usually is colorless, but may occasionally have very
faint pink granulation.
(4)  Avian heterophils have two to three nuclear lobes and dull-red, needle-shaped,
cytoplasmic granules.
B. Regulation of granulopoeisis
1. During microbial invasion or other tissue injury that produces a demand for neutrophils, T
lymphocytes, macrophages, and stromal cells are activated and release growth factors, including the
following:
a. Colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) such as stem cell factor (SCF), granulocyte-CSF (G-CSF),
and granulocyte/macrophage-CSF (GM-CSF).
b. Cytokines, including lymphokines and interleukins (IL-3, IL-6, and IL-1l), stimulate
endothelial cells and fibroblasts to produce CSFs.
 2. CsFs are glycoproteins that act directly on hematopoietic subpopulations in the bone marrow,
which results in the following:
a. Increased cellular proliferation
50
CHAPTER 2
b. Cellular differentiation
c. Inducement of and enhanced cell function
3. Functions of other mediators of the inflammatory response
a. Stimulating bone marrow release of neutrophils
b. Promoting margination and adhesion of neutrophils to endothelium in affected tissues
c. Stimulating emigration of neutrophils through the endothelium at the site of inflammation
d. Inducing chemotaxis toward the site of tissue injury
2. Enhancing phagocytosis and microbicidal activity
4. The end result is an increase in the number of functioning neutrophils at the site of tissue injury.
C. Production
1. Neutrophil production and maturation take place in the bone marrow. A similar process occurs
with avian heterophils.
2. Bone marrow neutrophils conceptually may be divided into two compartments, although there is
no physical distinction between them.
a. Proliferation or mitotic compartment
(1) Myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and myelocytes are capable of mitosis and comprise this
compartment.
(2) Four to five cell divisions occur, producing 16 to 32 cells from one differentiating stem
cell. There are three mitoses in the myelocyte stage; therefore, most of the increase in cell
numbers occurs at this stage.
(3) Maturation occurs concurrently with proliferation in this compartment.
(4) The transit time in this compartment is approximately two and a halfdays.
(5) In health, approximately 20% of the neutrophils in the bone marrow are in the
proliferation compartment.
(6) Up to 20% of granulopoiesis is ineffective in the healthy dog. Premature death of cells,
usually myelocytes, occurs. This degree of ineffective granulopoiesis has not been documented
in other species.
b. Maturation and storage compartment
(1) Metamyelocytes, bands, and segmenters constitute this compartment. These cells cannot
replicate but are functionally mature
(2) The normal transit time in this compartment has been estimated to be two to three days in
 the dog, but can be shortened by early release of immature neutrophils into the blood during
marked tissue demand for these cells
(3) In health, approximately 80% of the neutrophils in bone marrow are in the storage
the rate of cell turnover remains unchanged.
(4) Release of neutrophils from bone marrow into blood is orderly and age-related; the most
mature cells (segmenters) are released first.
(5) During increased tissue demand for neutrophils, bands and younger forms may be
released from the marrow prematurely, resulting in a left shift.
3. Mechanisms for increased neutrophil production
a. Increased stem cell recruitment
(1)  This probably occurs at the earliest demand for neutrophils
(2) Approximately three to five days are required for this increase to influence the number of
blood neutrophils.
 si e s s j sni m q 'sn de rn ()
quickly than those of large animals because of greater proliferative capacity.
b. Increased effective granulopoiesis
(1) Additional divisions may occur within the proliferation compartment, each additional
division doubles the output of cells
L EUKOCYTES
51
(2) Increased output of cells may occur by reducing myelocyte attrition (ineffective
granulopoiesis), which normally occurs in healthy dogs.
(3) This effect is realized in the blood in two to three days.
C.
 Shortened marrow transit or maturation time
(1) Neutrophils are released from the bone marrow into the blood at a faster rate.
(2) Increased mitosis of neutrophil progenitor cells and shortened maturation of their progeny
in the bone marrow may temporarily meet increased tissue demand for neutrophils
4. Neutrophil release from the bone marrow
a. Release is mediated by G-CSF, GM-CSF, C5a, tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α and TNF-8),
and, possibly, a cleavage factor of the third component of complement, which are derived from
 macrophages and other cells.
b. Increased rate of release from the storage compartment causes the rapidly developing
neutrophilia (earlier than two days) that follows initial tissue demand for neutrophils
c. The granulocytic marrow at this point exhibits a shift toward immaturity with a relative
increase in the proliferation compartment because mature cells (segmenters) have been removed from
 the storage pool.
d As tissue demand for neutrophils intensifies and the storage reserve of segmenters diminishes,
band neutrophils appear in the blood (left shift). In severe situations, they may be followed by
 neutrophilic metamyelocytes (juveniles) or even more immature cells. A left shift indicates a
decreased granulocyte reserve and usually denotes a tissue demand for neutrophils.
D. Neutrophil kinetics in blood
1. Neutrophils move more slowly than erythrocytes and plasma within postcapillary venules
because of adhesion molecules on both neutrophils and endothelial cells. This causes an uneven
distribution of neutrophils within the blood vasculature. The concentration of neutrophils in post
capillary venules is greater than that in large-vessel blood
a. Neutrophils that are hesitatingly adherent to the vascular endothelium constitute the marginal
neutrophil pool (MNP) and are not quantitated in the routine white blood cell (WBC) count.
b. Neutrophils moving as fast as erythrocytes and plasma in the axial or central blood flow of
arteries and veins make up the circulating neutrophil pool (CNP)
(1) Neutrophil numbers derived from the routine WBC count and differential count represent
 the approximate size of the CNP.
(2) CNP plus MNP equals the total blood neutrophil pool (TBNP).
C.
 The MNP is equal to the CNP in the dog, horse, and calf. The feline MNP is approximately
three times larger than the CNP
2. The average transit time for a neutrophil in blood in health is approximately 10 hours
3. All blood neutrophils are replaced approximately two and a half times each day.
4. Neutrophils emigrate randomly from the blood into tissue spaces, unaffected by cell age.
Migration is unidirectional; they do not return to circulation.
5. In health, neutrophils can survive in the tissues for 24 to 48 hours. Ultimately, effete neutrophils
are largely removed by macrophages of the spleen, liver, bone marrow, and other tissues. Some
neutrophils may be lost from the body via secretions, excretions, or transmigration of mucous
membranes.
E. Function
1. Phagocytosis and microbicidal action are the primary functions of neutrophils. This activity is
conducted efficiently in tissue but not in blood.
a. Metabolically active processes for these functions include the following:
(1) Adherence to and emigration through the vessel wall
(2) Chemotaxis, a motile response toward an attractant (e.g., C5a, bacterial products,
arachidonic acid metabolites) in the tissue
52
CHAPTER2
(3) Ingestion and degranulation
(4) Bacterial killing
b. These functions may be compromised by deficiencies of various humoral or cellular
components, drugs, or toxic bacterial products, increasing susceptibility to disease.
2. When exposed to bacteria or their products, neutrophils undergo a respiratory burst and secrete
certain substances that may have the following functions:
a. Extracellular digestion of fibrinogen and complement components
b. Stimulation of the generation of inflammatory mediators
3. Neutrophils also may contribute to pathologic events of certain conditions (e.g., immune-
complex glomerulonephritis and rheumatoid arthritis) by releasing inflammatory mediators into the
surrounding tissues.
4. Abnormalities in neutrophil function involving adherence, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, and
bacterial killing have been described in animals. These abnormalities in neutrophil function may
predispose affected animals to disease.
5. Besides bactericidal activity, neutrophils can kill or inactivate some fungi, yeasts, algae, parasites,
and viruses.
6. Other functions of neutrophils may include elimination of transformed cells, amplification and
 modulation of acute inflammation, and minor involvement in regulation of granulopoiesis.
Il. MONoCYTeS-MACrOPHAGES
A. Morphology (Figure 2.1)
1. Monocyte. The maturation sequence of the monocyte includes the following:
a. Monoblast
(1)  This cell is of low frequency in the bone marrow.
(2) It is indistinguishable from the myeloblast with Romanowsky stains.
b. Promonocyte
(1) The nucleus is indented and irregular with finely stranded chromatin
(2) Ultrastructurally, there are bundled or scattered cytoplasmic flaments.
c. Monocyte
(1) As viewed in Romanowsky-stained blood flms, monocytes are generally the largest
leukocytes circulating in health.
(2) The nucleus is oval, reniform, bilobed, or trilobed with lacelike chromatin
(3)  The cytoplasm is blue-gray (darker than that of immature neutrophils such as myelocytes,
metamyelocytes, and bands), granular, and may or may not have vacuoles.
(@) Distinct, variably sized, round vacuoles in monocytes commonly are an artifact of
prolonged in vitro storage of EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetate) anticoagulated blood
prior to preparation of hematologic smears.
(b)  Vacuolation of monocytes in fresh blood smears may indicate cellular activation.
(c)Monocyte vacuoles are relatively large and distinct compared with the frothy
 appearance of neutrophils with toxic vacuolation.
(4) Pink cytoplasmic granules are lysosomes that contain peroxidase, acid hydrolases, Q-
naphthyl acetate and butyrate esterases, aryl sulfatase, and lysozyme
(5) Pseudopodia (short hair-like processes of the plasma membrane) may project from the cell
margins.
(6) Ultrastructural features include short profles of rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER),
 lysosomes, vacuoles, and microfilament bundles.
2. Macrophage
a. Macrophages are derived from blood monocytes.
LEUKOCYTES
53
b. Monocytes transformed into macrophages are rarely encountered in blood, but may be
 observed in capillary blood smears in disorders such as ehrlichiosis, histoplasmosis, leishmaniasis,
and immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
C.
Macrophages contain more granules and proteolytic enzymes than monocytes.
d. Monocytes or macrophages recruited from the blood to sites of inflammation are short-lived,
whereas resident tissue macrophages may survive for prolonged periods (weeks to months), are
capable of division, and are functional phagocytes
e. Monocyte-derived macrophages include the following:
(1)  Macrophages or histiocytes of exudates
(2) Pleural and peritoneal macrophages
(3) Pulmonary alveolar macrophages
(4)  Connective tissue histiocytes
(5) Macrophages of the spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow
(6) Kupffer cells of the liver
f. Monocyte-macrophage cells constitute the so-called “reticuloendothelial system"; however,
these cells do not produce reticular fibers and are not endothelial cells.
B. Production and kinetics
1. Monocytes are derived from a bipotential progenitor cell (CFU-GM) that is common to both
 monocytes and neutrophils.
SCF, M-CSF, GM-CSF, IL-1, IL-3, and IL-6.
3. There are probably at least three divisions from monoblast to the last promonocyte division.
4. Maturation is rapid, requiring only 24 to 36 hours.
5. Monocytes are released directly into blood from a promonocyte proliferation pool in bone
 i a  ae un  s is a re aos 
u  s a  s  pd as m u sa i ar (
6. Evidence for a marginated monocyte pool exists.
7. The average blood transit time of monocytes is longer than for neutrophils, ranging from
approximately 18 to 23 hours.
C. Function
1. Monocytes phagocytize and digest foreign particulate material and dead or effete cells.
 2. Monocytes are less efficient phagocytes than neutrophils in the defense against microbial
invasion.
a   a pe ans  s  d s  
(dds rusndoxoi pue "dds runuusiai 'dds nisaypy "dds nanqos
b. Macrophages can be activated by products of microorganisms, certain cytokines, and some
inert agents. Activation consists of enhanced metabolism, lysosomal enzyme activity, mobility, and
microbicidal and cytocidal activities.
3. Monocytes are a major source of CSFs and cytokines (e.g., G-CSF, M-CSF, IL-1, IL-3, INF)
 involved in hematopoiesis.
4. Macrophages secrete a variety of substances that modulate the inflammatory response (e.g.,
 chemotactic factors, plasminogen activator, collagenase, elastase, complement components, plasmin
inhibitors)
5. Macrophages function in immune recognition by phagocytosing and processing foreign
substances for antigen presentation to T lymphocytes.
6. Macrophages eliminate virus-infected and tumor cells via antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity.
7. Macrophages are actively pinocytotic and catabolize serum proteins.
54
CHAPTER 2
ll. EoSiNoPhilS
A. Morphology (Figure 2.1)
1. Mature eosinophils have two to three nuclear lobes separated by constrictions.
 2. Distinct, eosinophilic granules characterize the cell and become evident at the myelocyte stage
of development.
a.These are the secondary or specific granules.
b. Secondary granules vary in size and shape among species (large and round in the horse,
variably-sized and round in the dog, uniformly small and round in ruminants and pigs, rod-
shaped in the cat, and moderately sized and round in most birds).
c. These granules are lysosomes that contain major basic protein, acid hydrolases, and an
eosinophil-specific peroxidase, which play a significant role in eosinophil function. Major basic
protein is located in the core of the granule, while peroxidase is located in the surrounding matrix
of the granule.
d. Ultrastructurally, an electron-dense core or crystalloid may be observed in secondary granules
of eosinophils from cats, dogs, horses, and some birds. Periodicity of the central core also may be
present. Secondary granules of bovine eosinophils are homogeneous (lack crystalloids).
B. Production and kinetics
1. Eosinophil production and maturation in bone marrow parallels that of the neutrophil;
eosinophils cannot be identifed before the myelocyte stage of development. There is a storage pool
of eosinophils
2. IL-5 is the major cytokine that controls eosinophil production. It is most influential in
eosinophil proliferation, differentiation, maturation, and function. GM-CSF and IL-3 may play
 minor roles in eosinophil development.
3. Bone marrow production requires two to six days.
4. The blood transit time is short (Tiz2 = 30 minutes in the dog), and a marginal pool of
eosinophils exists.
5. Eosinophils emigrate from the blood and pre ferentially reside in subepithelialsites in the skin,
lung,gastrointestinal tract, and endometrium. Minimal recirculation of eosinophils may occur.
 6. In most avian species except raptors, eosinophils are the rarest leukocyte in circulation.
C. Function
1. Eosinophils attach to and kill helminths in a process mediated by antibody, complement, and T
S     d  o  s sd 
via peroxidase activity.
2. Eosinophils may suppress hypersensitivity reactions. They are attracted by and inhibit
chemical mediators liberated by mast cells during allergic and anaphylactic reactions.
IgE and are activated by antigen-IgE complexes, releasing their granule contents which contribute
to tissue damage in allergic reactions. Eosinophil recruitment is mediated by interleukins (IL-5,
IL-2, IL-16).
4. Phagocytic and bactericidal capabilities are similar to those of neutrophils, but these processes
are not as effective. Eosinophils are not protective against bacterial infections.
5. Tumor-associated eosinophilia has been reported with mast cell tumor, T-cell lymphoma,
fibrosarcoma, and carcinoma in animals. Infiltration of neoplasms by eosinophils may be a positive
 prognostic indicator.
IV. BASOPHIlS
A. Morphology (Figure 2.1)
LEUKOCYTES
55
1. Mammalian basophils contain two to three nuclear lobes separated by constrictions or have a
ribbon-like nucleus. Avian and reptilian basophils have a round nucleus.
2. Granules become evident at the myelocyte stage of development.
a. Granules are round and stain metachromatically (purple) in most species.
b. Feline basophils contain lavender, rod-shaped granules.
C. Granules fill the cytoplasm of the cell in most species but are less numerous in the dog.
d. Ultrastructurally, granules are often homogeneous; they cannot be differentiated from mast
cell granules in most species. In some species, the granules may contain myelin figures, electron-
 lucent areas, or crystalloids, granule matrix dissolution may accompany poor fixation.
e. Basophil granules contain histamine, heparin, and sulfated mucopolysaccharides, but lack acid
hydrolases.
B. Production and kinetics
1. Maturation of basophils parallels that of the neutrophil; basophils cannot be identifed before the
myelocyte stage of development.
2. Basophils are sparse in most mammals but may be encountered more frequently in birds.
3. Production and release of basophils requires approximately two and a half days; bone marrow
storage of these cells is minimal.
4. IL-3 is the major cytokine that governs basophil growth and differentiation. GM-CSF and IL-5
play minor roles in basophil development.
5. Despite similar functions, basophils arise independently of tissue mast cells and do not share a
common basophil-mast cell progenitor.
C. Function
1. In differential leukocyte counts, basophils are usually present in small numbers if observed at
 all. Manual differential leukocyte counts give valid results only if basophil numbers are
substantially elevated (2% or more of the leukocyte population). Automated differential leukocyte
counts (e.g., ADVIA-l20) can produce very accurate basophil counts.
 2. Basophils and mast cells share many properies and serve similar functions. Specifc functions of
basophils include the following:
a. Participation in immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions through mediator release
(e.g., histamine release in allergic reactions)
b. Promotion of lipid metabolism by activation of lipoprotein lipase
C.
 Prevention and promotion of hemostasis via heparin release and kallikrein activity, respectively
d. Rejection of parasites (e.g., ticks)
e. Possible tumor cell cytotoxicity
3. The number of basophils may increase in certain myeloproliferative disorders.
V. MAST CELLS. MAST CELLS SHARE SIMILAR FUNCTIONS WITH BASOPHILS BUT CONSTITUTe
A DISTINCT CELl LINE
A. Morphology and production
1. Mature mast cells have a round nucleus and a moderate volume of cytoplasm filled with dark
purple granules that often obscure the nucleus.
2. Mast cells are tissue leukocytes and are not found in the blood of normal healthy mammals.
3. Precursors are rare and unidentifiable in bone marrow. They move from marrow to blood to
tissues as non-granulated mononuclear cells.
4. Once they establish tissue residence, mast cells undergo additional differentiation and growth
B. Function
1. Mast cells predominantly reside in sub-epithelial locations (dermis, submucosa of gastrointestinal
tract), but can be found associated with virtually any tissue (lymph nodes, liver, spleen)
56
CHAPTER 2
2. Mast cells promote inflammatory reactions, especially hypersensitivity.
3. Mast cells are also involved in fibrosis
C. Mastocytemia
1. Mastocytemia (increased mast cells in the blood) can indicate a reactive or neoplastic condition.
a. An inflammatory leukogram typically accompanies reactive mastocytemia.
b. Unless large numbers of mast cells are present in the blood, differentiation between reactive
2. Reactive conditions causing mastocytemia include enteritis (e.g., parvoviral enteritis), pleuritis,
peritonitis, and hypersensitivity conditions.
3. Neoplastic mastocytemia indicates either systemic mast cell disease (commonly originating as a
visceral or cutaneous mast cell tumor) or mast cell leukemia (rare).
Vl. LyMPhocYtes
A. Morphology (Figure 2.1)
1. Lymphocytes are differentiated by the presence or absence of lineage-specific cell surface
antigens and antibody production, which can be detected by monoclonal antibodies. Only plasma
cells and some cytotoxic T lymphocytes (granular lymphocytes) can be identified by morphology
alone.
2. Mature lymphocytes
a. Mature lymphocytes are small cells with scant amounts of blue cytoplasm. The nucleus is
round with aggregated chromatin; a slight nuclear indentation may be present. Nucleoli usually
are not visible with routine stains.
b. Lymphocytes in the dog and occasionally in the cat and horse may have dark red cytoplasmic
granules (granular lymphocytes) at the site of nuclear indentation. These are mainly cytotoxic T
lymphocytes.
of birds. Both small lymphocytes and larger lymphocytes with more abundant cytoplasm,
indented nuclei, and lighter-staining chromatin occur in blood. Cytoplasmic granules are
co mmon in bovine lymphocytes.
d. Storage in EDTA-anticoagulated blood for 30 to 60 minutes may cause lobulation of nuclei,
cytoplasmic vacuolation, or smudging of lymphocytes on stained smears. Marked cellular swelling
may be associated with prolonged blood storage.
2. Mature lymphocytes are not necessarily end cells, on appropriate stimulation they may transform
 into immunoblasts and plasmacytoid cells. Transformation usually occurs in lymphoid tissues but
occasionally may be observed in blood (reactive lymphocytes).
f. Ultrastructurally, lymphocytes contain many free ribosomes. Plasma cells have an
abundance of RER. Russell bodies, derived from RER, are dilated vesicles containing flocculent
immunoglobulin.
3. Reactive lymphocytes (immunocytes or transformed lymphocytes) are occasionally encountered
 in low numbers in blood during periods of antigenic stimulation.
a. These are probably T lymphocytes, but could be B lymphocytes.
b. Reactive lymphocytes (immunocytes) are large cells with intensely basophilic cytoplasm, a pale
Golgi zone, and/or fine cytoplasmic vacuoles. The nucleus has aggregated chromatin; nucleoli
and nucleolar rings are usually absent.
4. Plasma cells represent the ultimate development of B lymphocytes in response to antigenic
stimulation. They occur most frequently in lymph nodes, bone marrow, and other tissues. They are
rarely observed in blood. Nuclear staining characteristics are the same as that of other reactive
lymphocytes, but the cell is identifiable by an eccentrically placed, round nucleus with condensed
chromatin and a pale Golgi zone in the cytoplasm.
LEUKOCYTES
57
5. Lymphoblasts are large cells with a round nucleus, dispersed chromatin, multiple nucleoli or
nucleolar rings, and a thin rim of blue, granular cytoplasm. They are not necessarily precursors or
 n  a i   n -d n    a
They are rarely observed in blood except in acute lymphoblastic leukemia and lymphoma.
B. Production
1. The primary lymphoid organs are the thymus and bone marrow or bursa of Fabricius.
a. T lymphocytes are embryologically derived from the thymus and function in cell-mediated
immunity.
b. B lymphocytes are embryologically derived from bone marrow of mammals or bursa of
 Fabricius in birds and function in humoral (antibody) immunity.
2. Most of the lymphocytes in adult mammals originate in the secondary lymphoid tissues
including tonsils, lymph nodes, spleen, bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT), and gut-
associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). The secondary lymphoid tissues of birds include spleen,
conjunctival- or head-associated lymphoid tissue (CALT, HALT), GALT, and lymphoid aggregates in
various other body tissues. Birds do not have lymph nodes.
3. Lymphopoiesis (i.e., lymphocyte division and transformation) occurs in the lymphoid tissues
and depends upon the degree and type of antigenic stimulation as well as an array of interleukin
(IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-9, IL-11) and cytokine (interferon-) influences
4. Certain antigens stimulate B lymphocytes to divide and/or transform into effector cells that
produce immunoglobulin (i.e., IgG, IgA, IgM, or IgE); plasma cells are the ultimate derivative of B
lymphocytes.
5. Certain antigens stimulate T lymphocytes to divide and/or transform into effector (Thl/Th2)
 cells that produce lymphokines and mediate cellular immunity.
C. Lymphocyte distribution and circulation
1. Lymphocytes are distributed in lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, tonsils, GALT, BALT, bone
 e  i  q s  i s s po po p 
aggregates in many tissues and organs. GALT is especially prominent in waterfowl.
2. Compared with other leukocytes, lymphocytes are long-lived and are capable of mitosis and/or
transformation to more functionally active forms.
a. The life span of lymphocytes is defined as the interval between successive mitoses or the time
from the last mitosis until cell death.
b. Most lymphocytes are short-lived (about two weeks); however, other lymphocytes, such as
memory cells, may have intermitotic intervals of weeks, months, or years.
3. Among the leukocytes, lymphocytes are unique because they recirculate.
a. The primary route of recirculation is efferent ducts of lymph nodes -→ thoracic duct or right
lymphatic duct → blood → postcapillary venules of the cortex of lymph nodes → lymphoid
parenchyma → efferent lymph again. Activation of receptors in postcapillary venules and
subsequent cell binding is responsible for movement of lymphocytes from circulation into the
tissues.
 b. The recirculation of splenic lymphocytes is more direct, from blood → spleen →> blood again.
C. Recirculation promotes antigen sensitization of naive lymphocytes and detection of
transformed cells
d. Recirculation is non-random. Lymphocytes exhibit “homing" to their tissue of origin in health.
Normal recirculation patterns may be altered in disease.
2. The recirculation time ranges from approximately one to several hours, depending upon the
cell type (T versus B lymphocyte) and route through tissues and organs.
f. The majority of recirculating lymphocytes are long-lived, memory, I cells.
8. Most of the B lymphocytes in blood are transient members of the recirculating lymphocyte
 population. The majority of B cells remain in lymphoid tissues.
58
CHAPTER 2
h. Lymphocytes from GALT and BALT enter afferent lymph. Afferent lymph from other tissues is
relatively cell-free in health, except for emigration of antigen-bearing macrophages draining from
tissues to lymph nodes.
D. Function
1. Antibody production
a. Antigenically stimulated B lymphocytes form plasma cells, which secrete immunoglobulins.
b. Macrophages and T lymphocytes also regulate antibody production.
2. Regulatory activity
a. Appropriately stimulated T lymphocytes and, to a lesser extent, B lymphocytes secrete
biologically active messenger molecules called interleukins, lymphokines, or cytokines.
b. Functions of lymphocyte-derived interleukins:
(1) Mediation of humoral immunity
(2) Mediation of cellular immunity
(3)  Activation of inflammatory cells
(4)  Regulation of lymphocyte production, activation, and differentiation
(5) Stimulation and regulation of hematopoiesis
3. Cytotoxicity is a manifestation of cell-mediated immunity.
a. Certain T lymphocyte subsets (CD8+) are cytotoxic for virus-infected and transformed cells
b. Natural killer cells (null cells) also are cytotoxic but do not require previous sensitization to
perform this function.
LABORATORY EVALUATION OF LEUKOCYTeS
1. WhIte blooD Cell CoUNT
A. Methods of determination
1. Manual counts are performed with prepackaged diluent (Unopette? system), hemocytometer,
and microscope. Inherent error is approximately 20%, even with excellent technical skils. This
method is preferred for avian blood cell counts.
2. Automated cell counters
a. Results are more reproducible than by manual counting. Inherent error is approximately 5%,
but it may be greater if the cell counts are extremely low or high
b. Several blood abnormalities may introduce counting errors.
(1) Clumping of leukocytes or fragile leukocytes gives falsely low counts.
(2)  Abnormally large or clumped platelets may falsely elevate the automated WBC count.
(3) Excessive Heinz bodies, especially in feline blood specimens, may clump and cause a
falsely high WBC count. Heinz bodies do not disintegrate when the erythrocytes are lysed
during the counting procedure.
(4) Erythrocyte lysing agents for some instruments may be too weak to completely lyse animal
red cells, giving a falsely increased WBC count.
c. Normal feline platelets have the largest mean platelet volume (MPV) of domesticated animals.
 Platelets are not lysed during the leukocyte counting procedure and may falsely elevate the WBC
count. This problem occurs more frequently in diseases in which increased platelet turnover is
 present; younger platelets have an even greater MPV.
d. In addition to correct standardization and quality control practices, a rapid check on the
automated WBC count may be accomplished by comparing the estimated WBC count of a stained
blood film (see below) to the WBC count generated by the instrument.
3. All nucleated cells present, including nucleated red blood cells (nRBCs), are enumerated by
manual or some automated counting methods
LEUKOCYTES
59
a. Nucleated erythrocytes are identified by examination of a stained blood smear; the number of
nRBCs/l00 leukocytes is recorded concurrently during the leukocyte differential count.
b. The WBC count is then corrected by the following formula:
Corrected WBC count = (initial WBC count xl00) + (100+nRBC)
4. The WBC count can be estimated from a well prepared, Romanowsky-stained blood film in
emergency situations.
a. The estimated WBC count = (average number of leukocytes/45 to 50 xfield of view) x(l, 500)
b. Estimation of the WBC count also can be learned by comparing numbers of leukocytes in
stained blood smears to known quantitative leukocyte counts until proficiency at estimating
leukocyte numbers is achieved.
c. Estimated leukocyte counts are inferior to properly performed, quantitative WBC counts
 obtained manually or by an automated cell counter.
B. Abnormalities in the total WBC (leukocyte) count
1. Leukocytosis is an increase in the total WBC count. It is caused by increased numbers of any
leukocyte; however, neutrophilia (increase in neutrophils) usually is responsible.
 2. Leukopenia is a decrease in the total WBC count. It is usually caused by neutropenia (decrease
in neutrophils), except in ruminants and some avian species in which lymphocytes predominate in
the blood in health.
Il. BLOOD SMEAR EVALUATION (FIGURE 2.1)
A. A systematic approach to microscopic evaluation of the blood smear is described in Chapter 1.
B. Differential leukocyte count
1. The Romanowsky-stained smear is examined with high dry (45x) or oil magnification (50 t0
100x), and leukocytes are identified until 100 to 200 cells are classified by type. The number of
nRBCs/lo0 leukocytes encountered should be tallied separately
number of that leukocyte type/μL of blood. As a cross check, the cumulative total of all the
percentages of the various leukocyte subtypes should equal l00%. The cumulative total of the
absolute cell counts for the various leukocyte subtypes should equal the total WBC count.
3. Interpretation of the leukogram should be based upon the absolute cell counts/μL of blood and
not upon the relative percentages.
a. The suffix “philia" or "osis" (e.g., neutrophilia, eosinophilia, basophilia, lymphocytosis, and
 monocytosis) indicates an increase in number of a particular leukocyte.
b. The suffix "penia" or "cytopenia" (e.g., neutropenia, eosinopenia, basopenia, lymphopenia,
 and monocytopenia) indicates a decrease in number of a particular leukocyte.
4. Immature neutrophils are counted as part of the differential leukocyte count
a. Bands are the usual type of immature neutrophil observed in a left shift, but earlier forms
(metamyleocytes, myelocytes, etc.) are occasionally observed in severe disease.
b. Progressively more immature neutrophils (metamyelocytes, myelocytes, or promyelocytes)
may be encountered in blood in certain circumstances (e.g., severe inflammation, myeloid
leukemia).
c. A degenerative left shift is present if the number of bands and less mature neutrophils exceeds
the number of segmented neutrophils
C. Abnormal leukocyte morphology (Figure 2.1)
1. Toxic change of neutrophils (Cases 6, 8, 14, 21)
a. Toxic change can be associated with any inflammatory disease severe enough to cause
accelerated neutrophil production and shortened maturation time in the marrow. Four
manifestations of toxic change may occur in mammalian neutrophils:
60
CHAPTER2
(1) Cytoplasmic basophilia. The cytoplasm of toxic neutrophils has a diffuse blue color from
retained ribosomes. This is the last form of toxic change to resolve with recovery from disease.
(2) Cytoplasmic vacuolation. This change often occurs concurrently with cytoplasmic
basophilia, but cytoplasmic vacuolation (foamy appearance) is a more severe manifestation
of toxic change. Vacuolation occurs during bacteremia and generalized infection in most
species, but is not always specifc for infection. This change results from cytoplasmic granule
dissolution.
(3) Dohle bodies. These structures are blue to gray, angular, cytoplasmic inclusions
representing retained aggregates of rough endoplasmic reticulum. They are most commonly
 observed in feline blood smears.
(4) Toxic granulation. This form of toxic change is infrequently observed in blood smears of
horses and cats, representing severe toxemia. Toxic granulation is characterized by prominent
pink-purple granulation of the cytoplasm. Altered membrane permeability of cytoplasmic
primary granules permits uptake of Romanowsky stain. Toxic granulation should not be
confused with prominent staining of secondary granules, which is not a sign of toxemia.
b. Toxic changes in avian heterophils include cytoplasmic basophilia, variable degranulation,
vacuolation, and the presence of red and purple granules in the same cell.
c. Toxic neutrophils and heterophils may have compromised cell function.
2. Neutrophil nuclear hypersegmentation
a. Five or more distinct nuclear lobes are observed.
b. Causes of nuclear hypersegmentation of neutrophils:
(1) Prolonged blood transit time with corticosteroid therapy, hyperadrenocorticism, or late
stages of chronic inflammatory disease
(2)  Idiopathic finding in horses and goats
(3) Cobalt deficiency in cattle
(4）]
 Hereditary macrocytosis in Poodles
(5)Abnormal vitamin B uptake in Giant Schnauzers
(6) Myelodysplastic syndrome and some forms of leukemia
3. Neutrophil nuclear hyposegmentation
a. Nuclear shape is typical of bands (parallel nuclear margins), metamyelocytes (slight nuclear
 indentation), or myelocytes (round to oval nucleus). The chromatin pattern suggests possible
causes for this change in nuclear morphology
(1)  A less aggregated chromatin pattern may be observed in the typical left shift of infection,
 in leukemoid responses, and with some forms of granulocytic leukemia. Rarely, neutrophils
 may have a ring-shaped nucleus, indicating intense granulopoiesis or nuclear maturation
abnormality
(2) A coarse, aggregated chromatin pattern may be observed in the following:
Australian Shepherds, Coonhounds, and Foxhounds), cats, rabbits, and a horse. The
anomaly is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait that may have incomplete
 penetrance in some dog breeds (Australian Shepherd). Eosinophils and basophils also
have nuclear hyposegmentation. Cellular function is not impaired.
(b) Pseudo-Pelger-Huet anomaly has a similar appearance to the congenital anomaly
but is acquired and transient. This condition may be associated with chronic infection,
especially in cattle, and administration of certain drugs.
granulopoiesis, granulocytic leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndrome. This change is recognized by
observing nuclear lobes with dispersed chromatin (indicating immaturity) that are connected by
very thin constrictions or filaments (indicating maturity).
5. Reactive lymphocytes (immunocytes). These cells are often observed following antigenic
stimulation (e.g., infection, vaccination)
LEUKOCYTES
61
6. Lymphoblasts (immature lymphocytes). When observed in stained blood smears, these cells
usually indicate malignant lymphoma with a leukemic blood profile or acute lymphoblastic
leukemia.
7. Degranulated eosinophils. These cells are activated during disease and appear “moth eaten"
because of cytoplasmic degranulation and vacuolation. Greyhounds may have vacuolated
eosinophils in health.
8. Degranulated basophils. Affcted cells appear vacuolated and lack purple granules. This change
is especially noticeable in avian blood smears that are stained with Diff-Quik?.
9. Organisms or diagnostic inclusions may occasionally be observed in leukocytes on
Romanowsky-stained blood and/or bone marrow smears. Examples include the following (Figure
2.3):
a. Non-Anaplasmatareae spp. bacteria
(1) Intracellular rods and cocci are rarely seen within peripheral blood neutrophils during
bacteremia.
b. Anaplasmataceae spp. bacteria
(1)  These organisms infect leukocytes and platelets and may be observed on peripheral blood
smears. Organisms are most commonly observed early in infection.
(2) Different organisms within this family preferentially infect different hosts and different cell
types.
(a) Ehrlichia canis infects mononuclear cells (monocytes, lymphocytes) of dogs (canine
monocytic ehrlichiosis)
(b) Ehrlichia ewingii infects neutrophils and, rarely, eosinophils of dogs (canine
 granulocytic ehrlichiosis).
'sp go sdousoa Xianen pue sdonnu sioaun undooud pusnid ()
horses, cattle, sheep, and goats.
(d) Anaplasma platys infects platelets of dogs.
         s
C.
Hepatozoon spp
(1)  Gametocytes of this protozoan parasite primarily infect monocytes and neutrophils of
mammals and erythrocytes of birds, reptiles, and amphibians.
(2) Severity of disease and degree of parasitism varies in dogs, depending on the Hepatozoon sp.
(a) Hepatozoon canis (South America, Europe, Asia, Africa) typically causes no to mild
disease and large numbers of gametocytes can be found in peripheral leukocytes.
   ( n  sd    (
with only rare peripheral gametocytes.
(3) Gametocytes are lightly basophilic, oval organisms that measure 4 μm x 9 μm in size and
contain a round, eccentrically placed nucleus
d. Canine distemper virus
(1)  Distemper inclusions can be observed within erythrocytes and/or leukocytes early in
infection (often before clinical signs of disease are evident).
(2) Inclusions are round to oval and range from l to 6 μm in size. Staining characteristics are
variable as follows:
(@) Inclusions appear magenta to red with Diff-Quik? and traditional Romanowsky stains.
(bh) Inclusions may appear pale blue with other rapid modifications of traditional
Romanowsky-type stains.
e. Other bacterial (e.g., Mycobarteria spp.), protozoal (e.g., Toxoplasma sp.), and fungal organisms
(e.g., Histoplasma spp.) are rarely observed within peripheral leukocytes during disseminated
infections.
f. Several rare hereditary disorders may present with abnormal granulation or vacuolation of
leukocytes.
FIGURE 2.3. lnfectious organisms within the cytoplasm of leukocytes. A. Equine neutrophil with intracellular
and extracelluar bacilli (septic foal); B. Anaplasma phagocytophilum (previously Ehrlichia equi) morulae in
cytoplasm of two neutrophils; C. Ehrlichia ewingii morula in the cytoplasm of a canine neutrophil; D. magenta
cytoplasmic distermper inclusion in a canine neutrophil following staining with a rapid modification of Wright
            i 
62
 avian lymphocytes; 1. Leukocytozoon sp. in an avian blood cell; J. Hemoproteus sp. in the cytoplasm of an avian
erythrocyte; K. Chlamydophila psittaci (Chlamydia psiftari) inclusion in cytoplasm of avian monocyte.
?3
64
CHAPTER 2
(1) Lysosomal storage diseases may be characterized by an enzyme deficiency resulting in
accumulation of undigestable substances within lysosomes. Examples include fucosidosis;
GMl and GM2 gangliosidoses; and mucopolysaccharidosis types IIB, VI, and VI1.
(2)  Chediak-Higashi syndrome is characterized by abnormal fusion of lysosomes with
eosinophilic granules (secondary granules) in the cytoplasm of neutrophils. This condition has
been described in cattle, Persian cats, mink, beige mice, and rats.
(3) Birman cat neutrophil abnormality is characterized by prominent fine eosinophilic
granulation within neutrophils. Granules are functionally normal.
IMl. BONE MARROW EXAMiNATION. A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH tO EVAlUATe BONE
MARROW ASPIRATES IS PRESENTeD IN CHAPTeR 1.
INTeRPREtATION Of LeUkOCyTe rESPONSEs
The blood concentration of various granulocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils) and monocytes
results from changes in the rate of release of these cells from the bone marrow into the blood, the
distribution of these cells between circulating and marginal pools within the vasculature, and the rate
of emigration of cells from the blood into tissues. In esence, granulocytes and monocytes within the
 blood are in transit from the bone marow to the tissues where they will perform their functions. The
concentration of lymphocytes in the blood, however, is primarily a reflection of changes in the kinetics of
lymphocyte recirculation and cellular redistribution
1. NEUTROPHILIA IN MAMMALS AND HETEROPHILIA IN BIRDS (tABLE 2.1, FIGURE 2.4)
A. Physiologic neutrophilia and heterophilia
1. Leukogram findings
a. Mild neutrophilia in mammals or heterophilia in birds is associated with up to a two-fold
increase of absolute cell counts in the absence of a left shift.
b. Lymphocytosis is present and may be more dramatic than the neutrophilia in some species
(e.g. cat, birds)
C. Monocyte, eosinophil, and basophil counts remain within the reference interval.
d. The duration of physiologic leukocytosis is approximately 20 to 30 minutes.
2. Possible dlinical findings at the time of blood collection:
a. A young animal that is healthy but has experienced excitement or fear.
b. Evidence of increased heart rate, increased blood pressure, increased muscular activity, or
seizures.
3. Mechanism
a. Epinephrine release in response to fear, excitement, or sudden exercise is responsible for
physiologic neutrophilia and leukocytosis.
b. The neutrophilia is a pseudoneutrophilia.
(1) Increased heart rate, blood pressure, and blood flow cause mobilization of marginated
neutrophils (MNP) with redistribution into the CNP.
(2) Total blood neutrophil number (TBNP = CNP + MNP) is unchanged
C. The concomitant lymphocytosis is explained by two theories:
(1)  Epinephrine may block receptors on endothelial cells of postcapillary venules in lymph
nodes, altering the normal recirculation pattern and preventing blood lymphocytes from re-
entering lymphoid tissue.
(2) An unidentified source of lymphocytes, possibly from the thoracic duct, is released into
the general circulation in response to epinephrine.
LEUKOCYTES
65
Toble 2.1.
CAUSES OF NEUTROPHILIA IN MAMMALS AND HETEROPHILIA
IN BIRDS.
Physiologic:
Excitement
Fear
Exercise
Convulsions
Parturition
Corticosteroids:
Exogenous (drug administration)
Endogenous (stress, hyperadrenocorticism)
Inflammation (local or generalized):
Infectious (primary or secondary):
Bacteria
Rickettsia
Viruses
Fungi
Parasites
Non-infectious:
Burms
 Infarction
 Immume-mediated diseases
Necrosis
Postoperative
Thrombosis
Hemorrhage and hemolysis
Chemical and drug poisonings:
Including early estrogen toxicosis in dogs and ferrets
Toxemia/toxicosis:
 Blue-green algal toxicosis
 Botulism
Endotoxemia
Uremia
Neoplasia:
Granulocytic leukemia
Myelomonocytic leukemia
 Other malignancies (including parane oplastic syndromes)
Genetic disorders:
Leukocyte adhesion deficiencies
4. Species characteristics
a.
 Physiologic neutrophilia is uncommon in dogs
b. Physiologic leukocytosis is common in young healthy cats, where the absolute neutrophil
     q a p  xa  n
Neutrophilia is pronounced in the cat because of its larger MNP; however, the degree of
lymphocytosis occasionally may exceed the magnitude of neutrophilia in some patients.
C.
 The response may occur in healthy cattle during parturition and strenuous exercise. WBC
counts are 15,000 to 27,000/μL. Neutrophilia and lymphocytosis occur, but unlike in other
species, eosinopenia is expected.
66
CHAPTER 2
HEATTH
Hone Marrow
Proliferation
Storagc
MNP
Stcn
Cells
Myelercytes
Pronyelocytes
Mlycloblasts
Mctamyclocytes
EPINEPIIRINERESPONSE
NoFft Shift
(ORTICOSTEROIDRESPONSE
Litlle or No
Left Shift
ACUTEPURULENTINFLAMMATION
Tel'tShifi
ESTABLISHEDPURUIENTINFLAMMATION
Left Shift
CHRONICSUPPLRATIVEDISEASE
Little or No
Lelt Shilt
FIGURE 2.4. Mechanisms of neutrophilia. Ihe sizes of the arrows represent the number of cells moving through
the various compartrments (stem cell, proliferation, storage, blood, and tissue). The sizes of tubes, circles, and
respectively.
d. Physiologic leukocytosis also is common in young healthy horses. The total WBC count may
reach 26,000/μL. The absolute neutrophil count may exceed 14,000/μL, but the lymphocyte count
seldom peaks above 14,400/μL
2. Physiologic leukocytosis, especially lymphocytosis, accompanies lactation in sows, and it
occurs in healthy pigs three to five hours after feeding.
f.  Physiologic heterophilia is common in birds but relatively mild.
B. Corticosteroid-induced neutrophilia in mammals and heterophilia in birds (Cases 2, 3, 19, 20, 22,
23, 26, 27)
1. Leukogram findings
a. Neutrophilia in mammals or heterophilia in birds, usually without a left shift
LEUKOCYTES
67
b. Lymphopenia
c. Eosinopenia
d. Monocytosis in the dog and occasionally in the cat
2. Possible dlinical findings
a. Conditions that cause endogenous corticosteroid release (e.g., pain, high and low body
 temperatures, captive environment of birds)
b. Therapeutic use of corticosteroids
(1)  The route of administration and dose affect the magnitude of the response.
(2) The peak response occurs four to eight hours after drug administration.
(3) The leukogram usually returns to the reference interval within 24 hours after a single
 injection of short-acting glucocorticoid and within two to three days after cessation of long-
term therapy (10 or more days).
(4)  The neutrophil count will return to the reference interval after several weeks of
continuous corticosteroid therapy, but lymphopenia usually persists.
(5) In hyperadrenocorticism, the magnitude of the neutrophilia diminishes with longevity of
the disease, but other changes in the leukogram persist.
3. Mechanisms
a. Neutrophilia is due to an increase in the TBNP caused by multiple mechanisms.
(1) Decreased emigration of neutrophils from circulation into the tissues and an increased
blood transient time
(2) Increased bone marrow release of neutrophils. The number of cells released is usually not
sufficient to deplete the storage pool of segmenters. Therefore, bands are not released and no
left shift occurs.
(3) Decreased stickiness of neutrophils and a shift of cells from the MNP to the CNP
(4) Similar mechanisms are assumed to exist in birds
b. Causes of lymphopenia
(1) Redistribution of recirculating lymphocytes; they remain transiently sequestered in the
lymphoid tissues or bone marrow rather than entering efferent lymph and blood.
(2) Long-term usage of corticosteroids may cause lysis of thymic cortical lymphocytes
and uncommitted lymphyocytes in the lymph nodes. Thymic medullary and bone marrow
lymphocytes resist corticosteroid-induced lysis. Effector I- and B cells do not lyse.
C.
Monocytosis may be caused by an effect similar to that on neutrophils (i.e., mobilization of
marginated cells within the blood vasculature).
d. Causes of eosinopenia
(1) Margination or sequestration of eosinophils in the tissues. They resume circulation after
cessation of the corticosteroid stimulation
(2) Inhibition of release of eosinophils from bone marrow. Eosinophilopoiesis continues and
the total number of marrow eosinophils increases during corticosteroid stimulation.
(3) Other possible mechanisms include inhibition of cytokines that govern eosinophil
development and recruitment and induced apoptosis of eosinophils.
4. Species characteristics
a. Dog
(1) WBC counts are typically 15,000 to 25,000/μL, but may reach 40,000/μL on rare
occasions.
(2) Neutrophilia without a left shift is typical, but immature neutrophils (up to 1,00o/μL) may
be released if the storage pool is depleted at the time of corticosteroid administration.
(3) Lymphocyte counts commonly are decreased (less than l,0oo/μL).
(4) Monocytosis and eosinopenia are typically observed.
b. Cat
(1) The response is observed less frequently than in dogs.
(2) The leukogram pattern is similar to that of dogs, but monocytosis is infrequent
68
CHAPTER 2
(3) The most extreme leukocytosis is about 30,000/μL
c. Cattle
adn pue ud) aan iois a jo seo g i u u (1)
extremes), the response may occur with abomasal displacement, mild fever, ketosis, dystocia,
feed overload, and indigestion.
(2) WBC counts range from 8,000 to 18,000/μL.
(3) Eosinopenia caused by corticosteroids always occurs, but may be difficult to appreciate
Healthy cattle that are transported or placed in strange surroundings may have eosinopenia
without other steroid-associated changes in the leukogram.
d. Horse
(1)  This response may occur with sustained muscular exercise in healthy horses as well as
with the usual causes of corticosteroid release.
(2) WBC counts range up to 20,000/μL.
(3) Lymphopenia is seldom dramatic; lymphocyte counts are usually within the lower end of
the reference interval (2,000/μL in young horses and 1,500/μL in older horses).
e. Birds
(1) WBC counts may reach 35,000/μL
(2) Moderate heterophilia may occur with counts ranging from 10,000 to 25,000/μL.
(3) Lymphopenia (2,500 to 9,000/μL) is most dramatic in avian species that have a
 predominance of lymphocytes in circulation in health.
C. Neutrophila and heterophilia of inflammation and infection (Cases 4, 7, 8, 1l, 12, 17, 18).
1. Leukogram changes
a. Neutrophilia in mammals and heterophilia in birds. A left shift often is present.
(1) A left shift is the classic response to inflammation because the sudden demand for
neutrophils or heterophils depletes the storage pool of segmenters, and bands are released.
(2) There are exceptions to the above generalization.
(a) Mild inflammation may not be severe enough to cause a left shift; thus, a mature
neutrophilia may exist.
(b) In long-standing inflammation, production of neutrophils may be balanced with tissue
usage; a left shift does not occur.
(c)  Not all inflammation elicits a purulent response. Therefore, neutrophilia would not occur
(d) During inflammation, endogenous release of cortisol in mammals or corticosterone in
birds may secondarily cause neutrophilia or heterophilia, respectively, as described above.
b. Lymphopenia and eosinopenia
(1)  These are common findings in inflammation or infection.
(2) Endogenous release of cortisol in mammals or corticosterone in birds may contribute to
these changes.
(3) Because eosinophils are infrequent in the blood of cattle and birds (other than raptors),
eosinopenia may be difficult to appreciate clinically in these species.
c. Monocytosis (Cases 8, 1l, 14, 17)
(1)  This is an inconsistent finding in inflammation and infection.
(2) Stress associated with inflammation may cause a steroid-induced monocytosis in the dog
(3) Some forms of inflammation specifically elicit a monocytosis (e.g., granulomatous
diseases, endocarditis).
2. Clinical fndings
a. Obvious evidence of purulent or heterophilic inflammation may be present.
b. Purulent or heterophilic exudates may not be obvious with inflammation of the skin and
mucosal surfaces because cells may be lost without much visible accumulation of matter.
hemorrhagic cystitis, seborrheic dermatitis, catarrhal enteritis, certain granulomatous reactions).
Neutrophilia and heterophilia may or may not develop.
LEUKOCYTES
69
d. Localized purulent diseases such as pyometra or empyema stimulate greater neutrophilic
responses than generalized infections or septicemias. Birds do not form pus; however, heterophil
degranulation may provoke granuloma formation.
e. If a localized site of purulent or heterophilic inflammation is surgically extirpated, an
exacerbation of neutrophilia or heterophilia should be anticipated during the immediate
postsurgical period.
3. Mechanisms
a. Infectious agents and products of tissue injury stimulate a variety of cells to release
 interleukins, growth factors, cytokines, and other mediators of inflammation that are interrelated
in causing neutrophil or heterophil proliferation, maturation, and release from the bone marrow
into blood. These cells subsequently emigrate from the blood into tissues. The result of these
activities on the numbers of blood neutrophils in mammals, or heterophils in birds, may be
immediate or delayed for several days.
b. In mammals, an early, transient, endotoxin-mediated effect causes increased adhesiveness of
neutrophils, retention of neutrophils in the MNP, and subsequent emigration into the tissues
This effect may result in a short-term neutropenia. Neutrophilia quickly follows because of an
increased release of neutrophils from the bone marrow storage pool into the blood. Some birds
appear to be refractory to the effects of endotoxin.
c. Following infection, inflammation, or endotoxin effects, cells in the neutrophil lineage are
 stimulated to proliferate and differentiate. These cells include the following:
(1) Multipotential stem cells
(2) Neutrophil progenitor cells (CFU-GM, CFU-G)
(3) Mitotic precursors in the bone marrow proliferative cell pool (myeloblasts, promyelocytes,
and neutrophilic myelocytes)
d. The number of neutrophils in blood during purulent inflammation reflects a balance between
 the rate of release of cells from the bone marrow, the rate of emigration of cells from blood into
tissues, and the rate of cell utilization within tissues (tissue demand).
(1) If bone marrow release is greater than cellular emigration into the tissues, neutrophilic
leukocytosis occurs.
(2) If the emigration of cells from the vasculature exceeds the rate of replacement by the bone
marrow (occurs with excessive tissue demand for neutrophils), neutropenia occurs
(3) During purulent inflammation, a variable WBC count (from very low to very high) is
possible, depending on this balance.
(4) A similar process explains the degree of heterophilia in avian patients.
2. With an increased tissue demand for neutrophils and an increase in the bone marrow release
rate of these cells, the marrow storage pool may become depleted of segmenters. Band neutrophils
 and younger forms (neutrophilic metamyelocytes and myelocytes) may appear in blood following
severe tissue demands for neutrophils.
(1) When the total neutrophil/heterophil count is within the reference interval or
neutrophilia/heterophilia is present, a clinically important left shift exists when any of the
following is present:
(a) Bands and other immature neutrophils are greater than l,0oo/μL in dogs and cats.
(b) Bands and other immature neutrophils are greater than 30o/μL in large animals.
(c)  Bands and other immature heterophils are greater than 1,0o0/μL in birds. Left shifts
are more difficult to identify in avian blood smears because heterophils have less nuclear
lobulation and the prominent cytoplasmic granules may obscure nuclear morpohology.
(2) When neutropenia is present, greater than 10% bands and other immature neutrophils
(3)  A left shift is the hallmark of infection or severe inflammation; however, left shifts can
occur in noninflammatory diseases (e.g., immune-mediated hemolytic anemia).
(4)  The magnitude of the left shift tends to parallel the intensity of the purulent or
heterophilic inflammation.
70
CHAPTER2
(5) In certain severe purulent diseases, marked neutrophilia may be accompanied by a
left shift that includes myelocytes, progranulocytes, or myeloblasts in blood. This is called
 a “leukemoid response" because of its similarity to the blood profle of acute granulocytic
leukemia.
f.  During chronic, established, suppurative diseases, the rate of neutrophil production in the
bone marrow eventually exceeds the rate of neutrophil release from the bone marrow and the
rate of tissue utilization of neutrophils. As the marrow storage pool is replenished, the left
shift diminishes or disappears despite a continued tissue demand for neutrophils. This mature
neutrophilia persists until cell demand and production are balanced; the neutrophil count
subsequently returns to the reference interval.
4. Species characteristics
a. Dog
(1) WBC counts between 10,000 and 30,000/μL are common. A few cases will have counts
that exceed 50,000/uL, and in rare cases counts may exceed 100,000/μL.
salmonellosis, parvoviral enteritis) of the lung, thorax, peritoneum, intestine, or uterus.
Endotoxemia may be a contributory factor.
(3) Leukemoid reactions and extreme neutrophilia may be associated with WBC counts
exceeding 50,000 or even 100,000/μL. Examples include localized infection (e.g., pyometra,
 pyothorax, pancreatitis), certain forms of parasitism (e.g., hepatozoonosis), immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia, and canine leukocyte adhesion deficiency Extreme neutrophilia also has been
associated with several neoplasms, typically carcinomas, as a paraneoplastic syndrome.
b.Cat
(1) WBC counts between 10,000 and 30,000/uL are common. A few cases have counts that
exceed 30,000/μL, and in rare cases counts may exceed 75,000/μL
(2) Gram-negative sepsis and endotoxemia cause neutropenia in cats as described for dogs.
r. Cattle
(1) Inflammatory leukograms in calves up to three or four months old may be similar to those
described for cats and dogs, except that left shifts may be more subtle.
(2) Fibrinous, nonpurulent inflammation in cattle (e.g., early stages of shipping fever
pneumonia) elicit little or no neutrophil response. Hyperfibrinogenemia (high plasma
fibrinogen concentration) may be the first or only laboratory sign of inflammatory disease.
(3) In adult cattle, acute purulent inflammation frequently causes leukopenia, neutropenia
severe left shift, and lymphopenia (Case 21). This leukogram pattern lasts 24 to 48 hours. If
the animal survives, neutrophil counts return toward the reference interval with a persisting
left shift.
(4) Persistent purulent inflammation is associated with WBC counts ranging from 4,000
to 15,0o0/μuL, with a predominance of neutrophils. Lymphocyte numbers are reduced by
endogenous corticosteroid release during inflammatory disease
(5) Infrequently, bovine patients have neutrophil counts that exceed 30,000/μl. In rare
aq Aeu tr/ooo'oo1 bupaaxa stuno iri/ooo'og paaoxa Aeu stunoo (euaadua "3a) sases
observed in Holstein cattle with leukocyte adhesion deficiency Because of the lack of proper
adhesion molecule expression, neutrophils fail to emigrate from the vasculature and migrate to
 sites of tissue injury or infection.
d. Horse
xa u  a a Xae /oo o ooo'/ i ae soo  ()
30,000/μL
(2) Left shifts associated with neutrophilia are generally moderate in the horse. Infrequently,
diseases of the gastrointestinal tract associated with endotoxemia (e.g., acute salmonellosis) are
characterized by a severe left shift with leukopenia or a total WBC count within the reference
interval (Case 6).
LEUKOCYTES
71
(3) Because neutrophil response to inflammation is frequently mild, hyperfibrinogenemia has
been used as another indicator of inflammation.
c. Birds
(1) WBC counts are typically 24,000 to 45,000/μL. Occasionally, WBC counts may exceed
100,000 to 125,000/μL with salmonellosis, mycobacteriosis, or aspergillosis.
(2) Left shifts are more difficult to discern because avian heterophils have fewer nuclear
lobes than mammalian neutrophils in health. Cytoplasmic granules also may obscure nuclear
morphology.
(3) "Heteropil-lymphocyte reversal" may be observed in avian species with a predominance of
circulating lymphocytes (as is the case in adult cattle).
D. Other causes of neutrophilia (Table 2.1)
1. Tissue necrosis and ischemia
 2. Immune-mediated diseases with cell and tissue damage
3. Toxemia/toxicosis
4. Hemorrhage (Cases 1l, 25)
5.1
Hemolysis (Cases 2, 3)
6. Neoplasia, including nonspecific malignancies and myeloproliferative disorders involving
neutrophils
I. NEUTROPENIA IN MAMMAlS AND HETEROPENIA IN BIRDS (TABLE 2.2, FIGURE 2.5)
A. Margination of circulating neutrophils (pseudoneutropenia)
1. Neutrophils shift from the CNP to MNP as blood flow slows or as adhesion molecules are
expressed on the cell membranes of neutrophils and endothelial cells.
2. Endotoxin initially stimulates only margination of neutrophils (pseudoneutropenia); however,
increased emigration of neutrophils from blood ultimately results in transition to a true
neutropenia.
3. Birds may be refractory to these effects of endotoxin.
B. Excessive tissue demand for or destruction of neutrophils in mammals and heterophils in birds
1. Neutropenia occurs in inflammation or infection when the rate of emigration of neutrophils
from the vasculature into the tissues exceeds the rate of replacement of these cells in the blood by
the bone marrow (Cases 6, 2l).
a. Left shifts are common.
b. Toxic change is likely, considering the causes of disease.
c. Neutropenia occurs commonly in cattle, but does not carry as grave a prognosis as in other
species.
d. Neutropenia is found in peracute or acute inflammation before granulopoietic hyperplasia has
time to occur in the bone marrow.
2. Granulocytic hyperplasia in bone marrow usually follows with time and can have an effect on the
WBC count within 48 to 72 hours.
f  Similar changes occur with avian heterophils
animals. Neutropenia has been observed rarely with hemolytic disease of newborn foals and with
drug administration. This mechanism has not been reported in birds.
C. Reduced production of neutrophils in mammals and heterophils in birds
  assns     sn si r ' 1
some other drugs predictably cause neutropenia.
72
CHAPTER 2
Toble 2.2.
CAUSES OF NEUTROPENIA IN MAMMALS AND HETEROPENIA IN BIRDS.
Increased tissue demand:
Bacterial infection
Endotoxemia
 Immume-mediated diseases
:ood judoau euu au on pod donau sunn au  sis
Endotoxemia (transient response and diffcult to document)
 Reduced production neutropenia:
Cancer chemotherapeutic drugs and radiation
Idiosyncratic drug reactions:
Antibiotics
Antimycotics
Estrogens
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
rhGM-CSF
Infectious agents:
Viruses
Rickettsia
Disseminated mycose 5
Toxicoses:
Bracken ferm poisoning
Estrogen toxicity
 Idiosyncratic drug reactions
Myelophthisis:
Bone marrow necrosis
Myelofibrosis
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Genetic disorders:
Canine cyclic hematopoiesis (Gray Collies)
 Familial neutropenia (Standardbred horses, Belgian Iervuren dogs, Border Collies)
Neoplasia:
Hematologic or me tastatic neoplasia
a. Thrombocytopenia and anemia (pancytopenia or aplastic anemia) may follow.
b. Infections are considered imminent when neutrophil counts are 5oo/uL or lower.
C. Cytotoxic drugs also cause predictable heteropenia in birds.
2. Neutropenia is a common feature of diseases affecting hematopoietic stem cells (e.g.,
( ) e s n 
3.Certain viral and rickettsial infections
a. In mammals, a characteristic period of neutropenia may be present due to the death of
 progenitor cells and proliferating granulocytes in the bone marrow (Case 9) (e.g., feline
 infectious panleukopenia, canine parvoviral enteritis, feline leukemia virus [FeLV] and feline
immunodeficiency virus [FIV] infections, ehrlichiosis). Endotoxemia secondary to enteric lesions
also may play an important role in some viral infections.
b. In birds, heteropenia may be associated with circovirus, herpesvirus, polyomavirus, and
reovirus infections.
LEUKOCYTES
73
IIEALTH
BoneMarrow
Blood
Proliferalior
MINP
Sleu
Cclls
Slyelocytes
Segs
CNT
Promyelocytes
Mycloblas1s
Metarnyeloeyles
EXCESS TISSUE DEMAND
Left Shift
REDUCED GRANULOPOIESIS
[0]
INCREASED INEFFECTIVE GRANULOPOIESIS
FIGURE 2.5. Mechanisms of neutropenia. Ihe sizes of the arrows represent the number of cells moving through
the various compartments (stem cell, proliferation, storage, blood, and tissue). The sizes of tubes, circles, and
shaded areas represent the relative sizes of the proliferation, storage, and various blood neutrophil pools,
respectively.
4. Diminished bone marrow production of granulocytes may be a transient feature during
 preclinical and acute stages of many viral diseases. Granulopoietic hyperplasia, reflecting recovery.
 may be encountered in bone marrow aspirates by the time neutropenia is observed.
5. Cyclic hematopoiesis (neutropenia) has been reported in animals.
a. Cyclic hematopoiesis of Gray Collie dogs has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.
(1) Periods of neutropenia occur at ll- to l4-day intervals.
(2)  The disease is presumed to result from a defect in stem cell regulation.
(3) Cyclic activity also affects erythrocytes and platelets.
b. Cyclic hematopoiesis occurs rarely in FeLV-infected cats.
c.
 Cyclophosphamide therapy may induce cyclic hematopoiesis in dogs.
6. Neutropenia may be a manifestation of idiosyncratic drug reaction (e.g., chloramphenicol in cats,
phenylbutazone, cephalosporin antibiotics, griseofulvin, and estrogen toxicosis in dogs).
7. Inherited familial neutropenia has been observed in Standardbred horses and Belgian Tervuren
 dogs. The horses had signs of illness, suggesting that the neutropenia was pathologic. The dogs
humans.
D. Excessive ineffective granulopoiesis
1. This condition is uncommon except in cats with FeLV infection and myelodysplastic syndrome
(Chapter 3).
2. Bone marrow examination reveals granulocytic hyperplasia concomitant with neutropenia.
3. The bone marrow proliferating pool is expanded with a concomitant decrease in the maturation
and storage pool of neutrophils, giving the appearance of a shift toward immaturity. A
predominance of promyelocytes suggests a “maturation arrest" of neutrophil development.
74
CHAPTER 2
Ill. MoNocytosis
A. Monocytosis can occur any time that neutrophilia occurs, because both cell lines are derived from a
common bipotential stem cell.
B. Monocytosis is the least characteristic change in the leukogram in response to corticosteroids
except in the dog (Cases 2, 26).
C. Monocytosis may be observed in both acute and chronic stages of disease (Cases 8, 1l, 14, 17).
D. Monocytosis heralds the recovery from neutropenia. Because there is no bone marrow storage pool
for monocytes, these cells are released into the blood at an earlier age than neutrophils
 p p a  u  nd is a q au si 
and bacteremia.
 F. Disorders characterized by suppuration, necrosis, malignancy, hemolysis (Case 2), hemorrhage
(Case 25), immune-mediated injury, and certain pyogranulomatous diseases may be associated with
monocytosis. Marked monocytosis also may be observed in birds with chlamydophilosis (chlamydiosis,
ornithosis, psittacosis). This disease is caused by Chlamydophila psittaci (formerly known as Chlamydia
 psittari), an obligate, intracellular, Gram-negative bacterium that lacks a cell wall.
Iv. MoNocytopenla
A. This fnding is not a clinically useful feature of leukograms
V. EOSINOPHilIA (TABLE 2.3)
 A. Eosinophilia generally is associated with parasitic infection or hypersensitivity (Case 27)
effect (an eosinopenic effect).
C. Frequently, localized lesions that contain significant numbers of eosinophils in the exudate are not
accompanied by eosinophilia in the blood (e.g., eosinophilic granuloma).
D. Antigens that stimulate eosinophilia mediate the response via sensitized T lymphocytes. The second
(antibody) response.
1. The tissues most commonly affected in eosinophilic hypersensitivity conditions are mast cell
rich and include skin, lung, gastrointestinal tract, and uterus.
2. Endo- and ectoparasites with prolonged host-tissue contact promote the most dramatic
eosinophilia.
E. An allergic pathogenesis has not yet been demonstrated for all eosinophilic inflammatory
conditions (e.g., eosinophilic granuloma).
F. Hypereosinophilic syndrome, especially in cats and Rottweiler dogs, may be impossible to
distinguish from eosinophilic leukemia. Both diseases are characterized by persistent, often intense,
eosinophilia with cellular infltration of various tissues and organs.
G. Eosinophilia in birds is unusual and is most frequently observed in raptors. Dietary exposure to
parasites may be involved.
LEUKOCYTES
75
Toble 2.3.
CAUSES OF EOSINOPHILIA.
Parasi tism:
Ectoparasites:
Arthropods
Endoparasites:
Nematodes
Protozoa
Irematodes
Immediate or delayed hypersensitivity:
Asthma
Dermatitis
Eosinophilic granuloma
Feline eosinophilic keratitis
Gastroenteritis
Pneumonitis
Milk hypersensitivity in cattle
Canine panosteitis
Neoplasia:
Primary:
Eosinophilic leukemia
Paraneoplastic:
Mast cell tumor
I-cell lymphoma
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis
Various carcinomas
Fibrosarcoma
Thymoma
Infections:
Virus (some strains of FeLV)
Bacteria (some staphylococci and streptococci)
Fumgi (cryptococcosis)
 Slime molds (pythiosis)
Drug reactions:
Tetracycline
IL-2
Miscellaneous:
Hypereosinophilic syndrome (cats, Rottweiler dogs)
Hypoadrenocorticism (fewer than 20% of patients)
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
Vl. EoSiNoPeNIA
A. Eosinopenia occurs in response to corticosteroids via cell redistribution in the vasculature. Other
proposed mechanisms include inhibition of mast cell degranulation, neutralization of histamine in the
circulation, or infiltration of lymphoid tissues subsequent to corticosteroid-associated lympholysis and
cytokine release.
B. Catecholamine (epinephrine) release promotes eosinopenia by a &-adrenergic effect.
76
CHAPTER 2
C. The etiology of eosinopenia in acute infection occurs by a mechanism independent of corticosteroid
action.
 D. Eosinophils are rare in the blood of avian species other than raptors. Therefore, eosinopenia may be
difficult to appreciate clinically.
Vll. BASOPHILIA (TABLE 2.4)
A. An inverse relationship exists between the number of circulating basophils and tissue mast cells.
 Basophils are rare in the blood of mammals that have a rich tissue mast cell supply. Conversely,
 basophils are more prominent in avian blood while tissue mast cells are sparse.
B. Basophilia in mammalian blood smears is seldom dramatic, but observing even a few of these cells
     m  si       a 
300/μL
Table 2.4.
CAUSES OF BASOPHILIA.
 Parasitism:
Dirofilaria immitis infestation (dogs and cats)
Acanthocheilonema reconditum infestation
Hepatozoonosis
Ancylostomiasis (dogs)
Schistosomes
Ticks
Air sac mites (birds)
Allergic diseases:
 Dermatitis
Pneumonitis
Eosinophilic granulomas
Gastroenteritis
Some bacterial infections (birds)
Drug reactions:
Heparin
Penicillin
Stress:
Feed restriction (birds)
Starvation (birds)
Forced molting (birds)
 Ingestion of mycotoxins (birds)
 Neoplastic diseases:
Mast cell tumor
Myeloproliferative disease
Thymoma
Lymphomatoid gramulomatosis
Essential thrombocythemia
 Basophilic leukemia
LEUKOCYTES
77
C. Those IgE-generating disorders that cause predictable eosinophilia often have concomitant
basophilia.
D. Basophilia occurs in cats, but it may be overlooked because the granules of mature basophils do not
 stain metachromatically. The granules usually appear lavender to taupe (brownish-gray) with
Romanowsky stains.
E. Basophilia in the absence of eosinophilia is rare, but may be observed occasionally in equine blood
smears.
F. Disorders of lipid metabolism in mammals are not associated with basophilia, as measured by the
routine WBC count. The routine WBC count is too crude to quantitate very mild basophililia precisely.
G. Basophilia is observed more commonly in avian blood smears, probably because of increased
numbers of these cells in health. However, avian basophils may be difficult to identify because their
 granules may dissolve with Diff-Quik? staining. Degranulated basophils have a vacuolated or "moth-
caten" appearance.
Vll. BASOPENIA
A. Basopenia is diffcult to appreciate clinically unless special stains, diluent, and a hemacytometer are
used to perform an absolute basophil count.
IX. LYMPHOCYToSIS (tAblE 2.5)
A. The number of circulating lymphocytes tends to be quite constant in health and decreases slightly
with age in most species; young animals have higher lymphocyte counts. For example, average
lymphocyte counts in horses decline from approximately 5,200 to 3,100/μL between 8 months and
over 5 years of age.
B. The epinephrine effect of excited, healthy animals causes lymphocytosis as described earlier in the
chapter (Section I, A).
Toble 2.5.
CAUSES OF LYMPHOCYTOSIS.
Physiologic re sponse
Young animals, especially cats and birds
Chronic antigenic stimulation:
Bacterial infection
Rickettsial infection
Viral infection
 Deep mycosis
Protozoal infections
Post-vaccination
Hypoadrenocorticism
Lymphoid neoplasia:
 Lymphoma
Lymphoid leukemia
Thymoma
78
CHAPTER 2
C. Antigenic stimulation occasionally causes lymphocytosis.
1. Enlarged lymph nodes caused by antigenic stimulation (lymphoid hyperplasia) are commonly
encountered in all species, but blood lymphocyte numbers corelate poorly with increased
functional reactivity
2. The blood lymphocyte number may be within the reference interval or decreased in association
with enlarged lymph nodes, especially during acute stages of infection (see following discussion on
lymphopenia).
3. Reactive lymphocytes (immunocytes) may occur in the blood with or without lymphocytosis.
  (i/oo on ooo on n) sis un u go ss ruo u t
seen infrequently (e.g., Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever and canine ehrlichiosis) in dogs. Rickettsial
titers should be evaluated to distinguish reactive lymphocytosis from chronic lymphocytic leukemia
D. Persistent lymphocytosis in cattle is a subclinical, nonneoplastic manifestation of bovine leukemiz
virus infection (Chapter 3). Viral infection promotes B lymphocyte hyperplasia; lymphocyte counts
typically range from 7,000 to 15,000/μL.
E. Lymphocytosis is common in lymphocytic leukemias and can occur in association with the
leukemic blood profile of lymphoma.
F. Lymphocyte counts in healthy growing swine are higher than other species, typically 13,000 t0
26,00o/μL. Lymphocyte counts rarely exceed reference values in swine.
G. Lymphocytosis may be dramatic in birds with chronic bacterial, viral, fungal, or parasitic infections.
X. LYMPHOPENIA (TABLE 2.6)
 to lymphopenia is seldom differentiated before a final diagnosis is made; it may be postulated only in
retrospect.
B. Mechanisms that cause lymphopenia include:
1. Corticosteroid-induced redistribution of recirculating lymphocytes (Cases 2, 3, 20, 22, 26, 27)
2. Acute systemic infection. When there is generalized disbursement of infectious antigen,
 a   m 's  u p q  s 
with lymphopenia. The lymphopenia tends to disappear with time.
3. Viral infections are more likely to cause lymphopenia than bacterial infections (Case 9).
 4. Local infections may cause entrapment of lymphocytes in the regional lymph nodes, but
lymphopenia is unlikely.
 5. Acquired T-lymphocyte deficiency. Most recirculating lymphocytes are I cells. Certain
infections in neonates cause thymic necrosis or atrophy; if the animal survives, persistent
lymphopenia occurs.
lymphocytes. Lymphopenia develops slowly.
 7. Loss of lymphocyte-rich, efferent lymph. This mechanism of lymphopenia primarily occurs
with loss of thoracic duct lymph (i.e., chylothorax).
 8. Loss of lymphocyte-rich, afferent lymph. The only afferent lymph that is rich in cells comes
from GALT or BALT. Lymphopenia may occur with intestinal lymphangiectasia (Case 16).
9. Disruption of lymph node architecture by inflammation, infection, or neoplasia that replaces
lymphoid tissue and alters existing patterns of lymphocyte recirculation.
10. Hereditary immunodeficiency. Selective T-lymphocyte deficiency is characterized by
lymphopenia, while combined T- and B-lymphocyte (SCID) deficiency have lymphopenia and
decreased serum immunoglobulin concentrations. Animals with only B-lymphocyte deficiency do
not have lymphopenia.
LEUKOCYTES
79
Table 2.6.
CAUSES OF LYMPHOPENIA.
Drug-induced:
Corticosteroids:
Exogenous corticosteroid or ACTH administration
Hyperadrenocorticism:
Endogenous cortisol production (mammals)
Endogenous corticosterone production (birds)
Interleukin (rhIL-2)
Colony-stimulating factor (rcG-CSF)
Acute systemic infection:
Septicemia
Endotoxemia
Viruses (often only in very early stages)
 Therapeutically induced:
 Immunosuppressive drugs
Chemotherapeutic drugs
Radiation
 Loss of lymphocyte-rich lymph:
 Efferent lymph:
Chylothorax
Feline cardiac disease
Afferent lymph:
Alimentary lymphoma
Enteric neoplasms
Granulomatous enteritis, including paratuberculosis
 Protein-losing enteropathy
Lymphangiectasia
Ulcerative enteritis
Disruption of lymphoid tissue architecture with altered lymphocyte recirculation:
Generalized granulomatous diseases
Multicentric lymphoma
Hereditary disorders:
Selective T-lymphocyte deficiency
 Severe combined immunodeficiency (Arabian foals, Basset Hounds, Jack Russell Terriers)
Thymic aplasia (Black-Pied Danish cattle)
Xl. PROGNOSIS AND LEUKOCYTE RESPONSES
A. General considerations
 1. A single leukogram does not reveal whether the clinical situation is improving or deteriorating.
a. Neutrophilia with a moderate left shift, where segmenters outnumber bands, may be an 
 appropriate response at that point in time.
(1) The leukogram indicates that the infection or inflammation is severe and intense
(2) However, the clinician may be unable to determine whether the neutrophil response is
adequate to contain or eliminate the disease.
b. Neutrophilia wherein immature neutrophils outnumber segmenters (degenerative left shift)
(1) The leukogram indicates that overwhelming infection or inflammation is present.
80
CHAPTER 2
o sai m sisod o e sisns s  a  go  ()
the degenerative left shift suggests a more favorable prognosis.
2. Sequential leukograms usually are required for prognostic judgments.
3. Leukograms should be interpreted with a knowledge of historical data and clinical signs.
4. Leukogram interpretations should be based on the absolute cell counts. The relative leukocyte
percentages, derived from the differential leukocyte count, may be misleading, particularly when
the leukocyte in question represents only a small percentage of the total number of cells counted
B. Favorable prognosis
1. If sequential leukograms exhibit a return toward reference intervals, a favorable prognosis is
indicated when accompanied by convalescence in the animal.
2. Disappearance of a left shift indicates impending recovery and precedes the resolution of
neutrophilia.
 4. Resolution of lymphopenia or eosinopenia may precede clinical signs of recovery in the patient.
C. Guarded and poor prognosis
1. Neutrophil changes
a. Neutropenia, regardless of cause, is serious because of the increased risk of secondary bacterial
infection.
b. A degenerative left shift, regardless of the total WBC count, implies an intense tissue demand
for neutrophils that exceeds the ability of the bone marrow to replace these cells.
c. Extreme neutrophilic leukocytosis with or without a left shift to myelocytes or earlier
neutrophil precursors (leukemoid response) indicates a guarded prognosis until granulocytic
leukemia can be excluded and the disease process can be identified.
2. Lymphocyte changes
a. A declining lymphocyte count in an apparently healthy patient may indicate impending illness;
however, impending illness probably cannot be distinguished from a corticosteroid effect.
b. Persistent lymphopenia suggests ongoing disease.
c. Marked lymphocytosis implies a guarded prognosis until the possibility of lymphocytic
leukemia or lymphoma can be excluded
REFERENCES
Andreasen CB, Roth JA: 200o. Neutrophil functional abnormalities. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC
(eds): Schatms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
356365
Aroch I, Klement E, Segev G: 2005. Clinical, biochemical, and hematological characteristics, disease
prevalence, and prognosis of dogs presenting with neutrophil cytoplasmic toxicity. J Vet Intern Med
19:64-73.
Baneth G, Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson NA, et al: 2006. Hepatozoonosis. In: Greene CE (ed):
Infertious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. WB Saunders Co, St. Louis, pp. 698-710.
Bell TG, Butler KL, Sill HB, et al: 2002. Autosomal recessive severe combined immunodeficiency of
Jack Russell terriers. J Vet Diagn Invest 14:194-204.
Bienzle D: Monocytes and macrophages. 2000. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalm's
iie d a s  s nort  e o 
Brown MR, Rogers KS: 200l. Neutropenia in dogs and cats: A retrospective study of 26l cases.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:13l-139.
LEUKOCYTES
81
        e     
Jain NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia,
pp.382-390.
Duncan JR, Prasse KW, Mahaffey EA: 1999. Veterinary Laboratory Medirine: Clinical Pathology, 3rd ed.
Iowa State University Press, Ames, pp. 37-62.
Evans EW: 2ooo. Interpretation of porcine leukocyte responses. In: Feldman BF; Zinkl JG, Jain NC
(eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
411-416.
Gaunt SD: 2ooo. Extreme neutrophilic leukocytosis. In: Feldman BF; Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schatms
Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 347-349.
George JW, Snipes J, Lane VM: 20l0. Comparison of bovine hematology reference intervals from 1957
to 2006. Vet Clin Pathol 39:138-148.
Gilbert RO, Rebhun WC, Kim CA, et al: 1993. Clinical manifestations of leukocyte adhesion deficiency
in cattle: 14 cases (1977-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:445-449.
Greenfeld CL, Messick JB, Solter PF, et al: 2000. Results of hematologic analyses and prevalence of
physiologic leukopenia in Belgian Tervuren. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:866-871.
 g     po  n a  a a  
Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
Philadelphia, pp. 417-432.
Latimer KS, Campagnoli RP, Danilenko DM: 2000. Pelger-Huet anomaly in Australian shepherds: 87 cases
(1991-1997). Comp Haematol Int 10:9-13.
Latimer KS: 1995. Leukocytes in health and disease. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine. Disease of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. WB Saunders Co, Philadelphia
pp. 1892-1929.
Liska WD, MacEwen EG, Zaki FA, et al: 1979. Feline systemic mastocytosis: A review and results of
 5        
Madewell BR, Wilson DW, Hornof WJ, et al: 1990. Leukemoid blood response and bone infarcts in a dog
with renal tubular adenocarcinoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1623-1625
McManus PM: 1999. Frequency and severity of mastocytemia in dogs with and without mast cell
tumors: 120 cases (1995-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:355-357.
Moore FN, Bender HS: 200o. Neutropenia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary
Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 350-355.
Moore JN, Morris DD: 1992. Endotoxemia and septicemia in horses: Experimental and clinical
correlates. J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1903-1914.
Infection. In: Greene CE (ed): Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. WB Saunders Co, St.
Louis, pp. 698-710.
Raskin RE, Valenciano A: 2000. Cytochemistry of normal leukocytes. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain
NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
337-346.
Schultze AE: 2ooo. Interpretation of canine leukocyte responses. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC
(eds): Schatms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia,
pp.366-381.
82
CHAPTER 2
Scott MA, Stockham SL: 2000. Basophils and mast cells. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds):
Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 308-317.
Sellon RK, Rottman JB, Jordan HL, et al: 1992. Hypereosinophilia associated with transitional cell
carcinoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 20l:591-593
Shelton GH, Linenberger ML: 1995. Hematologic abnormalities associated with retroviral infections in
the cat. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Animal) 10:220-233.
Skubitz KM: 1999. Neutrophilic leukocytes. In: Lee GR, Foerster J, Lukens J, Paraskevas F, Greer JP,
Philadelphia, pp. 300-350.
Smith GS: 2000. Neutrophils. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology,
5th ed. Lippincott Wiliams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 28l-296.
Steffens WL: 20oo. Ultrastructural features of leukocytes. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds):
Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 326-336.
Sykes JE, Weiss DJ, Buoen LC, et al: 200l. Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome in 3 Rottweilers.
J Vet Intern Med 15:162-166.
Taylor JA: 2000. Leukocyte responses in ruminants. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalms
Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 391-404.
Thompson JP, Christopher MM, Ellison GW, et al: 1992. Paraneoplastic leukocytosis associated with a
rectal adenomatous polyp in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 20l:737-738.
   a a     o    i s
(eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp.
405-410
Wellman ML, Couto CG, Starkey RJ, et al: 1989. Lymphocytosis of large granular lymphocytes in three
dogs. Vet Pathol 26:158-163.
Young KM: 2000. Eosinophils. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology,
5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 297-307.
CHAPTER3
HEMATOPOIETICNEOPLASIA
Dorothee Bienzle, DVM, MSc, PhD
Neoplasms arising from hematopoietic cells, especially lymphocytes, are among the most common
manifestations of cancer in domestic animals (Figure 3.l). Various classification schemes are used to
improve disease diagnosis, provide a meaningful prognosis, and choose an effective treatment protocol.
lymphocytes (most commonly outside the bone marrow) and neoplasia arising from non-lymphoid
(myeloid) cells in the bone marrow.
LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS
In mammals, lymphoid neoplasms originate from clonal transformation of lymphocytes in lymph
nodes, mucosal sites, bone marrow, spleen, thymus, and tissues lacking obvious lymphoid cell
populations in health. In birds, lymphoid neoplasia may originate in any of the sites mentioned for
mammals, except lymph nodes (birds do not have lymph nodes). In birds, lymphoid neoplasia also
 may originate in the bursa of Fabricius, a lymphoid-rich tissue adjacent to the cloaca.
Neoplasms may arise from lymphocytes with various degrees of differentiation and biological
function, ranging from immature lymphocytes expressing few "cluster of differentiation" (CD) markers
to terminally differentiated lymphocytes (Figure 3.1). The terminally differentiated lymphocytes
include plasma cells, the ultimate stage of B lymphocyte development, and differentiated T
lymphocytes with discrete CD marker expression. The various forms of lymphoid neoplasia include:
Lymphoma
 Large granular lymphocyte (LGL) lymphoma
Plasma cell tumor
Acute lymphocytic leukemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
1. LyMPhoMA
A. Defnitions and general comments
  s n s s s  5  sn n so n si  
bone marrow.
a. Lymphoma originally was called “lymphosarcoma." Lymphosarcoma probably is the most
accurate name for this tumor of neoplastic lymphocytes.
b. In human medicine, the term lymphosarcoma subsequently was replaced by the term
"malignant lymphoma." The suffx “oma" is used to designate a benign neoplasm. Therefore,
83
FIGURE 3.1. Morphologic appearance of various forms of lymphoma and leukemia. A. Lymphoma (lymph node,
dog); B. large granular lymphoma (intestine, cat); C. plasma cell myeloma (bone marrow, dog); D. acute
leukemia (lymph node, cat); continued.
84
FIGURE 3.1.
 continued. G. acute granulocytic leukemia (blood, cat, myeloperoxidase staining);
H. myelomomocytic leukemia (blood, horse); 1. monocytic leukemia (blood, dog); J. monocytic leukemia (blood,
dog, C-naphthyl acetate esterase staining); K. erythroleukemia (bone marrow, cat); L. erythroleukermia (blood, cat);
continlled.
85
FIGURE 3.1.
continued. M. megakaryocytic leukemia (megakaryocytic myelosis, blood, cat); N. essential
thrormbocythermia (blood, cat); O. eosinophilic leukemia (blood, horse); P eosinophilic myeloproliferative disease
(bone marrow, horse); Q. basophilic leukemia (blood, dog); R. mast cell leukemia (blood, dog).
86
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
87
the adjective “malignant" was added, indicating that malignant lymphoma was a malignancy
composed of lymphocytes.
c.Current medical terminology has evolved one step further by designating these neoplasms as
"lymphoma." The adjective “malignant" was discarded from the term "malignant lymphoma"
because it was redundant; lymphomas are virtually always malignant.
d. In summary, common synonyms for lymphoma include lymphosarcoma and malignant
lymphoma; however, most forms of lymphoma are malignant.
2. Lymphoma may occur in very young animals, but most commonly affects middle-aged animals
3. In advanced lymphoma, neoplastic lymphocytes frequently infltrate the bone marrow and are
present in the blood (leukemic blood profle or leukemic blood picture) even though the neoplasm
originated as an extramarrow, solid tissue mass.
   d   sn rs su i s    t
and/or bone marrow.
5. Lymphocytic leukemia may arise in the bone marrow or as a primary splenic neoplasm with a
leukemic blood profile.
B. Subclassification. Lymphoma has been classified into subtypes according to anatomic distribution,
histologic pattern, cellular morphology, cytochemistry, and expression of CD markers. Prognostic
information regarding the clinical course of disease and response to therapy is gradually evolving as
larger numbers of patients with lymphoma are evaluated prospectively by uniform criteria.
Subclassification of lymphoma has been based on the following:
1. Anatomic distribution
a. Multicentric lymphoma. Multiple lymph nodes are involved in the disease. Various organs may
be infiltrated by neoplastic lymphocytes, especially spleen and liver.
b. Alimentary lymphoma. The gastrointestinal tract and its regional lymph nodes are affected
 Other abdominal organs may be infiltrated with neoplastic lymphocytes, but superfcial lymph
nodes usually are unaffected.
c. Mediastinal lymphoma. The cranial mediastinal lymph nodes or thymus are involved in the
 neoplastic process. This form of lymphoma occurs primarily in young animals and is uniformly of
T-cell origin.
d. Cutaneous lymphoma. Lymphoma of the skin may be epitheliotropic or dermal, solitary or
 generalized. The draining lymph nodes frequently are enlarged.
2. Miscellaneous presentations of lymphoma. Lymphoma may originate in most organs and
tissues, including the kidney, eye, and central nervous system.
2. Histologic pattern in affected lymph nodes
a. Diffuse. The diffuse pattern of lymphoma is characterized by sheets of neoplastic lymphocytes
 that replace the normal tissue architecture. In domestic animals, the majority of cases of lymphoma
have this pattern.
b. Nodular. The nodular pattern of lymphoma is uncommon in animals. Histologic sections of
 affected lymph nodes have nodular aggregates of neoplastic lymphocytes, sometimes mimicking
disease compared to diffuse lymphoma.
3. Morphology of the neoplastic lymphocytes
a. Attempts have been made to apply human lymphoma classification schemes to animal tumors.
b. The National Cancer Institute Working Formulation considers both the architectural pattern of
 the neoplastic lymph node and cellular morphology.
C. The updated Kiel classification includes architectural pattern, cellular morphology, and B or T
lymphocyte origin.
d. Both the National Cancer Institute Working Formulation and Kiel schemes classify lymphomas
into low-, intermediate-, or high-grade neoplasms. Both of these classification protocols predict the
clinical course of canine lymphoma with reasonable accuracy.
88
CHAPTER 3
&. The Revised European-American Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms (REAL) considers
cellular morphology, immunophenotype, and, in select categories, cytogenetics. This classification
scheme has not been evaluated in lymphoma of domestic animals
f. Enumeration of proliferation-associated antigens has been of limited value for prognosis in
animals with lymphoma.
g. Determination of argyrophilic nucleolar organizing regions (AgNOR scores) indicates the rate
 of the cell cycle and, less specifically, of the number of dividing cells. The AgNOR score correlates
with tumor prognosis in the dog, but not the cat.
h. Most canine and bovine lymphomas are high-grade neoplasms.
4. CD expression (immunophenotype)
a. Compared to other leukocytes, lymphocytes have few morphologic features indicating their
maturity or function.
b. The microscopic appearance of lymphocytes has limited correlation with immunophenotype.
c. Monoclonal antibodies specific for markers expressed on animal lymphocytes of different
maturational stages, function, and anatomic locations are increasingly available for diagnostic use.
d. Once a diagnosis of lymphoma has been established, the analysis of cell marker expression,
using a panel of antibodies, may allow determination of the immunophenotype of lymphoma.
2. Marker expression of neoplastic cells can be evaluated by the following techniques:
(1) Flow cytometry on single cell suspensions in fluid medium.
(2) Immunochemistry performed on cytologic preparations.
(3) Immunochemistry performed on formalin-fixed or frozen sections of biopsy material.
f. Determining the biological origin of the neoplastic lymphocytes can improve the accuracy of
prognosis and treatment of lymphoma.
g. In veterinary medicine, immunophenotyping is often a research technique that is being
investigated at larger universities. It generally is not commercially available.
C. Clinical staging of lymphoma
n s  s s  n o s o    
have been used in determining disease prognosis. The higher the stage of disease, the poorer the
clinical prognosis.
a. Stage I. Only a single lymphoid tissue or organ (excluding bone marrow) is involved.
b. Stage I1. Several lymph nodes in a regional area are involved.
C. Stage Ill. Generalized lymph node involvement is evident.
d. Stage IV Liver and spleen are involved (with or without stage II1).
2. Stage V. In addition to the primary solid tumor, neoplastic cells are present in the blood, bone
 marrow, and/or other organs.
 2. Each stage is further subdivided according to the absence (A) or presence (B) of systemic signs
of disease.
D. Canine lymphoma
1. Anatomic and functional features
a. Multicentric lymphoma is the most common anatomic form in dogs. Neoplasia begins in the
lymph nodes and progresses to involve the spleen and liver. Most superficial lymph nodes are
prominently enlarged and painless on palpation.
b. Alimentary, mediastinal, and cutaneous forms of lymphoma follow in decreasing frequency.
These forms of neoplasia present with infltrative disease of the small intestine, cranial mediastinal
 masses, and generalized skin disease, respectively Involvement of regional lymph nodes or
adjacent organs is common.
c. The majority of multicentric lymphomas in the dog are of B-cell origin.
. Mediastinal lymphoma is of Icell origin.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
89
f.Cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) is a form of T-cell neoplasia
involving the CD8+ subset of lymphocytes.
8.  A subgroup of lymphomas comprised of small cells causing gradual enlargement of lymph
nodes or spleen has an indolent course of disease and is most commonly of B-cell origin.
2. Laboratory features
a. Lymphopenia is more common than lymphocytosis.
b. A leukemic blood profile occurs in approximately 20% of dogs with lymphoma when presented
for initial examination.
C. Mild anemia is commonly observed.
d. Mild thrombocytopenia occurs in 10% to 20% of dogs with lymphoma.
2.
 The neutrophil count is variable, but a mild mature neutrophilia is commonly observed.
f.  Infltration of the bone marrow by neoplastic lymphocytes can be observed in bone marrow
aspirates from most dogs with marked anemia, thrombocytopenia, or a leukemic blood picture.
g. Hypercalcemia is often associated with lymphoma due to production of parathyroid hormone-
related peptide (PTHrP) by neoplastic T lymphocytes. The degree of hypercalcemia may be
marked and results in the activation of osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Hypercalcemia may cause renal
failure via nephrocalcinosis.
h. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, gammopathy, or bleeding due to tumor-elaborated
factors occurs infrequently.
Ad    is i  ia  
abnormal lymphocytes in circulation (Sezary syndrome)
j-
 Diffuse tumor architecture and homogenous cellular morphology permit cytological diagnosis
 in most cases of canine lymphoma.
E. Feline lymphoma
1. The role of viral agents
a. Prior to widespread testing and vaccination, feline leukemia virus (FeLV) infection was the
most common cause of feline lymphoma.
b. Currently, only 10% to 20% of lymphomas in the cat are associated with a positive FeLV
antigen test.
C. In the last two decades, the average age of cats with lymphoma has increased (approximately
10 years of age), while concurrent FeLV seropositivity has decreased.
d. Cats chronically infected with the feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) also have an increased
incidence of lymphoma.
2. However, most cats with lymphoma are negative for FeLV and FIV infections by group-
specific antigen testing and antibody determination on blood, respectively. In some individuals
sequestered FeLV infection subsequently may be demonstrated by polymerase chain reaction
analysis of bone marrow.
2. Anatomic and functional features
a. Alimentary lymphoma is the most common form of lymphoid neoplasia in the cat, followed by
multicentric, mediastinal, renal, and other extranodal lymphomas.
b. Multicentric lymphoma commonly involves the abdominal lymph nodes with or without
 involvement of the liver and spleen. Involvement of the superficial lymph nodes alone is
infrequently observed.
C. A rare form of lymphoma, involving solitary or regional lymph nodes of the head or neck, is of
atypical B-cell origin and morphologically similar to human Hodgkin's lymphoma.
d. Gastric lymphomas are of B-cell origin, while small intestinal lymphomas are of either I- or
B-cell origin.
e. Large granular lymphoma of the small intestine occurs in older cats, is of T-cell origin, and
associated with a leukemic blood picture.
f.Alimentary lymphoma occurs in older FeLV-negative cats.
06
CHAPTER 3
g. Mediastinal lymphoma occurs in younger cats. It is of T-cell origin, and more than 80% of
affected cats are FeLV seropositive.
h. The incidence of FeLV infection varies from 20% to 50% for hepatic and renal lymphoma.
i. Most spinal lymphomas are reported in young FeLV-seropositive cats.
 j. Nasal lymphomas are of B-cell origin and occur in older FeLV-seronegative cats.
k. Cutaneous lymphoma in the cat is rare.
1. FIV-associated lymphomas are of B-cell origin and occur most commonly in extranodal sites
in most cases of alimentary and multicentric feline lymphoma.
3. Laboratory features
a. A leukemic blood profle is uncommon in cats with lymphoma, regardless of their FeLV status.
b. Changes in the hemogram are absent to mild in the majority of cats with lymphoma.
c. Mild anemia of chronic disease may occur.
d. Primary hematopoietic manifestations of FeLV infection are uncommon in cats. If present
these manifestations include severe macrocytic non-regenerative anemia, giant platelets, variable
dyspoiesis of neutrophils and red cells, and/or leukemia.
F.Mustelid lymphoma
1. Anatomic and functional features
a. Lymphoma is a relatively common neoplasm in ferrets.
b. The alimentary form is most common, and occurs mostly in middle-aged to older ferrets.
c. Mediastinal lymphoma is of T-cell origin and occurs in younger ferrets, as is the case in other
species.
d. Indolent as well as rapidly progressive forms of lymphoma have been reported.
2. Most lymphoma in ferrets is of T-cell origin.
2. Laboratory features
a. Typical changes in the hemogram are mild to moderate anemia.
b. Other cytopenia or a leukemic blood picture is uncommon.
G. Avian lymphoma
1. Anatomic and functional features
a. Multicentric, cutaneous and alimentary forms of lymphoma have been reported in psittacines
and raptors.
2. Laboratory features
a. Hypercalcemia and gammopathy have been reported for individual cases.
H. Equine lymphoma
1. Anatomic and functional features
a. Neoplasia, other than cutaneous neoplasms, is uncommon in horses; however, lymphoma is
not infrequent.
b. Multicentric lymphoma is the most frequent presentation of lymphoma in the horse.
Abdominal lymph nodes are affected; concurrent intestinal and hepatic infltration by neoplastic
lymphocytes may be observed.
c. Subcutaneous, splenic, and mediastinal forms of lymphoma also occur in the horse.
d. T-cell origin is most common, but variable cell morphology and plasma cell and histiocyte
infiltrates occur in both T-cell and B-cell lymphomas.
2. In T-cell-rich B-cell lymphoma, the B-cells are thought to be the neoplastic population with
subsequent recruitment of mature, differentiated T-cells.
f.Cutaneous lymphoma may be of B- or T-cell origin.
8. Mediastinal lymphoma is of T-cell origin, as is the case in other species.
h. Lymphoma in the horse may be indolent. Tumor masses may wax and wane with exposure to
estrogen or progesterone.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
2. Laboratory features
a. Systemic inflammation with hyperfibrinogenemia, hypoalbuminemia, and hyperglobulinemia
are common and accompanied clinically by ventral edema in multicentric lymphoma.
b. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia with a positive direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test is
common and may be the presenting sign of disease.
c. Thrombocytopenia or a leukemic blood picture occurs in 20% to 30% of horses with
lymphoma.
d. Gammopathy is frequent in multicentric lymphoma, and may be polyclonal or monoclonal
1. Bovine lymphoma
1. The role of bovine leukemia virus (BLV) viral infection
a. Most lymphoma or lymphoid leukemia in mature cattle is due to infection with the bovine
leukemia virus (BLV).
b. Infection with BLV results in persistent lymphocytosis of mature, non-neoplastic B-cells in
approximately 30% of infected cattle.
C. Persistent lymphocytosis is defined as an absolute lymphocyte count greater than the reference
d. Fewer than 5% of cows with persistent lymphocytosis develop lymphoma. Thus, persistent
lymphocytosis suggests BLV infection but does not indicate the presence of lymphoma.
2. Persistent lymphocytosis precedes the development of lymphoma by several years in the
majority of BLV-infected cattle.
2. Anatomic and functional features
a. Multicentric (enzootic) lymphoma is the most common presentation of lymphoid neoplasia in
cattle. This form of lymphoma usually affects older cattle.
b. Multicentric lymphoma is characterized by enlargement of superficial or abdominal lymph
 nodes. As the disease progresses, the heart, gastrointestinal tract, uterus, kidney, and other organs
become involved.
c. The neoplastic cells are mature B lymphocytes that express major histocompatibility complex
class II antigens, CD5, and surface IgM.
d. Other sporadic forms of lymphoma are not associated with BLV infection
e. Sporadic multicentric lymphoma occurs in calves, sporadic mediastinal lymphoma affects
yearlings, and sporadic cutaneous lymphoma occurs in young cattle.
f. Cytologic diagnosis from tumor aspirates is suitable in most cases.
3. Laboratory features
a. The WBC count is highly variable, ranging from leukopenia to leukocytosis.
b. Morphologically abnormal lymphocytes and an increased proportion of B-cells may be detected
before persistent lymphocytosis is recognized.
c. Aleukemic blood profle occurs in 10% to 30% of cattle with multicentric lymphoma. The
WBC count may exceed 100,000 cells/μL and lymphocytes may have abnormal morphology.
d. Anemia is uncommon in bovine lymphoma because of the prolonged lifespan (l60 days) of
erythrocytes.
Il. ACUTE LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIa (ALL)
A. Definition and occurrence
1. ALL arises from undifferentiated lymphocytes in the bone marrow.
2. ALL is uncommon in all animals compared to lymphoma.
3. ALL in FeLV-infected cats has become uncommon since the introduction of testing and
vaccination
4. ALL may occur at any age and typically has a very short clinical course.
92
CHAPTER 3
B.Laboratory features
1. Individual neoplastic lymphocytes are medium to large and have a round to slightly indented
nucleus, dispersed chromatin, one to multiple nucleoli or nucleolar rings, and a thin rim of dark
blue, sometimes granular cytoplasm ("blast cells").
2. Hematologic changes are variable, but severe cytopenia is typical and may affect one or more
cell lines. Neoplastic lymphocytes may be restricted to the bone marrow and morphologically
inapparent on blood smears (aleukemic), may circulate in scant numbers (subleukemic), or may
appear in large numbers (leukemic) in the blood.
3. Cytopenia due to myelophthisis tends to be severe and progressive.
4. Cytochemical classification of the neoplastic cells has been useful to distinguish ALL from
non-lymphoid malignancies.
5. Detailed classification by immunophenotype has been limited because few differentiation
markers are expressed by the neoplastic lymphocytes, but most cases of ALL are of B-cell origin.
6. CD34 is an antigen expressed by undifferentiated lymphoid and myeloid precursor cells. Its
presence confirms acute leukemia, but does not identify the lineage of the neoplastic cells.
             ' 
of circulating neoplastic lymphocytes than blood smear morphologic assessment.
C. Differential diagnoses
1. ALL must be distinguished from other acute leukemias, especially when there is a predominance
of undiferentiated blast cells (e.g., acute myelocytic or monocytic leukemia) and chemotherapy
will be attempted. Most ALL express either cytoplasmic CD79alpha or cell surface CD2l if of B-cell
origin, or CD3 if of I-cell origin.
2. Advanced lymphoma may have a marked leukemic blood profile, resembling ALL. However
 po p a d  ss s s  ad  a  si 
leukemic blood profle. In leukemia, organ infltration and enlargement usually occur after
neoplastic cells are evident in the blood
3. In the terminal stages of disease, ALL and lymphoma may be difficult to distinguish. However,
 ALL is not associated with the formation of solid tissue masses.
IIl. CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA (CLL)
A. Definition and occurrence
1. CLL is a neoplasm of relatively differentiated lymphocytes that "home" to secondary lymphoid
organs such as the spleen.
2. CLL typically occurs in older animals, predominantly dogs.
3. The natural clinical course of disease is protracted, often lasting months to years.
 4. Splenomegaly is pronounced at diagnosis, but bone marrow becomes involved only gradually.
 5. The eventual development of lymphadenopathy in CLL may mimic the clinical appearance of
small cell lymphoma.
B. Laboratory features
1. The neoplastic cells resemble benign smal lymphocytes. Absolute lymphocyte counts may range
from 10,000 to 100,000 cells/μL.
2. Fine, pink-purple, cytoplasmic granules have been observed in the neoplastic lymphocytes of
approximately 50% to 80% of dogs with CLL, and correspond to I-cell origin. These cells have
3. 60% to 80% of the cases of canine CLL are of I-cell origin, specifically of the CD8+ subset.
4. B-cell CLL has been associated with monoclonal gammopathy.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
93
6. Bone marrow involvement occurs in advanced CLL, leading to insidious myelophthisis.
C. Differential diagnoses
1. Physiologic lymphocytosis of excited cats may resemble CLL but the lymphocytosis is transient
and unassociated with organomegaly.
2. Infrequently, dogs with hypoadrenocorticism may exhibit moderate lymphocytosis involving
small lymphocytes.
3. Reactive lymphocytosis may be seen in some infectious diseases (e.g., anaplasmosis, ehrlichiosis
Rocky Mountain spotted fever) or following vaccination. Moderate numbers of lymphocytes may
appear reactive. The etiology of reactive lymphocytosis usually can be determined by further
laboratory testing (e.g., rickettsial titers).
IV. LaRGE GraNULAr LyMPHocYTe (lGl) LyMPHoMa/LeUkeMlA
A. Definition and occurrence
1. In health, LGLs arise from the bone marrow and “home" to epithelial sites, primarily in the
intestine
2. Most LGLs express a T-cell receptor, CD3, and CD8, but some may be of natural killer (NK)
phenotype.
3. LGL lymphomas are uncommon but comprise a distinct entity of lymphoma. LGL lymphoma
has been reported in cats, horses, dogs, and birds. Neoplasms generally arise in older animals.
4. LGL lymphoma arises in the small intestine and involves abdominal lymph nodes and liver.
5. Clinical signs of anorexia and vomiting with an increased proportion of LGL cells on blood
smears are usually the presenting abnormalities.
6. LGL lymphoma is a high-grade malignancy in all species. The course of disease after diagnosis is
usually rapid.
B. Laboratory features
1. LGLs are variable in size and have chunky, pink to magenta cytoplasmic granules. In some
 neoplastic lymphocytes, the granules may cluster near the site of nuclear indentation.
2. Increased numbers of circulating LGLs usually are present and absolute counts may exceed
100,000 cells/μL
3. Mild anemia and neutrophilia are common.
4. Development of immunoreagents to identify LGL subsets may improve the accuracy of disease
diagnosis and clinical prognosis.
C. Differential diagnoses
1. T-cell origin CLL in the dog frequently consists of small lymphocytes with fine pink cytoplasmic
granules, and may be mistaken for LGL lymphoma. However, T-cell origin CLL is not associated
with intestinal tumors, but originates in splenic red pulp.
2. Reactive lymphocytosis involving lymphocytes with small cytoplasmic granules has been
reported in dogs with chronic anaplasmosis and in birds with coccidiosis.
V. PLASMA CELL TUMORS
A. Definition and occurrence
1. Plasmacytoma and plasma cell myeloma (multiple myeloma) are clonal proliferations of B
lymphocytes that often produce a homogeneous immunoglobulin or immunoglobulin fragment
 2. Plasmacytomas occur as solitary or multiple masses, most commonly involving the skin or
mucous membranes. These neoplasms arise in older animals, and in dogs usually are
unaccompanied by clinical signs of disease and do not elaborate a secreted immunoglobulin
94
CHAPTER 3
3. Solitary plasma cell tumors in cats have a predilection for bone or skin, and may be locally
invasive.
 4. Plasmacytomas may contain cytoplasmic immunoglobulin that can be demonstrated by
 5. Plasma cell myeloma (multiple myeloma) is a clonal neoplasm of plasma cells that typically
arises in the bone marrow and is often associated with monoclonal gammopathy. Osteolysis may be
observed in the dog but is rare in the cat.
6. Plasma cell myelomas in animals can produce IgG, IgA, or IgM.
7. Non-secretory plasma cell myeloma is rare, but has been reported in dogs and cats.
 8. In IgM-producing plasma cell myeloma, hyperviscosity is frequent due to the large size of IgM.
Osteolysis is uncommon.
 9. Hyperproteinemia with hyperglobulinemia and monoclonal gammopathy are considered the
hallmarks of plasma cell myeloma. However, monoclonal gammopathy has been observed
infrequently in some infectious diseases (e.g., feline infectious peritonitis, canine anaplasmosis).
10. Cryoglobulinemia is the production of a monoclonal immunoglobulin, such as IgM or IgG,
that precipitates below body temperature.
11. Monoclonal immunoglobulins, usually of the IgM isotype, may be produced infrequently in
lymphoma or CLL of B-cell origin.
12. Plasma cell myeloma is generally a neoplasm of older animals.
B. Diagnostic criteria
1. At least two of four criteria must be met to diagnose plasma cell myeloma. These criteria
include the following:
a. Radiographic evidence of osteolysis. Osteolysis is relatively common in dogs but rare in cats.
present in aspirates from osteolytic lesions. In cats, soft tissue accumulations of neoplastic plasmz
cells are more common than bone lesions.
c. Monoclonal gammopathy on serum electrophoresis.
d. Bence Jones proteinuria. Bence Jones proteins are free immunoglobulin light chains best
detected by electrophoresis of concentrated urine specimens (Chapter 9).
C. Laboratory features
1. Hyperglobulinemia. This is the hallmark of plasma cell myeloma.
a. The monoclonal immunoglobulin is recognizable as a narrow-based, discrete band or peak in
the β or  region of the serum electrophoretogram.
b. The abnormal protein is referred to as M component or paraprotein.
C. The paraprotein may be composed of intact immunoglobulin, light chains, or heavy chains.
d. The immunoglobulin isotype can be identifed by immunoelectrophoresis, immunofixation, or
radial immunodiffusion.
e. Synthesis of benign, active immunoglobulins may be suppressed. This functional
immunodeficiency may predispose the patient to infection because the monoclonal antibody does
not provide broad protection against pathogens.
2. Bence Jones proteinuria
a. Free immunoglobulin light chains (Bence Jones proteins) are smaller than albumin, readily
pass the glomerulus, and are present at greater concentration in urine than in serum. Thus, their
detection in urine is of diagnostic importance. “Light chain disease" does not result in monoclonal
gammopathy on serum protein electrophoresis.
b. Intact immunoglobulin molecules do not pass the glomerular flter, unless glomerular damage
is present.
methods are used to detect this protein.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA 
95
d. Electrophoresis of concentrated urine is the preferred method to detect Bence Jones protein;
2. More than 50% of dogs and cats with plasma cell myeloma may have light chain
proteinuria.
3. Bone marrow and hematology
a. Neoplastic plasma cells in the bone marrow frequently are indistinguishable from benign
 plasma cells by light microscopy.
b. Clusters of plasma cells in the bone marrow are observed in the majority of multiple
 myelomas, but may be missed in a single bone marrow aspirate or core biopsy.
c. Greater than 15% to 20% plasma cells in the bone marrow is highly suggestive of plasma cell
myeloma. Up to 5% plasma cells, dispersed as single cells, may be found in the bone marrow of
healthy or diseased animals that do not have plasma cell myeloma
d. Plasma cell leukemia is rare. In plasma cell myeloma, the neoplastic plasma cells rarely
circulate in numbers detectable on blood smear review.
2. Anemia is consistently present and results from myelophthisis, relative blood dilution
due to increased plasma oncotic pressure, or shortened erythrocyte lifespan due to coating of
erythrocytes by the paraprotein with subsequent phagocytosis by splenic macrophages.
f.
 Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia develop with progressive myelophthisis.
4. Hemostasis
a. Platelet function may be impaired due to binding of the paraprotein to platelets (e.g., decreased
aggregation).
b. Complexing of the paraprotein to coagulation factors reduces clotting.
c. IgM (MW = 900,000 daltons) and IgA dimers may cause increased viscosity of blood, resulting
 in tissue ischemia and hemorrhage.
d. Thus, bleeding may be observed in cases of plasma cell myeloma despite a normal platelet
count.
5. Other laboratory features
a. Moderate hypercalcemia is common. Myeloma cells produce osteoclast-activating factors
 resulting in resorption of bone.
b. Renal disease develops from nephrocalcinosis secondary to chronic hypercalcemia, hypoxic
damage from hyperviscosity, renal toxicity of light chains, neoplastic cell infltration of the
C.
 Hyperviscosity relates to the size, polymerization, and amount of paraprotein. It is a common
feature of IgM myeloma, and less frequently observed in IgA and IgG myelomas.
d. Compensatory hypoalbuminemia may occur to offset the hyperglobulinemia-induced increase
 in plasma oncotic pressure.
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE DISORDERS
Myeloproliferative disorder is a general term for all leukemias that originate in the bone marrow and
 r  e   r  si  n   n 
gives rise to a homogeneous progeny. The neoplastic progeny cells may be relatively undifferentiated
(acute leukemia) or resemble more mature cells that are normally encountered in the blood (chronic
leukemia) (Figure 3.1). Leukemia cells have multiple genetic lesions that result in particular
 ogoads nog sindaoai o sioioey bues jo unssaidau no uoissadxa on bupoooe sadkouaud
lineages. Normal hematopoietic cells are displaced by the neoplastic population, resulting in
myelophthisic disease. Acute leukemia has a rapid and fatal clinical course without treatment. In
contrast, untreated chronic leukemia has a more gradual onset and longer clinical course prior to
death. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia are greater clinical complications in chronic
leukemia because of the longer course of disease.
96
CHAPTER 3
1. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS
A. A leukemic blood profle is usually present.
B. Classification into acute or chronic leukemia is based on the percentage of undifferentiated blast
cells in the blood or bone marrow.
C. This classification corresponds to the clinical course of the disease. Acute leukemia is rapidly
 progressive, whereas chronic leukemia is more slowly progressive.
monocytes and macrophages. Infltrative disease commonly involves the splenic red pulp, sinusoidal
and subcapsular areas of lymph nodes, sinusoidal and portal regions of the liver, and vascular areas of
other organs.
masses, called chloromas, that may rarely be observed in granulocytic leukemia. Similar masses
 r a  e  a  a    e  
which may result in hypo- or hypercellularity.
G. Bone marrow hypercellularity, gradually developing hepatosplenomegaly, and mild
lymphadenopathy are characteristic of chronic leukemia.
H. Myeloproliferative diseases are much less common than lymphoproliferative diseases.
Il. ACUTE MYELOID LEUKEMIA (AML)
A.Classification
1. Acute myeloid leukemia in humans is categorized according to the World Health Organization
(WHO) Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, which considers
morphologic, immunophenotypic, and genetic features to arrive at distinct entities that have
clinical and prognostic similarity. This classification scheme has been adapted for acute leukemias
in dogs and cats, with predominant reliance on morphologic features.
2. Acute myeloid leukemia in dogs and cats can be classified into most of the human subgroups.
3. A diagnosis of acute leukemia is made when more than 30% of the nucleated cells in the bone
marrow are blast cells and the total nonerythroid cells comprise more than 5o% of the nucleated
cell population.
4. Blast cells of different cell lineages have few distinguishing morphologic features in
Romanowsky-stained blood and bone marrow smears. Therefore, panels of cytochemical or
immunochemical reactions frequently are necessary to identify specific lineage of the blast cells.
5. Transmission electron microscopic evaluation may assist in classification of leukemia cells
according to cytoplasmic features.
6. Acute leukemias may have profound genetic abnormalities and are rapidly fatal.
7. Current technology does not permit classification of all acute leukemias in animals
B. Subgroups
1. Acute undifferentiated leukemia (AUL). This form of leukemia is characterized by large numbers
of blast cells whose lineage cannot be determined. In the dog, these cells can be labeled with an
anti-CD34 antibody, which identifies undifferentiated lymphocytic and myelocytic precursor cells in
the bone marrow.
2. Acute myeloblastic (granulocytic, neutrophilic) leukemia
a. Two subtypes may be recognized in animals.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA 
97
(1) Myeloblastic leukemia without maturation. In this form of AML (Ml), more than 90% of
the nonerythroid cells in the bone marrow are myeloblasts.
(2) Myeloblastic leukemia with maturation. In this form of AML (M2), 30% to 90% of the
 nonerythroid cells are myeloblasts. Basophilic or eosinophilic differentiation may be present.
b. Laboratory features include the following:
(1) A leukemic blood profile with a variable number of myeloblasts. Neutrophilic blasts
are myeloperoxidase, Sudan Black B, and chloroacetate esterase positive. In the dog and cat,
neoplastic neutrophil precursors may exhibit alkaline phosphatase staining, whereas normal
neutrophils are negative (alkaline phosphatase activity is a marker of immaturity in many cell
lines, including lymphocytes).
(2) Myeloperoxidase activity may be detected by automated hematology analyzers.
xa  e t  o-d   t sxa si  a (
neutrophil specific antigen (NSA).
(4) Total leukocyte counts vary from leukopenia to leukocytosis. A bone marrow aspirate is
essential for diagnosis of AML in cases with leukopenia (neutropenia) and few neoplastic cells
 in the blood. Bone marrow should contain more than 30% blast cells.
(5) Nonregenerative anemia and thrombocytopenia result from myelophthisis. The anemia may
be severe.
3. Promyelocytic leukemia (M3)
a. The neoplastic cells have a few azurophilic, cytoplasmic granules.
b. Cytochemical reactivity is consistent with neutrophil lineage.
c. This subtype of AML has been reported only in pigs.
4. Myelomonocytic leukemia (M4)
a. This subtype is the most common form of AML of dogs, cats, and horses
b. Both neutrophilic and monocytic cell lines are affected, demonstrating their shared bipotential
precursor cell (CFU-GM; see Figure 1.2 in Chapter 1).
c. Laboratory features
(1) Myeloblasts and monoblasts in the bone marrow comprise more than 30% of all nucleated
cells.
(2)  Neutrophilic blasts are identified by cytochemical reactivity for myeloperoxidase, Sudan
Black B, and chloracetate esterase.
esterase) activity that can be inhibited by sodium fluoride treatment. These cells also have
ractivity for C-naphthyl butyrate esterase (specific esterase) activity.
(calprotectin) is supportive of monoblastic or monocytic origin.
either cell type may predominate.
(6) Of the nucleated cells in the bone marrow, more than 20% are maturing granulocytes and
 more than 20% are maturing monocytes.
5. Monocytic leukemia (M5)
a. Cells of the monocytic lineage, as identified by cytochemistry and/or CDl4 or calprotectin
 immunostaining, comprise more than 80% of the nonerythroid nucleated cells in the bone
marrow.
 b. Marked monocytosis is present in the blood. The monocytes may be immature or appear
abnormal.
c. Mild anemia and thrombocytopenia are common. The mild degree of anemia, even with
6. Erythroleukemia (M6)
a. Erythroleukemia is characterized by the co-production of erythroblasts and myeloblasts. This
form of leukemia has a dual cell lineage.
86
CHAPTER 3
b. More than 50% of the nucleated bone marrow cells are erythroid precursors, while more than
30% of the non-erythroid cells are myeloblasts. Dyserythropoiesis is common.
staining nor immunochemical markers are available for erythroblast identification.
d. Erythroleukemia has only been reported in cats and poultry, and is often associated with FeLV
infection in cats.
e. Erythemic myelosis is an older term used for FeLV-associated erythroleukemia in cats.
f. Laboratory features
(1)  This leukemia is characterized by severe anemia, marked metarubricytosis with variable
maturation stages of erythroid precursor cells in the blood, and an absence of polychromasia or
reticulocytosis.
(2)  Thus, this condition is a severe nonregenerative anemia and leukemia.
(3)  Acute and chronic forms of erythemic myelosis are recognized. The acute form has
more rubriblasts and prorubricytes. The chronic form has a predominance of rubricytes and
metarubricytes; erythroblasts are infrequently observed. This condition may transition into
acute undifferentiated leukemia.
(4) This manifestation of FeLV infection has become less common since the advent of FeLV
testing and vaccination.
7. Megakaryocytic leukemia (megakaryocytic myelosis, M7)
a. More than 30% of the nucleated bone marrow cells are megakaryoblasts. These cells may be
difficult to recognize by morphology alone.
b. If necessary, megakaryoblasts may be identified by cytochemistry by identifying acetylcholine
esterase reactivity. Alternatively, immunoreactivity for von Willebrand factor or glycoprotein IIb-
Ila (CD4l-6l) may be used for cellular identification. Concurrent expression of CD34 identifies
cells as megakaryoblasts
c. Myelofibrosis and inability to aspirate bone marrow is a feature of megakaryocytic leukemia
Ill. MYElODYSPLASTIC SYNDROME (MdS)
A. Definition
1. MDS is a clonal hematopoietic disorder that commonly evolves into overt acute leukemia. Thus,
MDS is a preleukemic condition.
2. The presence of fewer than 30% blast cells in the bone marrow, dyserythropoiesis (abnormal
3. MDs has been reported most commonly in cats and infrequently in dogs and horses.
4. Cats infected with FeLV may develop MDS
B. Laboratory features
1. Cytopenia affecting more than one hematopoietic cell line may cause non-regenerative anemia
neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia in any combination
2. Typical hematologic changes in MDS include macrocytosis without polychromasia,
metarubricytosis, abnormally maturing rubricytes, giant platelets, hypersegmented and giant
neutrophils, circulating myeloblasts, and abnormal eosinophils
3. Bone marrow aspirates and core biopsies are often hypercellular. Dysplastic changes, in addition
to those observed in the blood, may include megakaryocytic nuclear hypo- or hyperlobulation,
dwarf megakaryocytes with round nuclei, megakaryocyte clustering, megakaryocyte and rubricyte
nuclear:cytoplasmic asynchrony, and abnormal granulation of granulocytic precursors.
4. Many animals with MDS progress to a type of AML, although the transitional period is of
variable length
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
99
IV. MyElOProliferative NeoPlaSMS (MPN)
A. Definition
 1. MPN encompasses clonal neoplastic proliferations of mature and less mature granulocytes,
erythrocytes, and platelets with gradual disease progression.
2. Common clinical features are bone marrow hypercellularity, splenomegaly, and moderate to
marked leukocytosis, erythrocytosis, or thrombocytosis.
3. MPN is generally a disease of older animals.
4. Transformation into acute myeloid leukemia may occur along with a change to a predominance
of undifferentiated cells in the blood (blast crisis).
B. Subgroups
1. Chronic granulocytic leukemia (CGL)
a. CGL is characterized by the proliferation of relatively mature neutrophils.
b. CGL has been described infrequently in dogs, cats and horses.
c. Hematologic changes include a moderate to severe neutrophilia with a disorderly left
shift. Neutrophilic segmenters, bands, and metamyelocytes predominate, but myelocytes,
promyelocytes, and myeloblasts invariably are present.
d. Moderately differentiated granulocytic cells predominate in the bone marrow with myeloid to
erythroid ratios ranging from 5:1 to more than 20:1
 The degree of maturation of the neutrophilic precursors distinguishes CGL from AML in bone
 marrow aspirates, AML has a predominance of myeloblasts.
f.  Mild anemia is common, and a variable degree of thrombocytopenia may be present.
g. CGL must be differentiated from leukemoid inflammatory responses, which are characterized
by a marked neutrophilia and severe left shift. A diagnosis of CGL is made by excluding the
possibility of inflammation and infection (e.g., pyometra, abscesses) and observing abnormal
neutrophil morphology The pattern of tissue and organ infltration in CGL is not characteristic of
 an inflammatory response.
h. CGL also must be diffrentiated from paraneoplastic syndromes associated with the aberrant
production of granulocyte- or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF or GM-
CSF, respectively) by neoplasms such as renal carcinoma, rectal adenoma, fibrosarcoma, and other
tumors. These paraneoplastic syndromes may be associated with neutrophil counts in excess of
100,000 to 200,000 cells/μL
2. Chronic eosinophilic leukemia
 a. Marked eosinophilia in blood and bone marrow is accompanied by variable eosinophil
maturation.
b. This form of leukemia is rare, but has been observed in the cat.
c. Chronic eosinophilic leukemia must be differentiated from hypereosinophilic syndrome in cats
 and Rottweiler dogs, where mild to moderate blood eosinophilia is accompanied by nonspecific
tissue infltration by eosinophils.
3. Chronic basophilic leukemia
a. Basophils predominate in the blood and bone marrow.
b. This form of leukemia is rare, but has been described in the dog and cat.
C. Basophils are distinguished from mast cells by the presence of segmented nuclei and less
intense granulation. Nuclear hyposegmentaion of neoplastic basophils may make these cells more
diffcult to differentiate from mast cells. Basophil granules have a more chunky appearance as
compared to the finer granules of mast cells.
4. Polycythemia vera (primary erythrocytosis, essential erythrocytosis)
a. This form of hematologic neoplasia represents proliferation of “mature" erythrocytes
independent of erythropoietin stimulation.
100
CHAPTER 3
b. Animals with polycythemia vera have an elevated hematocrit (60% to 80%) despite adequate
hydration and oxygenation.
c. Erythrocytes on the stained blood film are morphologically normal.
d. Polycythemia vera has been described in cats, dogs, cattle, and horses.
e. Polycythemia vera must be differentiated from absolute polycythemia that infrequently occurs
due to increased erythropoietin production by kidneys with cysts or certain neoplasms (e.g., renal
carcinoma).
f. In polycythemia vera, erythropoietin concentrations are at the low end of the reference interval
or decreased.
g. Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis in dogs may be associated with marked polycythemia (PCV = 60%
 to 80%); however, clinical signs make the diagnosis obvious.
5. Essential thrombocythemia
a. This form of leukemia is rare but has been described in dogs and cats.
b. Platelet counts in the blood typically exceed 1 x 10%/μL.
C. The platelets may be morphologically abnormal with giant platelets and intense granulation.
d. Megakaryocytes are numerous in bone marrow aspirates and core biopsies.
6.Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
a. This form of leukemia involves excessive production of neutrophils and monocytes.
b. Percentages of neutrophils and monocytes are variable and may change throughout the course
of disease.
c. The neutrophils and monocytes appear mature or well differentiated on the stained blood smear.
d. The degree of anemia often is less severe that in chronic granulocytic leukemia but more severe
than in chronic monocytic leukemia.
e. Hepatosplenomegaly is common.
7. Chronic monocytic leukemia
a. This form of leukemia is characterized by the excessive production of monocytes.
b. Extreme leukocytosis may be present with monocyte counts that approach 800,000 cells/μL.
C. The monocytes appear mature or well differentiated on the stained blood smear.
d. The degree of anemia often is mild despite extreme leukocytosis. This may be due to the lack
of a bone marrow maturation and storage pool for monocytes (Chapter 2).
2. Hepatosplenomegaly is common.
V. MASt CElL LeUKEMlA
1. This form of leukemia is characterized by circulating mast cells that either appear morphologically
normal or have variable granulation, cell size, and nuclear size.
  an  sn   i  e     n  
cutaneous neoplasms in dogs or gastrointestinal neoplasms in cats.
3. In cats, splenic mast cell tumors often have systemic mastocytosis with a leukemic blood profle.
4. Mast cell leukemia is rare. It must be differentiated from solid mast cell tumors with a leukemic
blood profle, as well as from benign mastocytemia that may accompany parvoviral enteritis, gastric
torsion, pericarditis, pleuritis, peritonitis, aspiration pneumonia, and pancreatic necrosis.
5. Gastrointestinal illness in mast cell leukemia is common due to release of vasoactive mediators such
as histamine.
VI. MYELOID-DERIVED MACROPHAGE AND DENDRITIC CELL NEOPLASMS
A. Definition
1. Histioeytes and dendritic cell derived from bone marrow precursors may give rise to solid
tumors affecting skeletal muscle, spleen, skin, lung, bone marrow, and other sites.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
101
2. Clinical, morphological, and immunophenotypic characteristics allow distinction of histiocytic
from dendritic cell origin.
3. Tumors are most commonly diagnosed in dogs, and there is a breed predisposition for Bernese
Mountain, Rottweiler, and flat-coated Retriever dogs.
4. Chronic leukemia of dendritic cells has been described in dogs.
B. Subgroups
1. Histiocytic sarcoma of interstitial dendritic cell origin comprises solid masses in periarticular
regions, lung, or spleen of dogs. Localized and disseminated forms occur. Disseminated histiocytic
sarcoma was previously termed "malignant histiocytosis.
2. Histiocytic sarcoma cells are characterized by expression of CDla, CDllc, and major
histocompatiblity class II antigens, characteristic of dendritic cells
             s
neoplasms occur in spleen, bone marrow, and liver, and are of a diffuse and infltrative nature,
rarely forming solid masses.
4. Hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma is characterized by phagocytosis of erythrocytes and other
blood cells. Affected dogs have anemia, thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, and
hypocholesterolemia.
5. The neoplasm is characterized by expression of CDlld with absence of CDl and CDllc,
consistent with macrophages.
6. Dendritic cell leukemia is rare. In a single case report there were no cytopenias but marked
leukemia with tissue infiltrates
7. Chronic histiocyte proliferations affecting the skin have been described in cats.
REFERENCES
Affolter VK, Moore PF: 2006. Feline progressive histiocytosis. Vet Pathol. 43:646-655.
Ammersbach M, Delay J, Caswell JL, et al: 2008. Laboratory findings, histopathology, and
immunophenotype of lymphoma in domestic ferrets. Vt Pathol 45:663-673.
Allison RW, Brunker JD, Breshears MA, et al: Dendritic cell leukemia in a Golden Retriever. Vet Clin
Pathol 37:190-197, 2008.
Beatty JA, Lawrence CE, Callanan J, et al: 1998. Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)-associated
lymphoma: a potential role for immune dysfunction in tumourigenesis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
65:309-322.
Bienzle D, Silverstein DC, Chaffin K: 2000. Multiple myeloma in cats: variable presentation with
     o  h        
for treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome with erythroid predominance in a dog. J Am Vet Med Asso
213:999-1001.
Breuer W, Colbatzky F Platz S, et al: 1993. Immunoglobulin-producing tumours in dogs and cats. J
Comp Pathol 109:203-216.
of fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Vet Pathol 33:204-212.
Cesari A, Bettini G, Vezzali E: 2009. Feline intestinal I-cell lymphoma: assessment of morphologic and
kinetic features in 30 cases. J Vet Diagn Invest 2l:277-279.
102
CHAPTER 3
Colbatzky F, Hermanns W: 1993. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in one cat and two dogs. Vet Pathol
30:186194.
Dascanio J, Zhang CH, Antczak DF, et al: 1992. Differentiation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia in the
horse. A report of two cases. J Vet Intern Med 6:225-229.
Darbes J, Majzoub M, Breuer W, et al: 1998. Large granular lymphocyte leukemia/lymphoma in six
cats.Vet Pathol 35:370-379.
Day MJ, Henderson SM, Belshaw Z, et al: 2004. An immunohistochemical investigation of 18 cases of
feline nasal lymphoma. J Comp Pathol. 130:152-161.
de Bruijn CM, Veenman JN, Rutten VP, et al: 2007. Clinical, histopathological and
immunophenotypical findings in five horses with cutaneous malignant lymphoma. Res Vet Sri
83:63-72.
de Wit M, Schoemaker NJ, Kik MJ, et al: 2003. Hypercalcemia in two Amazon parrots with malignant
lymphoma. Avian Dis 47:223-228.
Erdman SE, Brown SA, Kawasaki TA, et al: 1996. Clinical and pathologic findings in ferrets with
lymphoma: 60 cases (1982-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:1285-1289
Fine DM, Tvedten HW: 1999. Chronic granulocytic leukemia in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
214:1809-1812.
Fournel-Fleury C, Ponce F, Felman P, et al: 2002. Canine T-cell lymphomas: a morphological,
immunological, and clinical study of 46 new cases. Vet Pathol 39:92-109.
Gabor LJ, Jackson ML, Trask B, et al: 200l. Feline leukaemia virus status of Australian cats with
lymphosarcoma. Aust Vet J 79:476-481.
Gabor LJ, Canfeld PJ, Malik R: 1999. Immunophenotypic and histological characterisation of 109
cases of feline lymphosarcoma. Aust Vet J 77:436-441.
Gavazza A, Lubas G, Valori E, et al: 2008. Retrospective survey of malignant lymphoma cases in the
dog: clinical, therapeutical and prognostic features. Vet Res Commun 32 (Suppl 1):S291-S293.
Gregory CR, Latimer KS, Mahaffey EA, et al: 1996. Lymphoma and leukemic blood picture in an emu
(Dromaius novae hollandiae). Wet Clin Pathol 25:136-139.
Grindem CB, Roberts MC, McEntee MF, et al: 1989. Large granular lymphocyte tumor in a horse. Vet
Pathol26:86-88.
Guglielmino R, Canese MG, Miniscalco B, et al: 1997. Comparison of clinical, morphological
immunophenotypical and cytochemical characteristics of LGL leukemia/lymphoma in dog, cat and
human. Eur J Histochem Suppl 2:23-24.
Hammer AS, Williams B, Dietz HH, et al: 2007. High-throughput immunophenotyping of 43 ferret
lymphomas using tissue microarray technology Vet Pathol 44:196-203
Haney SM, Beaver L, Turrel J, et al: 2009. Survival analysis of 97 cats with nasal lymphoma: a multi
institutional retrospective study (1986-2006). J Vet Intern Med 23:287-294.
Hisasue M, Nishimura T, Neo S, et al: 2008. A dog with acute myelomonocytic leukemia. J Vet Med Sci
70:619-621.
Jain NC, Blue JT, Grindem CB, et al: 199l. Proposed criteria for classification of acute myeloid
leukemia in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 20:63-82.
 Kelley LC, Mahaffey EA: 1998. Equine malignant lymphomas: morphologic and immunohistochemical
classification. Vet Pathol 35:241-252.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
103
Khanna C, Bienzle D: 1994. Polycythemia vera in a cat. J Am Animal Hosp Assoc 30:45-49.
Kiselow MA, Rassnick KM, McDonough SP, et al: 2008. Outcome of cats with low-grade lymphocytic
lymphoma: 4l cases (1995-2005). J Am Vet Med Assor 232:405-410
Kiupel M, Teske E, Bostock D: 1999. Prognostic factors for treated canine malignant lymphoma. Vet
Pathol 36:292-300.
Krick EL, Little L, Patel R, et al: 2008. Description of clinical and pathological findings, treatment and
outcome of feline large granular lymphocyte lymphoma (1996-2004). Vet Comp Oncol 6:102-110.
Lane SB, Kornegay JN, Duncan JR, et al: 1994. Feline spinal lymphosarcoma: a retrospective evaluation
of 23 cats.J Vet Intern Med 8:99-104
Latimer KS, Rakich PM: 1996. Sezary syndrome in a dog. Comp Haematol Int 6:115-119.
6:111-114.
 Lennox IJ, Wilson JH, Hayden DW, et al: 200o. Hepatoblastoma with erythrocytosis in a young female
horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:718-721
Lester GD, Alleman AR, Raskin RE, et al: 1993. Pancytopenia secondary to lymphoid leukemia in three
horses. J Vet Intern Med 7:360-363.
Little L, Patel R, Goldschmidt M: 2007. Nasal and nasopharyngeal lymphoma in cats: 50 cases (1989-
2005). Vet Pathol 44:885-892.
McManus PM: 2005. Classification of myeloid neoplasms: a comparative review. Vet Clin Pathol
34:189-212.
B             
extramedullary plasmacytomas in nine cats. Vet Pathol 40:249-253.
Malka S, Crabbs T, Mitchell EB, et al: 2008. Disseminated lymphoma of presumptive I-cell origin in a
great horned owl (Bubo virginianus). J Avian Med Surg 22:226-233.
      e        
immunohistologic and ultrastructural observations. J Vet Intern Med. 9:5o-54.
Mears EA, Raskin RE, Legendre AM: 1997. Basophilic leukemia in a dog. J Vet Intern Med 1l:92-94.
Mellanby RJ, Craig R, Evans H, et al: 2006. Plasma concentrations of parathyroid hormone-related
 protein in dogs with potential disorders of calcium metabolism. Vet Rec 159:833-838.
Mellor PJ, Polton GA, Brearley M, et al: 2007. Solitary plasmacytoma of bone in two successfully
treated cats. J Feline Med Surg 9:72-77.
  rs    a '  '  h 
analysis of feline myeloma-related disorders: Further evidence for primary extramedullary development
in the cat. Vet Pathol 45:159-173.
Messinger JS, Windham WR, Ward CR: 2009. Ionized hypercalcemia in dogs: A retrospective study of
109 cases (1998-2003). J Vet Intern Med 23:514-519.
Meyer J, Delay J, Bienzle D: 2006. Clinical, laboratory, and histopathologic features of equine
lymphoma. Vet Pathol 43:914-924.
genes in canine lymphoma/leukemia cells. J Vet Med Sci 55:775-780.
104
CHAPTER 3
is a proliferative disorder of CD8+ T cells. Am J Pathol 144:421-429.
Moore PF Affolter VK, Vermau W: 2006. Canine hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma: a proliferative
disorder of CD11d+ macrophages. Vet Pathol 43:632-645.
Mylonakis ME, Petanides TA, Valli VE, et al: Acute myelomonocytic leukaemia with short-term
spontaneous remission in a cat. Aust Vet J 86:224-228, 2009.
Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF, et al: 2005. Multiple myeloma in 16 cats: a retrospective study Vet Clin
Pathol 34:341-352
       a    
          
Pohlman LM, Higginbotham ML, Welles EG, et al: 2009. Immunophenotypic and histologic
classification of 50 cases of feline gastrointestinal lymphoma. Vet Pathol 46:259-268.
Puette M, Latimer KS: 1997. Acute granulocytic leukemia in a slaughter goat. J Vet Diagn Invest
9:318-319.
Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD: 1989. Prevalence of leukemic blood and bone marrow in dogs with
multicentric lymphoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1427-1429.
Rendle Dl, Durham AE, Thompson JC, et al: 2007. Clinical, immunophenotypic and functional
characterisation of I-cell leukaemia in six horses. Equine Vet J 39:522-528.
Roccabianca P, Vernau W, Caniatti M, et al: 2006. Feline large granular lymphocyte (LGL) lymphoma
with secondary leukemia: primary intestinal origin with predominance of a CD3/CD8(alpha)(alpha)
phenotype.VetPathol 43:15-28.
Scott MA, Stockham SL: 2ooo. Basophils and mast cells. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds):
Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Willkins, Philadelphia, pp. 308-317.
Shimoda I, Shiranaga N, Mashita I, et al: 2000. Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia in a cat. J Vet Med
Sci 62:195-197.
Souza MJ, Newman SJ, Greenacre CB, et al: 2008. Diffuse intestinal T-cell lymphosarcoma in a yellow-
naped Amazon parrot (Amazona ochrocephala auropalliata). J Vet Diagn Invest 20:656-660
Tasca S, Carli E, Caldin M, et al. 2009. Hematologic abnormalities and flow cytometric
immunophenotyping results in dogs with hematopoietic neoplasia: 210 cases (2002-2006). Vet Clin
Pathol 38:2-12.
Teske E, van Heerde P, Rutteman GR, et al: 1995. Prognostic factors for treatment of malignant
lymphoma in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1722-1728.
 Teske E, Wisman P, Moore PF, et al: 1994. Histologic classification and immunophenotyping of canine
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas: unexpected high frequency of T cell lymphomas with B-cell morphology
Exp Hematol 22:1179-1187.
Vail DM, Moore AS, Ogilvie GK, et al: 1998. Feline lymphoma (145 cases): proliferation indices,
cluster of differentiation 3 immunoreactivity, and their association with prognosis in 90 cats. J Vet
Intern Med 12:349-354.
Valli VE, Jacobs RM, Norris A, et al: 2000. The histologic classification of 602 cases of feline
lymphoproliferative disease using the National Cancer Institute Working Formulation. J Vet Diagn
Invest. 12:295-306.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASIA
105
Valli VE, Vernau W, de Lorimier LP, et al: 2006. Canine indolent nodular lymphoma. Vet Pathol
43:241-256.
Vernau W, Jacobs RM, Valli VE, et al: 1997. The immunophenotypic characterization of bovine
lymphomas. Vet Pathol 34:222-225.
Vernau W, Jacobs RM, Davies C, et al: 1998. Morphometric analysis of bovine lymphomas classified
according to the National Cancer Institute Working Formulation. J Comp Pathol 118:28l-289.
Sd p s   s n  e  a  n
assessment of clonality by polymerase chain reaction. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:145-164.
Walton RM, Hendrick MJ: 2001. Feline Hodgkin's-like lymphoma: 20 cases (1992-1999). Vet Pathol
38:504-511.
Washburn KE, Streeter RN, Lehenbauer TW, et al: 2007. Comparison of core needle biopsy and
fine-needle aspiration of enlarged peripheral lymph nodes for antemortem diagnosis of enzootic bovine
lymphosarcoma in cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc 230:228-232.
dog bone marrow. J Vet Intern Med 15:589-594.
WHO Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, 4th ed. 2008. Swerdlow SH,
Campo E, Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Pileri SA, Stein H, Thiel J, Vardiman JW (eds). pp. 109-145.
Chapter 
HEMOSTASIS
Mary K. Boudreaux, DVM, PhD; Elizabeth A. Spangler, DVM, PhD;
and Elizabeth G. Welles, DVM, PhD
ESSENTIAL CONCEPTS
Hemostasis is an intricate, highly balanced interaction between blood vessels, platelets, and soluble factors
in the formation and dissolution of blood clots. These interactions maintain blood in a fluid state under
physiologic conditions. Following vascular injury or other procoagulant stimuli, the process of hemostasis
promotes the rapid formation of platelet plugs and clots to minimize blood loss. Platelets plug endothelial
wounds and provide a surface for the assembly of coagulation factors as well as soluble factors that
promote hemostasis. Coagulation is the process that results in generation of thrombin, a multifunctional
plasma enzyme that converts soluble fibrinogen into insoluble fbrin. Concurrent generation of plasmin,
another plasma enzyme, causes dissolution of fibrin via fibrinolysis. Disorders of hemostasis or
unbalanced hemostasis may lead to hypocoagulation (hemorrhage) or hypercoagulation (thromboembolic
disorders). The processes of coagulation and fibrinolysis also are involved in tissue inflammation and
repair, tumor metastasis, and reproductive processes such as ovulation and implantation.
ENDOTHELIUM
The surface of endothelial cells is a major site of procoagulant and anticoagulant interactions.
Antithrombotic properties of the vascular endothelium include production of inhibitors of blood
coagulation and platelet aggregation, modulation of vascular tone and permeability, and provision of a
protective surface over reactive subendothelial structures, such as subendothelial collagen. Endothelial
cells also can be stimulated by cytokines and other mediators to initiate a procoagulant response.
1. ANTITHROMbOTIC PROPERTIES OF ENDOTHELIAL CELlS INCLUDE THE fOLlOWING:
A. Prostacyclin (PGl,) release. Prostacyclin is a prostaglandin that activates adenylate cyclase and
increases cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production, which results in vasodilation and
platelet inhibition.
B. Nitric oxide (endothelium-derived relaxing factor) release. Nitric oxide functions similarly to
C. Thrombomodulin expression. Thrombomodulin acts as an anticoagulant by binding thrombin and
inhibiting the enzyme's ability to function in the coagulation system or activate platelets. Thrombin
bound to thrombomodulin activates Protein C, which in concert with protein S inhibits coagulation
107
108
CHAPTER 4
factors V and Vll1. Thus, thrombomodulin modulates thrombin activity and converts it from
procoagulant to anticoagulant.
D. Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) release. tPA converts plasminogen to plasmin in the presence of
fibrin, which initiates fibrinolysis.
E. Heparan sulfate expression. Heparan sulfate accelerates antithrombin binding and inactivation of
thrombin and factor X.
F. Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) synthesis. TFPI inhibits tissue factor/activated factor VII
complex.
G. EctoADPase release. EctoADPase degrades locally generated adenosine diphosphate (ADP), which
limits platelet aggregation.
II. PROCOAGULANT PROPERTIES THAT FOLLOW STIMULATION OF ENDOTHELIAL CELLS
INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING:
A. Tissue factor synthesis. Tissue factor in combination with factor Vlla and factor X forms the
extrinsic factor X activation complex.
B. von Willebrand factor (VWF) synthesis, storage and release. VWF supports platelet adhesion to
subendothelial collagen. The largest multimeric and most functional forms of VWF are synthesized and
stored in Weibel-Palade bodies within vascular endothelial cells and are released in response to a
variety of stimuli.
C. Plasminogen activator inhibitor type l (PAI-l) synthesis and release. PAI-l inhibits fibrinolysis
D. Damage to the endothelium results in the following:
1. Loss of protective vascular endothelial lining
2. Exposure of the subendothelium with enhanced platelet adherence and aggregation
 3. Reduction of cell-membrane-associated thrombomodulin and heparan sulfates that inhibit
hemostasis
PLATELETS
1. MorPholoGY
A. Mammalian platelets are small, anuclear, cytoplasmic fragments of megakaryocytes. They average 3
to 5μm in diameter in most species and have fine reddish granules. Feline platelets are more variable
in size and may be as large as erythrocytes. Feline platelets have the largest mean platelet volume
(MPV) in health. Equine platelets stain more faintly with Romanowsky stains and may be difficult to
identify on blood smears.
B. Platelets have a phospholipid bilayer membrane that contains transmembrane and peripheral
glycoproteins. These glycoproteins serve as receptors for activation, adhesion, and aggregation.
C. Platelet form is maintained by a submembranous microtubule coil. Many transmembrane receptors
are linked to the cytoskeleton by actin-associated proteins.
D. There are three types of membrane-bound cytoplasmic granules:
 a a d -a n e  n e s e 
HEMOSTASIS
60L
include fibrinogen, factor V, VWF, thrombospondin, platelet factor 4, and platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF).
2. Dense granules primarily store adenine nucleotides, calcium, inorganic phosphates, and
serotonin. Results of organelle proteomic studies suggest these granules also may contain proteins
proteins, and proteins involved in glycolysis.
3. Lysosomes, the third type of granule, contain acid-dependent hydrolases including glycosidases,
proteases, and lipases.
E. Avian thrombocytes usually are oval, measure 5 to 6μm in diameter and have a high
 nuclear:cytoplasm ratio, round nuclei with densely clumped chromatin, and clear, colorless cytoplasm
that may contain one or more distinct magenta to purple granules. Thrombocyte-specific granules
 contain serotonin and thromboplastin. Analogs to some mammalian glycoproteins have been identified
 in avian thrombocyte cell membranes.
II. PRODUCTION
A. Platelets are produced by extension of megakaryocyte cytoplasm into vascular sinuses within bone
marrow. Proplatelets fragment into individual platelets in circulation.
1. Megakaryocytes are derived from a bipotent megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor (MEP)
Although the MEP was once thought to arise from a committed common myeloid progenitor, there is
recent evidence that suggests the MEP may arise directly from an uncommitted short-term
hematopoietic stem cell.
2. Iwo morphologically distinct colonies that lead exclusively to megakaryocyte production have
been identifed in vitro. The burst-forming unit megakaryocyte (BFU-MK) is considered a primitive
progenitor cell and produces complex colonies that contain several hundred megakaryocytes, which
include satellite colonies. The colony-forming-unit-megakaryocyte (CFU-MK) is a more mature
progenitor and divides into colonies containing 3 to 50 megakaryocytes.
3. As megakaryocytes mature, cell division ceases but DNA continues to replicate via endomitosis
until a ploidy of 8N-32N (or rarely 64N or 128N) is reached.
4. Nuclear and cytoplasmic maturation are independent; initiation of cytoplasmic maturation may
overlap with terminal rounds of endomitosis
a. Stage I megakaryocytes (MK) are 15 to 50 μm in diameter with a 5-μm rim of intensely
basophilic cytoplasm and oval, round, or kidney-bean shaped nuclei.
b. Stage I MK are up to 75 μm in diameter and have increased nuclear lobulation, basophilic
cytoplasm, and a few azurophilic granules.
c. Stage Il MK are up to 150μm in diameter and have lobulated nuclei, variable amounts of
eosinophilic cytoplasm, and numerous azurophilic granules. They are capable of platelet
production.
5. Maturation time from stage I MK to platelet release is approximately 4 to 5 days (in people)
B. Platelet circulating lifespan is approximately five to nine days in most animal species.
C. The spleen normally contains up to 30% to 40% of the circulating platelet mass. Epinephrine-
induced splenic contraction from excitement, fear, pain, or exercise may cause increased platelet
 n siid n ss  as o  i s ss
thrombocytopenia.
D. Regulation of platelet production includes the following:
1. Thrombopoietin (TPO) is a key humoral regulator of platelet production. TPO is critically
plays a role in enhancing expansion of hematopoietic stem cells
110
CHAPTER 4
a. Under steady state conditions, TPO is produced constitutively and bound by platelets and
degraded and not available for stimulation of thrombopoiesis. TPO levels increase during episodes
of thrombocytopenia, which results in enhanced thrombopoiesis.
b. TPO concentration is inversely correlated to the mass of megakaryocytes and platelets. TPO
concentration is not related to platelet number.
C. Splenic sequestration or release of platelets may alter platelet number in blood, but has no
effect on total platelet mass. Therefore, splenic sequestration of platelets will not affect platelet
production.
2. While TPO production is constitutive under steady state conditions, severe thrombocytopenia
can result in enhanced production of TPO by bone marrow stromal cells. Inflammatory conditions
can result in enhanced TPO production by hepatocytes, thought to be mediated by IL-6, with
resultant reactive thrombocytosis.
3. Other cytokines involved in megakaryopoiesis and platelet production include stromal cell
GM-CSF, stem cell factor (SCF), IL-1l, IL-12, IL-1-alpha, and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF).
E. Early avian thrombocyte precursors are derived from mononuclear precursors; however, the
committed stem cell has not been identified positively in avian bone marrow. Late thrombocyte
from thromboblast to immature thrombocyte to mature thrombocyte.
Ml. FUNCTION
A. Platelet shape change. Platelets exposed to various stimuli undergo several physiologic events
phosphatidylserine, which facilitate assembly of coagulation factors on their surface
B. Platelet shape changes from discoid to spherical with formation of pseudopodia.
C. Platelet adhesion
1. Platelets adhere to exposed subendothelial collagen, VWF, fbronectin, and vitronectin.
Membrane glycoproteins (GP) including GPIb-IX-V, GP-VI, and integrins α2B, and αuBs (GPIIb-
Ila) participate in platelet adhesion events.
2. Platelet glycoprotein Ib-IX-V (GPIb-IX-V) complex, which interacts with collagen indirectly, is
critically important in initiation of platelet contact with collagen under high shear conditions.
GPIb-IX-V complex mediates transient arrest of platelets from flowing blood and weak tethering of
platelets onto exposed subendothelial surfaces through binding of VWE As tethered platelets roll
along exposed subendothelium they encounter collagen fibrils, which bind to GPVl. This leads to
inside-out signaling and activation of integrins α2βl and cllbβ3, release of ADP, and thromboxane
formation, which in turn reinforce GPVI interactions. Activated c2βl, transformed to a high
affinity state, binds tightly to specific sequences in collagen and allows firm platelet adhesion and
spreading.
D. Platelet aggregation. Activated cllbβ3 is transformed to a high affnity state, and reinforces firm
platelet adhesion and platelet aggregation by binding to fibrinogen.
E. Granule release
1. Aggregating platelets have rapid granule release; the rate and degree of granule release is
2. In general, binding of various agonists activates platelet phospholipases, which result in calcium
and diacylglycerol mobilization and synthesis of thromboxane A, (TXA2).
a. TXA, induces irreversible platelet aggregation and release
HEMO STASIS
111
b. ADP, serotonin, and coagulation factors, including fibrinogen, factor V, and factor Xl, are
 released from granules and enhance further platelet activation and thrombus growth.
C.
 Platelet activation results in phosphatidylserine translocation to the outer membrane.
 Phosphatidylserine facilitates assembly of coagulation factor complexes, which leads to thrombin
generation.
F. Platelets play an essential role in inflammation through release of vasoactive compounds (such as
serotonin and platelet activating factor [PAF]), the production of cytokines, and interactions with
neutrophils. They are also involved in tissue repair owing to release of potent mitogens, platelet-
derived growth factor (PDGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and fibroblast growth factor (FGF).
p ssx are i sn  nr  si e o  
 activation in a similar manner to those of mammalian platelets. Thrombocyte aggregation is induced
by thrombin, collagen, serotonin, and arachidonic acid.
IV. LABORATORY EVAlUATION OF PLATELETS
A. Platelet count
1. Analysis methods
a. Automated platelet counts can be performed on platelets collected in anticoagulated whole blood
The anticoagulant of choice is EDTA. Several instruments that use different methods are available:
(1) Aperture impedance flow automated hematology instruments (Coulter Counter, Heska
CBC-DiffIM, Heska HematrueTM, SCIL ABC Counter, CDC Mascot Hemovet Counter, Abaxis
HMIl and HMV, and others). Platelets are measured by size. Coefficients of variation of
(a) Because cats have variably sized platelets, some of which are very large, there
can be overlap with counting of erythrocytes. Cat platelet counts can be falsely low
(pseudothrombocytopenia) because platelets are miscounted as erythrocytes.
(b) Aggregated platelets also may cause inaccurate counts because clumps may be
counted as erythrocytes or leukocytes, or excluded, depending on their size. Platelet
aggregation can occur in any species, but is a common problem in feline blood specimens.
platelet counts, but results are too variable and unreliable to recommend this as a
corrective procedure
(d) Collection of cat blood samples in a citrate-based anticoagulant containing platelet
inhibitors such as theophylline, adenosine, and dipyridamole (Diatube-H, Becton Dickinson.
Oxford, UK) decreases platelet aggregation and pseudothrombocytopenia.
(e) If platelet aggregates are observed on blood smears, then platelet counts as determined
by impedance counters or flow cytometric analysis are falsely decreased.
(f) Platelet counts obtained on blood by quantitative buffy coat (QBC) analysis are not
affected by platelet clumping as observed with impedance counters, but all QBC analysis-
derived platelet counts have only fair to good accuracy (the coeffcient of variation is quite
high in comparability studies, see below)
(2) Quantitative buffy coat analysis (IDEXX QBC VetAutoReader)
(a) This method is based on differential centrifugation of blood components in samples of
anticoagulated whole blood by use of modified microhematocrit tubes.
(b) Blood components are stained with acridine orange, a fluorescent dye.
(C) A plastic cylindrical float with a density similar to that of platelets and leukocytes
expands the buffy coat, which allows quantification of platelets and leukocytes based on
their differential fluorescence. DNA primarily stains green, while RNA, lipoproteins, and
112
CHAPTER 4
(d)  This method of platelet quantification has fair accuracy with blood specimens from
 dogs, horses, and cats. QBC determination of platelet mass (plateletcrit) is not influenced
 by platelet aggregation as with impedance counters.
(e) The QBC instrument cannot be used for ruminant blood because cellular components
do not separate well by differential centrifugation.
(3) Flow cytometry (Siemens ADVIA? 120 hematology instrument, IDEXX LaserCyte).
(a) Platelet count is determined based on light scattering characteristics.
(b)  Arcuracy of platelet counts is very good to excellent with most species; aggregation of
platelets in feline specimens is less of a problem but still exists and blood smears must be
examined for platelet clumping.
b. Manual counting by use of a hemocytometer.
(1) Whole blood is diluted and erythrocytes are lysed with an ammonium oxalate diluent
solution (Unopette system).
(2) Platelets are counted by light or phase contrast microscopy.
(3) Precision of the platelet counts is fair to poor and coeffcients of variation typically range
from 20% to 25%.
(4) Platelet clumping interferes with accuracy because large aggregates are excluded from
the counting area (depth only 0.l mm) and the number of individual platelets in smaller
aggregates is difficult to determine.
(5) Avian thrombocyte counts can be performed by use of Natt and Herrick's diluent.
Thrombocytes may be difficult to distinguish from small lymphocytes and young erythrocytes.
c. EDTA-induced platelet clumping has been reported occasionally in horses and dogs with
resultant spuriously low platelet counts (pseudothrombocytopenia). Citrate anticoagulated whole
blood may be used for more accurate counts in these situations.
d. Manual and automated platelet counts may be compared with estimated platelet counts on
stained blood smears (see below)
(1) Cat platelet counts are unreliable due to platelet clumping, and must be verifed by
estimation of platelets on stained blood smears.
(2) Cavalier King Charles Spaniels often are thrombocytopenic. By use of impedance and flow
cytometric counters, the degree of thrombocytopenia appears worse than it is because giant
platelets, which are common in this breed, are excluded from the count.
2. Interpretation
a. Platelet counts substantially below the reference interval for a given species (typically less
than 100,000/μL) indicate thrombocytopenia. Greyhounds are exceptions. In health, typically
they have lower platelet counts than other breeds of dogs; therefore, a diagnosis of thrombocytopenia
requires platelet counts to be considerably lower than 100,000/μL. Spontaneous petechial to
ecchymotic hemorrhage usually does not occur until the platelet count is below 20,00o/μL.
b. Platelet counts that exceed the reference interval (typically more than 800,000/μL) indicate
thrombocytosis. Thrombocytosis associated with inflammation (reactive thrombocytosis) usually
is not associated with increased risk of thrombosis. However, thrombocytosis associated with
myeloproliferative disease may increase risk of thromboembolic disease
B. Platelet evaluation from stained blood smears
1. Platelet number may be reported as decreased, within the reference interval, or increased based
 upon observation of platelets on stained blood smears. Decreased platelet counts reported from
automated hematology instruments because of platelet aggregation in the blood sample usually are
correctly estimated as normal to increased based on evaluation of stained blood smears.
2. Several techniques are used to estimate platelet numbers in blood smears:
a. Platelet estimation can be determined based on the average number of platelets/l00 x oil
immersion field (OIF) by light microscopy.
(1) 8 to 10 platelets/100 x O1F is greater than or equal to 100,000/μL
HE MO STASIS
113
(2) 6 to 7 platelets/100 x O1F is approximately equal to 100,000/μL
(3)<3 to 4 platelets/100 x OIF indicates significant thrombocytopenia
(4) On blood smears, each platelet/100 x O1F corresponds to approximately 20,000
platelets/μL; therefore, 10 platelets/100 x OIF equals 200,000 platelets/μL. Blood smears
with platelet aggregates are usually associated with adequate platelet numbers. In cats where
automated counters report low platelet counts, estimation of platelets from blood smears
should always be done.
b. Less than l platelet/50 erythrocytes (in the monolayer of a blood smear) denotes
thrombocytopenia, but presence of anemia must be considered to evaluate severity.
c. Platelet count also can be estimated on a stained blood smear by use of the following formula:
o d a = (o )x (aas d go )m
d. In healthy birds, thrombocyte counts range from 20,000 to 30,000/μL. The estimated
thrombocyte count is within the reference interval if there are 10 to 15 thrombocytes/l,000 RBCs
or 1 to 2 thrombocytes/OIF in the monolayer area of the smear.
3. Platelet morphology
a. Giant platelets (large platelets, shift platelets, macroplatelets, megathrombocytes) may be found
in thrombocytopenia caused by excessive platelet consumption or destruction with intact bone
marrow production. They may be round or elongated.
b. Platelet fragments (microplatelets or platelet microparticles) are less than I μm in diameter and
may occur in iron-deficiency anemia (often with thrombocytosis), bone marrow aplasia, immune-
mediated thrombocytopenia (associated with activation of canine platelets), or as an artifact of
 in vitro storage and aging in EDTA anticoagulant for more than 24 hours.
C. Platelets with decreased granularity, vacuoles, or less intense staining may be seen in situations
where platelet activation has occurred in vivo (e.g., FeLV, DIC) or in vitro (e.g., poor specimen
handling or collection).
C. Mean platelet volume (MPV)
1. MPV, measured in femtoliters (fL), is determined by impedance and optical particle counters.
MPV reflects the average size of platelets in the circulating population. MPV generally is inversely
 proportional to platelet number.
2. Increased MPV with thrombocytopenia suggests responsive thrombopoiesis. Larger platelets
(giant platelets, shift platelets) are fully functional and usually hyper-responsive. MPV greater than
12 fL indicates normal to increased megakaryocytopoiesis in bone marrow with 96% positive
predictive value.
3. Decreased MPV most commonly is associated with insufficient megakaryocytes, lack of a
 megakaryocyte response (bone marrow failure), and early immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
4. Increased MPV should be expected in disorders with responsive thrombopoiesis (e.g., immune-
mediated thrombocytopenia). Megakaryocyte number and morphology should be evaluated in bone
marrow aspirates, especially in patients with low MPV and thrombocytopenia or in patients who
fail to respond to treatment.
5. Platelets sphere and swell in EDTA anticoagulated blood samples that are stored for more than
four hours, cooled to room temperature (25oC), or refrigerated (4°C). Swelling may result in an
artifactually high MPV. Platelets retain their native discoid shape and have minimal MPV changes
when collected in citrate anticoagulant and stored at 37°C
D. Platelet distribution width (PDW), a number without specific units, is determined by some cell
munters and is a measure of platelet size variation.
E. Reticulated platelets, which contain increased RNA, have been released recently from bone marrow
(less than 24 hours old). They may be quantitated by flow cytometric analysis using thiazole orange, a
fluorescent dye that binds RNA. Increased reticulated platelets suggest responsive thrombopoiesis. This
114
CHAPTER 4
F. Mean platelet component concentration (MPC) is determined by modified two-angle light scatter
(Siemens ADVIA? 120 hematology instrument). The MPC is linearly related to both platelet refractive
index and platelet density. Only unaggregated platelets are included in the analysis. MPC also may be
useful in determination of the state of activation of platelets. Two non-overlapping populations of
feline platelets suggest non-activated platelets (MPC 14.8 to 18.5 g/dL) and activated platelets (MPC
20.2 to 2l.6 g/dL) (data from comparative study with ADVIA).
G. Antiplatelet antibody
1. Numerous assays (platelet immuno-radiometric assays, microscopic and flow cytometric platelet
immunofluorescence assays, direct megakaryocyte immunofluorescence assay, enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays, and platelet factor 3 or PF3 assay) have been developed to identify
secondary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. These assays are available in some specialized
laboratories; however, most of these tests are insensitive and non-specific. For example, the PF3
assay has highly variable (28% to 80%) sensitivity. Most dogs with immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia are negative upon testing; therefore, the PF3 assay cannot be recommended from
a diagnostic standpoint.
2. Direct determination of platelet surface-associated immunoglobulin (PSAlg) by fluorescence
labeling and flow cytometry may distinguish some cases of immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
from non-immunologic thrombocytopenia. The PSAlg assay cannot differentiate primary from
secondary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
a. Platelet glycoproteins (such as the fibrinogen receptor GP IIb-Illa) are common targets of
antibodies. Non-specific immune complexes also may be bound to platelet Fc receptors or
adsorbed on platelet surfaces.
b. If platelets must be washed for this assay, artifactually high concentrations of PSAlg may
be detected. Platelet activation and alpha granule release add granule membrane with potential
antigens to the platelet surface
c. PSAlg is best measured in samples less than four hours old, which limits test availability to
locations where the assay is performed.
d. Samples stored for more than 24 hours have increased PSAIg; however, interpretation of test
values may still be valid if based on 24-hour reference intervals, which can be established in the
individual laboratory.
3. Diagnosis of primary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia is made by process of elimination.
H. Platelet function assays are available in some institutions where platelet studies are conducted.
Samples must be analyzed within three hours of collection. These assays are not adapted to commercial
or diagnostic laboratories.
aggregometers assess the ability of platelets to form aggregates by use of light transmission
(platelet-rich-plasma) or impedance (whole blood) as monitoring methods. Platelet release can be
performed simultaneously to evaluation of platelet aggregation responses (l'+C-serotonin release,
luciferin/luciferase assays). Species-specific differences must be accommodated and validated for
 methods of isolation of PRP as well as interpretation of responses to various agonists. These tests
are useful in identification of:
a. Hereditary platelet functional defects (e.g., canine thrombopathia, Glanzmann thrombasthenia,
etc.)
b. Acquired disorders of platelet function secondary to disease or drug administration (e.g.-
2. Aperture closure instruments. The Platelet Function Analyzer-loo? (PFA-loo%; Dade-Behring)
is an example of an aperture closure instrument that can be used to document global, high-shear-
high shear through a capillary tube and a compartment containing test cartridge membranes. Test
HEMOSTASIS
115
cartridge membranes have a small centrally located aperture and are coated with either ADP and
collagen or collagen and epinephrine. As blood flows under high shear across the membrane and
through the aperture, platelets become activated and begin to adhere and aggregate, which results
in closure of the aperture within one to three minutes. The instrument measures decrease in flow
rate with time until flow completely stops. The final closure time (CT) and volume of blood flow
are recorded by the instrument. CT is affected by many variables including platelet count,
hematocrit, medications, von Willebrand disease, intrinsic platelet disorders, and improper sample
 handling including errors in anticoagulant-to-blood ratios. Two different platelet agonists are
available in the kit reagents: epinephrine and ADP. Epinephrine does not produce reliable results in
dogs because it only potentiates aggregation and is not a true agonist. ADP, as agonist, gives
reproducible results (typically 50 to 85 seconds).
1.Bleeding time
1. Bleeding time measures the length of time (minutes) required for platelets to plug a small
laceration in blood vessels. This in vivo assay evaluates primary hemostasis or platelet status. Test
sensitivity is low, especially if cuticle bleeding time is used.
2. Different bleeding time techniques have been used including cuticle bleeding time (clipping a
toenail into the quick). Toenail clipping is not recommended because variation in amount of toenail
3. Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) is the most reliable clinical test for in vivo assessment of
platelet function. A spring-loaded cassette produces a precise depth and length of cut on the buccal
mucosa of an extremely quiet or anesthetized animal. Anesthesia is recommended to avoid licking.
head shaking, and excitement, all of which affect the length of time required for primary
hemostasis to occur.
4. BMBT is prolonged in thrombocytopenia; performance of the test does not provide new
diagnostic information.
5. BMBT should be reserved for use in animals with adequate platelet count but questionable
 platelet function.
6. BMBT may be prolonged with acquired or congenital platelet dysfunction such as VWD,
acquired or congenital, and acquired platelet disorders from effects of medications or immune-
mediated disorders.
7. Coagulation factor deficiencies do not prolong BMBT.
8. Vitamin C deficiency (scurvy) with resultant loss of vascular collagen integrity causes prolonged
bleeding time in guinea pigs and people, but has not been reported in domestic animals.
J. Clot retraction
1. This test measures platelet function and may be performed in a clinical setting. A sample of
 blood (0.5 mL) is drawn directly into a plastic syringe that contains cold saline (4.5 mL) and is
mixed. A portion of this blood/saline mixture (2 mL) is placed in glass tubes (test is performed in
duplicate) that contain a small amount of thrombin (0.1 ml of 10 units/mL), capped, mixed, and
refrigerated for 30 minutes. The tubes are then placed in a 37°C water bath, and clot retraction is
graded +l to +4 (depending on tightness of the clot and amount of clear serum surrounding the
clot) at one and two hours (Figure 4.l).
2. The clot retraction test should be reserved for animals with a known adequate platelet count
and questionable platelet function (as with bleeding time). The test should not be performed on
 animals with administration of known antiplatelet drugs (aspirin, NSAIDs). Thrombocytopenia will
result in poor clot retraction.
3. This test depends on the interaction between platelet receptors, thrombin, and fbrinogen;
therefore, some specific platelet functional defects will not be detected.
a. Normal clot retraction occurs in the CalDAG-GEFI platelet disorders (canine thrombopathias)
because these platelets can interact with thrombin and express fibrinogen receptors.
116
CHAPTER 4
1+
2+3+
4+
FIGURE 4.l. Clot retraction evaluation scale, +l to +4.
b. Platelets from dogs with VWD also react normally with thrombin.
C. Abnormal clot retraction may be seen in dogs and horses with Glanzmann thrombasthenia.
K. VWF assays
1. There are three forms of VWD: Type 1, Type 2, and Type 3 (see VWD under platelet disorders
for more information).
2. VWF assays are available in several laboratories. Tests are quantitative ELISA assays, which
require citrated or EDTA plasma, frozen in plastic tubes after immediate separation from
erythrocytes, and shipped frozen to the laboratory within two weeks of collection. Serum is not an
acceptable sample; VWF is partially consumed during clot formation; thus, serum values will be
artifactually low.
3. The collagen-binding activity assay (CBA) is a method for evaluation of VWF function and is
useful for identification of dogs with acquired or inherited Type 2 VWD. CBA ELISA assays use
collagen-coated microtiter plates to assess for VWF binding capacity. Calculations of ratios of
VWF-antigen to VWF-CBA can be used to distinguish Iype 2 VWD from Iypes 1 and 3.
 Dogs with Iype 2 VWD have VWF antigen assay results that are discordant with their CBA
results due to reduced presence of the more functional high molecular weight multimers of VWF
Ratios of VWF-antigen to VWF-CBA greater than 2 are consistent with the diagnosis of Type 2
VWD. To distinguish acquired and inherited forms of Type 2 VWD requires treatment of potential
underlying causes of acquired VWD and subsequent re-evaluation of the VWF-antigen to VWF-
CBA ratio.
4. Botrocetin and ristocetin assays may be performed as qualitative assays in some species but
these methods are not readily available and require expertise in performance and interpretation.
5. VWD molecular assays are available for some breeds and, when available, are recommended for
accurate identification of carrier states. The website vetgen.com may be consulted for current
breed-specific molecular assays.
L. Flow cytometry assays
1. Flow cytometric studies can be useful for initial characterization of novel platelet function
 disorders in animals, particularly when the patient is not near a laboratory that tests platelet
function.
2. Flow cytometry can determine if platelets lack major glycoproteins such as GPllb and GPllla if
species-sensitive antibodies are available.
HE MO STASIS
117
3. Flow cytometry can assess function by detection of binding of fibrinogen to activated platelets.
CAPl is an antibody that detects fibrinogen bound to activated canine platelets. CAPl does not
 bind to native fibrinogen; therefore, platelet washing prior to assessment is not necessary.
4. Flow cytometric assays can be performed successfully on samples that are 24 hours old if care is
taken during collection and shipping (collect samples atraumatically into CPDA-l and do not
expose to cold temperatures). Sample volume required for these assays is much less than for
traditional platelet aggregation studies.
V. DISORDERS OF PLATELETS
A. Functional impairment of platelets and thrombocytopenia may cause bleeding.
1. Bleeding usually involves body surfaces or mucous membranes.
2. Petechial or ecchymotic hemorrhage usually is observed.
B. Thrombocytosis and enhanced platelet function may increase the risk of thrombosis.
C. Extrinsic platelet dysfunction
1. von Willebrand disease (VWD)
a. von Willebrand factor (VWF) is synthesized predominantly by megakaryocytes and
endothelial cells.
b. VWF is a large multimeric plasma glycoprotein needed for normal platelet adhesion to
subendothelial collagen and serves as a carrier for factor Vlll-coagulant (FVlll:C).
C. 
VWF provides stability for FVIll:C in circulation.
S'P
 Small, medium, and large multimers of VWF exist; the largest multimers are most active in
hemostasis.
VWD may be inherited or acquired.
(1)  The specific defect involves VWF, a plasma protein.
(2) VWF is necessary for adequate platelet function.
(3) Platelet numbers are usually within the reference interval.
f.
VWD is relatively common in dogs (more than 50 breeds have been reported with VWD), but
is rare in cats, horses, and cows. Pigs often are used as an animal model of human VWD.
g
 FVIll:C activity often is decreased because of insufficient VWF to stabilize and protect the
protein from degradation by proteases. Usually more than 30% to 40% FVIll:C activity
 exists in affected dogs (even dogs with Iype 3 or severe VWD); thus, APTT is not prolonged in
canine VWD.
h. Clinical signs of VWD may include mucosal hemorrhage (e.g., epistaxis, gastrointestinal
bleeding, hematuria, and excessive bleeding from tooth eruption), prolonged bleeding from
wounds, and increased cutaneous bruising (e.g., after venipuncture or clipping).
 Severity of clinical signs varies greatly from an absence of apparent bleeding to severe
bleeding. Concurrent thrombocytopenia, disease conditions that inhibit platelet function, or
drug administration that inhibits platelet function exacerbate bleeding. A plasma transfusion or
cryoprecipitate is sufficient for treatment and provides VWF and FVIll:C. DDAVP, which releases
preformed high molecular weight VWF multimers from Weibel-Palade bodies, may be effective in
controlling hemorrhage during minor surgical procedures in dogs with Type 1 VWD.
Type 1 VWD is a partial quantitative deficiency of VWF; plasma concentrations of all size
multimers are less than 50%
(1) Clinical signs of bleeding are not observed until VWF concentrations are below 20%.
(2) VWF that is present is structurally and functionally normal.
(3) Greater than 90% of all cases of VWD in dogs are Type 1
(4) TIype l VWD has an autosomal pattern of inheritance; males and females are equally
affected.
118
CHAPTER 4
(5)  Severity of disease can vary greatly.
k.T
 Type 2 VWD has qualitative abnormalities of VWF structure and function.
(1)  Decreased plasma VWF concentration is associated with disproportionate loss of high
molecular weight multimers.
(2) Iype 2 VWD has an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
(3)  Iype 2 VWD is rare in dogs, but has been described in German Shorthaired Pointers and
German Wire-haired Pointers.
1. TIype 3 VWD is a severe quantitative deficiency of VWF (sometimes referred to as severe type
1 VWD).
(1) VWF concentration is usually less than 0.l% of normal.
(2) Dogs have reduced FVlll:C, but usually greater than 30% activity remains; therefore,
APTT is not prolonged.
(3)  Iype 3 VWD has an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.
(4) Type 3 VWD has been reported in Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, Scottish Terriers, Shetland
Sheepdogs, and Dutch Kooikers.
m. Acquired VWD has been documented in dogs and can in situations where there is excessive
high shear stress (such as in severe aortic stenosis or problems where blood is jetting through
narrow orifices), which results in unfolding of VWF and immediate cleavage by ADAMTSl3 (a
disintegrin and metalloprotease with thrombospondin repeats; ADAMTSl3). ADAMTS13 is an
enzyme that cleaves VWF into smaller, less functional, multimers when VWF is under high shear
stress or involved in platelet aggregates (these situations expose cleavage sites that ADAMTS13
mediated by large VWF multimers.
D. Intrinsic platelet dysfunction
These are disorders due to defects in platelets themselves and may involve platelet granules, membrane
glycoproteins, signal transduction proteins, proteins involved in platelet production by
arrest bleeding and restore adequate hemostasis for most intrinsic platelet disorders.
1. Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by
abnormal leukocyte, melanocyte, and platelet granulation. Platelets of affected animals lack
discernable dense granules and are defcient in storage pools of adenine nucleotides, serotonin, and
divalent cations. Affected individuals have a diluted coat color (smoke blue Persian cats, fawn
colored Hereford cattle, silver-blue Arctic foxes) and may experience prolonged bleeding at surgical
incision sites and hematoma formation at venipuncture sites. CHS has been diagnosed in mink,
cattle, foxes, killer whales, and mice. CHS in cattle, mice, and people has been linked to mutations
 in the lysosomal trafficking regulator (LYST) gene.
 2. Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT) is a deficiency of glycoprotein (GP) complex IIb-Illa (integrin
CmBs) on platelet surfaces. Platelets are unable to bind fibrinogen.
b. GT has been documented at the functional, biochemical, and molecular level in Otterhounds
(previously known as thrombasthenic thrombopathia), Great Pyrenees dogs, a Quarter horse-
cross, a Thoroughbred, a Peruvian Paso, and an Oldenburg.
3. CalDAG-GEFI platelet disorders, also known as canine thrombopathia, Basset Hound
thrombopathia, Spitz thrombopathia, Landseer-ECT thrombopathia, and bovine thrombopathia, are
inherited signal transduction platelet disorders.
a. Platelets exhibit abnormal fibrinogen receptor exposure and impaired dense granule
release. These abnormalities are caused by absent or dysfunctional calcium diacylglycerol
 in the pathway leading to the change in conformation of GPllb-Illa necessary for fibrinogen
binding.
HE MO STASIS
119
b. Affected animals experience mucosal bleeding and petechial and echymotic hemorrhages,
which intensify with trauma or surgery.
c. Diagnosis of novel cases requires platelet aggregation testing or flow cytometry; clot retraction
is normal in these disorders.
d. The molecular basis for these disorders has been determined in Basset Hounds, Eskimo Spitz,
 Landseers-ECT, and Simmental cattle.
 Although platelet counts are within reference interval and platelet morphology appears normal,
ADP concentration is decreased and an altered ATP/ADP ratio exists.
5. Cyclic hematopoiesis is an autosomal recessive disorder described in Grey Collies characterized
by cyclic fluctuations in numbers of circulating neutrophils, reticulocytes, and platelets.
Melanocytes are also affected in this disorder. The basis for the disease is a bone marrow stem cell
defect, which results in neutropenic episodes approximately every 12 days. Mortality is high; most
puppies die prior to six months of age due to fulminating infection. Platelet numbers usually are
not below reference interval, but fluctuate between 300,000 and 700,000/μL. Platelet reactivity to
and platelet adhesiveness are impaired. A mutation in the gene that encodes adaptor protein
complex 3 (AP3) beta-subunit has been linked to this disorder. AP3 directs trans-Golgi export of
transmembrane cargo proteins to granules.
6. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency type IIl (LAD-Ill or LAD-I variant) disorder is due to Kindlin-3
deficiency or dysfunction. Kindlin-3 has been identified as a key signal transduction protein critical
for activation of beta subunit-type integrins (βl, β2, and β3) located on hematopoietic cells,
including neutrophils and platelets. Kindlin-3 deficiency is characterized by lack of ability of
platelets and leukocytes to activate their beta subunit-type integrins. Affected individuals bleed in a
manner similar to that observed with Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT), have persistent
leukocytosis, and are susceptible to infections as observed with LAD-I. A mutation in the gene
encoding Kindlin-3 has been identifed in a German Shepherd dog with abnormal bleeding.
persistently increased leukocyte counts, and chronic infections.
7. P2Yl2 is one of two key platelet ADP receptors. P2Yl2 activation does not contribute to platelet
shape change, but is associated with platelet aggregation and granule release, thromboxane
 generation, expression of procoagulant activity, and inhibition of adenylate cyclase. A mutation in the
gene encoding P2Yl2 has been identified in a Greater Swiss Mountain dog. The affected dogs platelets
did not bind CAPl in response to high concentrations of ADP, but did bind CAPl in response to
convulxin and PAF in a manner similar to healthy controls. Prolonged postoperative hemorrhage was
the primary clinical sign.
8. Scott syndrome is a rare bleeding disorder owing to lack of procoagulant expression on the
surface of platelets. The disorder has been described in a family of German Shepherd dogs. Platelet
aggregation, clot retraction, and BMBT are normal. Annexin-5 binding by ionophore activated
platelets, as assessed by flow cytometry, is markedly diminished in affected dogs, which suggests
lack of phosphatidylserine exposure. Bleeding in affected dogs is similar to that seen in dogs with
 9. Macrothrombocytopenia of Cavalier King Charles Spaniels (CKCS) is due to a mutation in the
 gene encoding betal-tubulin. The mutation is thought to affect microtubule stability and alters
megakaryocyte proplatelet formation and release. Affected dogs typically have platelet counts that
range from 30,000 to 100,000/uL. However, plateletcrit determined by quantitative buffy coat
(QBC) method (IDEXX VetAutoreadIM) typically is normal. Afected dogs do not have bleeding
tendencies; however, because the cause of their thrombocytopenia may be misdiagnosed, they are at
risk for receiving inappropriate medical (steroids and/or antibiotics) or surgical (splenectomy)
treatments. Some cross-bred CKCS dogs or dogs with similar ancestry as CKCS likely carry this
mutation, either in heterozygous or homozygous form, but at a much lower rate (unpublished data
MK Boudreaux).
120
CHAPTER 4
E. Acquired qualitative functional disorders
1. Hyporesponsive platelets
a. Drugs
(1)  Cyclooxygenase inhibitors
(a)  Aspirin irreversibly acetylates cyclooxygenase within platelets and megakaryocytes
and results in inhibition of thromboxane Az production. Because megakaryocytes are also
affected, abnormal platelet function may be apparent for five days.
(b) Ibuprofen and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reversibly
inactivate cyclooxygenase. This effect usually lasts less than six hours, depending on the
half-life of the drug.
(c) Almost all cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) selective NSAIDs have some COX-1 inhibition
activity. Therefore, COX-2 NSAIDs have a slight effect on platelet metabolism and function.
(d) These drugs, when administered at recommended dosages, do not result in clinically
significant bleeding unless the patient has an underlying platelet problem such as VWD,
thrombopathia, or thrombocytopenia. Elective surgery should be avoided during the
 period of drug treatment.
(2) β-lactam antibiotics, such as penicillins and cephalosporins, reversibly inhibit platelet
function by binding agonist receptors, which impairs agonist-induced Cat2 flux across the
platelet membrane. These effects are not usually clinically relevant.
(3) Calcium channel blockers such as barbiturates, diltiazem, nifedipine, and verapamil
prevent Ca' movement across membranes, which impairs platelet activation. Effects of
calcium channel blockers vary depending upon the specife drug, dosage, and species of animal.
b. Uremia may impair platelet function and prolongs BMBT. Mechanisms are complex and in
 people may include:
(1) Inhibition of fibrinogen binding because of altered function of GPllb-Illa receptor or the
presence of interfering substances that bind to the receptor.
(2) Decreased platelet reactivity because of increased cytosolic cAMP due to increased
prostacyclin production and nitric oxide secretion
(3) Altered VWF-platelet interactions.
(4) Similar mechanisms are suspected to occur in animals, but have not yet been documented.
C. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) may produce increased plasma concentration
 of FDPs. FDPs may competitively inhibit fbrinogen binding to platelet receptors, which impairs
platelet aggregation.
d. Liver disease may be associated with impaired platelet function; however, mechanisms are
 poorly understood.
2. Infectious and miscellaneous agents that may impair platelet function include the following:
(1) FeLV infection may cause thrombocytopenia, thrombocytosis, and/or impaired platelet
function.
(2) Ehrlichia canis infection may cause inhibition of platelet adhesion and/or aggregation
because of hyperproteinemia or the presence of anti-platelet receptor antibodies. These effects
may occur in the absence of thrombocytopenia.
(3) Paraproteinemia of plasma cell myeloma may inhibit platelet adhesion and/or aggregation.
(4) Leukemia and myeloproliferative disorders may be associated with various platelet defects
 including altered signal transduction pathways, altered membrane glycoproteins, or abnormal
platelet granules.
(5) Some snake venoms contain platelet inhibitory peptides or enzymes that degrade platelet
membrane receptors and/or VWE.
2. Enhanced platelet function
a. Nephrotic syndrome may cause platelet hyperreactivity; the mechanism is likely multifactorial.
 Findings from one study showed platelet hyperaggregability diminished when plasma albumin
concentration increased
HE MO STASIS
121
b. In dogs, erythropoietin administration increases the number of reticulated platelets in
circulation, which have increased reactivity upon exposure to agonists.
c. Infectious agents and parasites may be associated with hyperreactive platelets.
(1) FlP virus may affect platelets directly, but the increased risk of thrombosis is probably the
rsult of endothelial cell perturbation or inflammation induced by viral infection.
(2) Heartworm disease may enhance platelet aggregation and granule release. Excreted
ractivity. Treatment with aspirin at recommended dosages may not effectively inhibit platelet
activity in this disease.
F. Mechanisms of thrombocytopenia. The four basic mechanisms that may produce thrombocytopenia
include decreased production, increased consumption, sequestration, and excessive loss. Many of the
disorders that cause thrombocytopenia involve more than one of these mechanisms. The following
outline categorizes diseases that cause thrombocytopenia by their major mechanism.
1. Decreased platelet production or failure of platelet production (decreased bone marrow
megakaryocytes with concurrent thrombocytopenia)
a. Pure megakaryocytic hypoplasia (dogs) is a rare form of immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
 in which the autoantibody is directed against megakaryocytes. Bone marrow evaluation is required to
 make this diagnosis. Anecdotally, this disorder responds poorly to treatment. It also may be associated
with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
b. Bone marrow panhypoplasia (pancytopenia, aplastic anemia) of any cause will result in
thrombocytopenia. Bone marrow panhypoplasia begins with leukopenia (neutropenia) because
neutrophils have the shortest lifespan in circulation (approximately 10-hour circulating half-life).
Thrombocytopenia is apparent within several days because of longer platelet lifespan (three to 10 days,
depending on species). Progressive nonregenerative anemia develops over the next few weeks (onset
of anemia is variable, depending on erythrocyte lifespan; see Chapter 1). Causes of bone marrow
panhypoplasia include (also see Chapters l and 2):
(1) Drugs, such as chemotherapeutic agents, chloramphenicol, sulfadiazine, estrogen
compounds (dogs), and griseofulvin (cats) cause direct cytotoxic effects on bone marrow
progenitor cells. The drug effects may be predictable, such as in cancer chemotherapy, or
idiosyncratic
(2) Chemicals such as trichloroethylene and benzene
(3) Mycotoxins and plant toxicosis, such as aflatoxin B and bracken fern ingestion, respectively
(4) Exposure to ionizing radiation
(5) FeLV or parvoviral infections may cause pancytopenia through destruction of
hematopoietic cells.
C. Myelophthisis (bone marrow space is occupied by neoplastic or other non-marrow cells)
(1)  Neoplastic causes include myeloproliferative or lymphoproliferative diseases, which
originate within the marrow cavity, or a variety of metastatic neoplasms that infiltrate the
marrow cavity.
(myelofibrosis) or osteoid (osteosclerosis)-
(3) Disseminated inflammation of the marrow cavity (e.g., granulomatous osteomyelitis with
disseminated histoplasmosis) also may cause myelophthisis.
d. Infectious agents
(1) Late stages of ehrlichiosis and other rickettsial diseases frequently are associated with
persistent thrombocytopenia.
(2) FeLV, FIV, equine infectious anemia (EIA) virus, African swine fever virus, and bovine
viral diarrhea (BVD) virus may directly infect and destroy marrow hematopoietic cells and/or
may infect stromal cells, which results in decreased production of growth stimulant factors or
increased production of growth suppressor factors.
122
CHAPTER 4
2. Platelet consumption or destruction in excess of rate of platelet production
a. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
(1) In primary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (also called autoimmune
thrombocytopenia or idiopathic thrombocytopenia), autoantibodies are produced
           s
Megakaryocytes may be targeted along with platelets if the antibody is directed against a
common membrane antigen.
(2) In secondary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, antibody production is secondary
to another underlying condition such as systemic lupus erythematosis, neoplasia, infectious
 disease, or drug administration. The platelet membrane nonspecifically adsorbs the offending
antibody.
(3) Vaccine-induced thrombocytopenia has been associated with several different modified
live vaccines.
(a) Thrombocytopenia may follow immunization against canine distemper and
(b) Mild thrombocytopenia occurs three to 10 days post vaccination; platelet counts are
seldom below 100,000/μL. Marked thrombocytopenia may occur, but the nadir is difficult to
determine because platelet counts rebound rapidly.
(c) Clinical bleeding does not occur unless an underlying platelet defect, such as VWD or
thrombopathia, coexists. Elective surgery should be avoided during this time interval.
b. Drug-induced thrombocytopenia
(1) With drug-independent thrombocytopenia (primary drug-induced immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia), the offending drug incites antibody formation to a normal platelet
membrane antigen. Antibody production persists in the absence of the drug. Drug-independent
thrombocytopenia is difficult to distinguish from primary IMT.
(2) Drug-dependent thrombocytopenia (secondary drug-induced) is observed more
commonly in cats, dogs, and horses than is drug-independent thrombocytopenia
(a) In novel or first exposure drug-dependent thrombocytopenia, the immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia occurs with the first exposure to the offending drug. An example is
thrombocytopenia that may follow heparin administration in horses
(b) In previous exposure drug-dependent thrombocytopenia, the patient has a history of
previous treatment with or exposure to the offending drug.
i) Thrombocytopenia is observed at least one week or more after initial drug
treatment.
ii) Thrombocytopenia returns within three days of administration of the offending
drug.
(c)  Drug-induced non-immune mechanisms of thrombocytopenia include direct
agglutination and sequestration, excessive loss, and removal via normal activation and
Coagulation pathways.
c. Increased activation and removal of platelets can occur with intravascular parasites
(Plasmodium sp., Dirofilaria immitis); DIC; and infections with bacteria, rickettsia, and viruses.
4. Excessive platelet consumption occurs with hemorrhage, trauma, rodenticide toxicosis, DlC, and
neoplasia; however, thrombocytopenia is usually observed only in DIC and some cases of
disseminated neoplasia.
G. Causes of thrombocytosis (platelet numbers exceed reference interval; MPV is variable). Individuals
with thrombocytosis may be at increased risk of thrombosis or hemorrhage, depending on platelet
function.
1. Physiologic thrombocytosis is caused by epinephrine-induced splenic contraction. In health, the
spleen contains 30% to 40% of all circulating platelets. Physiologic thrombocytosis is a transient
phenomenon.
HE MO STASIS
123
2. Essential thrombocythemia (ET, primary thrombophilia, hemorrhagic thrombocythemia/
thrombocytosis, primary thrombocythemia, or idiopathic thrombocythemia) is a rare
myeloproliferative disorder (Chapter 3).
a.
 Platelet count is persistently, and often markedly, increased.
b. Platelet morphologic changes include variation in size, variation in shape, and intense
granulation.
C. Platelet function is abnormal in human beings, but has not been evaluated thoroughly in
domestic animals.
d. Bone marrow megakaryocytes are increased, often with abnormal morphology and increased
numbers of immature megakaryocytes.
2. Hemorrhage or thrombosis may occur, depending on whether platelets are hyper- or
hypofunctional. Selective loss of high molecular weight VWF multimers may contribute to
hemorrhage.
3. Reactive thrombocytosis (secondary thrombocytosis) is an increase in platelet count associated
with conditions other than myeloproliferative disorders. Depending on the stimulus, thrombocytosis
may be short term or long term. Reactive thrombocytosis is much more common than ET.
a. Inflammation and malignancy are the most common causes of reactive thrombocytosis
Cytokines associated with inflammation or secreted by tumor cells, such as IL-6, IL-3, and
 IL-1l, stimulate megakaryocytic proliferation and maturation. IL-6 is thought to enhance
thrombocytosis by stimulating TPO production by hepatocytes. The cause of thrombocytosis
 in iron deficiency is not known; however, enhanced thrombopoiesis may occur secondary to
erythropoietin effects, possibly at the level of the MEP. Measurement of increased concentration of
IL-6 has been suggested as a means to diffrentiate reactive thrombocytosis from ET.
b. Decreased removal or destruction of platelets by macrophages. Splenectomy is followed by
thrombocytosis. Platelet counts peak about two weeks post-operatively and return to reference
interval within two to three months.
H. Megakaryocytic leukemia is observed rarely (Chapter 3). Platelet counts may be decreased, within
reference interval, or increased. Megakaryoblasts or micromegakaryocytes may be observed. Alterations
in both platelet and megakaryocyte morphology may be present (see dysthrombocytopoiesis, below).
I. Dysthrombocytopoiesis is the disordered production of platelets. Dysthrombocytopoiesis is
syndrome is characterized by cytopenia(s) in blood, hypercellular bone marrow, and dysplastic changes
in one or more hematopoietic cell lines. Dysplastic changes of megakaryocytes include immaturity of
cells, dispersed nuclei (multinucleated rather than multilobulated), anisokaryosis, and asynchronous
nuclear to cytoplasmic maturation. These changes may be observed with FeLV infection,
 chemotherapeutic drug administration, cephalosporin treatment, inherited and acquired genetic
mutations, and clinical disorders with markedly responsive thrombocytosis.
COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS
I. MECHANISMS Of COAGULATION
Activation of the coagulation system occurs simultaneously with platelet activation at sites of vascular
injury. Coagulation is a highly regulated system, which involves formation of complexes that result in
conversion of zymogens into active serine proteases. These complexes require negatively charged cell
complexes are the intrinsic factor X activation complex (also known as intrinsic tenase complex)
composed of factors IX, VIll, and X; the extrinsic factor X activation complex (known as extrinsic tenase
complex) composed of factors Vll, IHl (tissue factor), and X; and the prothrombinase complex composed
of factors X, V, and I1. Traditionally, the coagulation system has been divided into intrinsic, extrinsic, and
124
CHAPTER 4
common pathways for ease of understanding and for laboratory testing in vitro. However, cross-
activation does occur in vivo and it is known that the extrinsic factor Vll-tissue factor complex, in
 addition to activating factor X in the common pathway, can also activate factor IX in the intrinsic
pathway (Figure 4.2).
A. Serine protease coagulation factors are synthesized by the liver and occur in plasma as proenzymes
or zymogens, which require activation to become functional.
1. Enzymatic factors
a. Factor XlI (Hageman factor), factor Xl (plasma thromboplastin antecedent), and prekallikrein
(Fletcher factor) constitute most of the contact activation system.
b. Vitamin K-dependent factors include factor II (prothrombin; activated factor II is thrombin),
factor Vll (proconvertin), factor IX (antihemophilic factor B, Christmas factor), and factor X
(Stuart factor).
(1) Inactive precursors are made functional by vitamin-K-dependent post-translational
carboxylation of glutamic acid residues on the molecules.
(PK, XIl, HMWK)
 Disrupted Cells
Contact Activation
TF
Vlla-TF
Vlla
V11
lntrinsic
System
1X
Extrinsic
lXa
System
V111
1112
IXa-Vllla
Vlla-TF
CFP]
Inhibitor
lnactive
Common
System
BA-BX
Active
PK = Prekallikrein
PT
HMWK = High Molecular
Weight Kininogen
TF = Tissue Factor
PT = Prothrombin
T = Thrombin
Fibrin
Fibrinogen
PC = Protein C
AT = Antithrombin
TFPl = Tissue Factor
Pathway Inhibitor
FIGURE 4.2. Scheme for activation of thrombin and fibrin formation. Notice that thrombin is a feedback
activator of factors Xl, Vlll, and V. Activated factor Vll-tissue factor complex affects the activation sequence in two
locations. Other cofactors, platelet phospholipid and calcium, are not showm in this scheme.
HE MO STASIS
125
(2) Carboxylated factors I, VIll, IX, and X have a negative charge and can bind to exposed
phosphatidylserine on activated platelets in the presence of calcium. Calcium ions allow the
electrostatic interaction to occur between negatively charged coagulation factors and negatively
charged platelet surface.
(3) In cases of vitamin K antagonism (e.g., coumarin toxicosis), coagulation factors are
 synthesized without sufficient carboxylation and have inadequate function. These proteins
are termed “proteins induced by vitamin K absence or antagonism" (PIVKA). Severity of
dysfunction is proportional to degree of vitamin K deficiency (Case 25).
c. Factor Xlll (fibrin stabilizing factor) is converted to an active transglutaminase by thrombin
and functions to cross-link and stabilize fibrin monomers.
2. Plasma half-life of the zymogens varies from hours to a few days. Factor Vll, which circulates in
both zymogen and active states, has the shortest half-life (four to six hours).
3. Natural in vivo inhibitors of serine protease clotting factors include antithrombin (AT), whose
activity is enhanced by heparin and other serpins such as heparin cofactor I1.
a. The major function of AT is to inhibit thrombin activity by formation of l:l stoichiometric
thrombin-AT complexes(TAT).
(1) Complexes are cleared by the mononuclear phagocytic system
(2) AI activity is enhanced by heparin. The structure of AT is modified when bound with
heparin, which augments AT ability to bind with thrombin.
(3)  AT also inactivates other serine proteases, including activated factors IX, X, XI and XIl.
b. Thrombin that escapes the site of clot formation and AT inhibition moves downstream and
binds with thrombomodulin, a protein expressed on the surface of endothelial cells.
(1) Once bound to thrombomodulin, thrombin's procoagulant activity is lost.
  d n og as  n oe as anss sui ()
vitamin-K-dependent proenzyme with anticoagulant and profibrinolytic functions, described
below).
4. Activated enzymatic factors are not consumed by clotting and are present in serum.
B. Nonenzymatic protein coagulation factors are synthesized primarily by the liver and circulate in
blood. Two of these proteins serve as critical cofactors within the intrinsic and extrinsic tenase and
prothrombinase complexes.
1. Nonenzymatic protein factors include factor V (proaccelerin), factor Vlll (antihemophilic factor
A), and fbrinogen (factor I).
a. Fibrinogen and factor Vlll are acute phase proteins; their concentration increases in plasma
during inflammation or neoplasia
b. The plasma half-life of these factors is hours to days.
2. Clotting consumes the nonenzymatic factors; therefore, they are absent in serum.
3. Activated factors V and Vlll are degraded enzymatically by activated protein C.
a. Inactivation of factors V and Vlll is accelerated in the presence of phospholipid, calcium, and
protein S (a vitamin-K-dependent cofactor for protein C).
b. Inactivation of factors V and Vll results in severe impairment of the intrinsic tenase and
prothrombinase complexes where these proteins serve vital roles as protein co-factors, thus
explaining the anticoagulant effect of protein C.
C. Platelet phospholipid
1. Platelet phospholipid, specifically phosphatidylserine, is a cofactor of coagulation.
Phosphatidylserine is expressed on activated platelet membranes and provides a negatively charged
surface upon which coagulation factor activation is greatly enhanced.
2. Calcium provides a link between the negatively charged vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factors and platelet membrane phosphatidylserine residues, thus positioning these enzymes and
their protein cofactors for highly efficient activation of their respective substrates.
126
CHAPTER 4
D. Tissue factor (factor Ill, tissue thromboplastin)
1. Tissue factor (factor Ill) is a transmembrane cell surface receptor. Tissue factor does not require
proteolytic cleavage to become active. It is not exposed to plasma normally and is present in cells
in the adventitia around blood vessels and in epidermal and mucosal lining cells. Tissue factor alsc
may be expressed on the surface of monocytes/macrophages and cancer cells in certain situations
and may be synthesized by platelets
a. TF is found in subendothelial fibroblasts, pericytes, macrophages, and monocytes, but not on
unperturbed endothelial cells. This contrasts with other coagulation proteins, which circulate in
plasma.
b. TF synthesis by endothelial cells can be induced by cytokines, endotoxin, and other
 inflammatory mediators, but does not initiate coagulation without disruption of the endothelium.
c. Once exposed to blood, TF binds factor Vll and activated factor VlI (FVlla) with high affinity
and specificity. The TF/factor Vlla complex subsequently activates factor X and is termed extrinsic
factor X or extrinsic tenase complex. TF/FVIlla also can activate factor IX in the intrinsic tenase
complex.
2. Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPl) is a lipoprotein-associated protease.
a. TFPI is found predominately in platelets and endothelial cells.
b. TFPI exerts its inhibitory action in a two-step process. First, TFPI binds to activated factor
 X at its catalytic site. Second, this newly formed complex binds to membrane-bound FVlla/TF
complex in a calcium-dependent manner with resultant loss of FVlla/TF catalytic activity
E. Calcium (factor IV)
1. In vivo hypocalcemia does not directly result in hemorrhage. The concentration of calcium
required for muscular contraction, including cardiac function, is greater than that required for
blood coagulation in vivo.
2. Anticoagulants such as EDTA, oxalate, or citrate prevent clotting by binding calcium
COAGULATION (FIGURE 4.2)
A. The extrinsic pathway usually initiates coagulation in vivo. Coagulation is initiated when tissue
factor (factor III) contacts and complexes with factor Vll or activated factor VII (FVIla). Factor VlI has
minimal protease activity despite the capability of autoactivation. The complex of activated factor VII
and tissue factor has greatly enhanced proteolytic activity. In the presence of calcium and phospholipid
(extrinsic tenase complex), this complex can activate factor IX of the intrinsic tenase complex and
factor X within the prothrombinase complex
B. Disorders of extrinsic coagulation
1. Hereditary deficiency of factor Vll (dogs) is a mild disease associated with easy bruising but
lacks more serious bleeding tendencies.
2. Early vitamin K inhibition or deficiency
a. Early vitamin K inhibition or deficiency initially affects factor Vll because of its short half-life
Prothrombin time (PT) may be prolonged. Clinical hemorrhage may not be present.
3. Hypercoagulation and DlC caused by excessive tissue factor release (e.g., intravascular
hemolysis, massive necrosis, trauma, septicemia, endotoxemia; Case ll).
IMl. MECHANISMS AND DISORDERS OF The INTRINSIC PaThWAY (HMW k, PREkALlikREiN,
AND FaCTORS XIl, XI, IX, AND VIl) OF COaGULaTION (fIGURE 4.2)
A. Contact activation involves factor Xll, factor Xl, prekallikrein (Fletcher factor), and cofactor
HE MO STASIS
127
plasma interacts with negatively charged substances in vivo (e.g., collagen, activated platelets,
endotoxin) or in vitro (e.g., glass, kaolin, or celite)
1. The product of contact activation of the intrinsic system is activated factor Xl, which
subsequently activates factor IX.
2. Physiologic significance of contact activation in coagulation is controversial because isolated
deficiencies of these factors usually do not result in hemorrhagic tendencies.
B. In conjunction with thrombin-activated factor Vlll, activated factor IX subsequently activates factor
initiates the common pathway of coagulation.
C. Blood coagulation in vivo probably begins after tissue injury via extrinsic tenase complex activation
of factors X and IX. Sustained generation of activated factor X, however, depends on the intrinsic tenase
complex, which is not susceptible to TFPI and is 50 times more efficient in activation of factor X.
 of a small amount of thrombin in their vicinity.
2. Activated factor IX (generated by the intrinsic tenase complex) ultimately enhances production
of thrombin on surfaces of activated platelets. Briefly, activated factor IX produces activated factor
X. Activated factor X is a key component of the prothrombinase complex on the surface of
platelets. The prothrombinase complex, as its name indicates, cleaves prothrombin to produce
thrombin.
D. Defciency of factors within the intrinsic pathway may or may not result in hemorrhage, and when
present, will vary in severity. Coagulation-type hemorrhage is characterized by delayed deep tissue
hemorrhage and hematoma formation.
E. Disorders of factors within the intrinsic pathway include:
1. Hereditary deficiency of prekallikrein (dogs and horses). Affected animals are not reported to
experience clinical bleeding.
 op s n (sop p s) s s n oip n ro i 7
exhibit clinical bleeding. The abnormality usually is encountered as a serendipitous observation of
prolonged activated clotting time (ACT) or activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) in
absence of bleeding.
3. Hereditary factor XI deficiency (dogs and Holstein cattle). Affected dogs and cattle have
protracted bleeding after surgery but otherwise the disorder is mild.
4. Hereditary, sex-linked, factor IX deficiency or hemophilia B (cats and dogs). Affected males
usually have less than l0% normal factor IX activity. Clinical signs vary with the size and activity of
the animal and factor activity present. Cats with severe hemophilia B (less than 1% activity) are
 more likely to have a normal lifespan than a large dog with similar factor IX activity. Clinical signs
tend to be non-specific, particularly in cats, and include depression, anorexia, and irritability.
Spontaneous hemorrhage occurs, particularly in animals with very low factor activity. Spontaneous
external hemorrhage, however, is rare; most spontaneous hemorrhages are internal and clinical
signs tend to reflect the location of hemorrhage (lameness, depression, difficulty breathing, seizures.
etc). Carrier females are identified by decreased activity of factor IX (usually 40% to 60%). Carriers
 do not experience abnormal hemorrhage.
5. Hereditary, sex-linked, factor VIll:coagulant (VIll:C) factor deficiency or hemophilia A (cats,
horses, sheep, cattle, and dogs). This is the most common inherited coagulopathy of animals and
people due to the high spontaneous mutation rate of the factor Vll gene. Variable severity of
bleeding is similar to that observed for hemophilia B and again correlates with the severity of the
factor deficiency and the size and activity of the animal. Affected males usually have less than 10%
of normal factor VIlI-C activity (VWF may be increased). Carrier females can be identifed by
decreased factor Vlll:C activity (usually 40% to 60% of normal). Carrier females do not have
clinical signs.
128
CHAPTER 4
6. Acquired deficiency of nonenzymatic factors in disseminated intravascular coagulation syndrome
(DIC) (Case 11)
a. DlC is associated with consumption of coagulation proteins, including fibrinogen, factor V, and
factor VIll. Platelets also are consumed, and excessive fibrin(ogen) degradation products (FDPs)
may be generated. If clotting factor consumption exceeds their rate of synthesis, hemorrhage may
result.
b. Thrombocytopenia may be associated with petechial and/or ecchymotic hemorrhage.
end-organ necrosis and failure.
7. Acquired deficiency of vitamin-K-dependent factors (factors II, Vll, IX, and X) may occur in
rodenticide toxicosis (coumarin, indanedione; Case 25), fat malabsorption/maldigestion, and
hepatic failure.
a. In early rodenticide toxicosis, prolongation of the PT occurs initially because factor Vll has the
shortest half-life.
b. Severity of bleeding correlates with degree of failure in carboxylation of factors.
8. Hypercoagulable states may be associated with heat stroke, viremia, and endotoxemia. These
hypercoagulable states may transition into DlC depending on severity of associated tissue damage
and lack of appropriate tissue perfusion.
FIBRINOGEN) OF COAGULATION (FIGURE 4.2)
A. Factor X, when activated by either the intrinsic or extrinsic system, binds to activated factor V,
is also concentrated within platelet C-granules.
B. The prothrombinase complex cleaves two peptide bonds in membrane-bound prothrombin, which
results in formation of prothrombin fragment 1+2 and prethrombin 2. Prethrombin 2 is then cleaved to
form thrombin. Thrombin dissociates from the platelet surface and converts soluble fibrinogen (factor
I) to monomeric fibrin with release of fibrinopeptides A and B. Activated factor Xll (fibrin stabilizing
factor) catalyzes polymerization and cross-linking of fibrin monomers to form insoluble fibrin.
C. Thrombin is a positive feedback accelerator of coagulation. It activates factors Xl, Xl, VIll, V, and
platelets. Thrombomodulin-bound thrombin acts as an anticoagulant by activation of protein C.
D. Disorders of the common system (factors X, V, Il, and fibrinogen)
1. Disorders that only affect the common pathway are rare. Disorders that result in prolongation of
both PT and APTT are usually "multiple hit" disorders such as liver disease, vitamin K antagonism,
or DlC, in which factors in multiple pathways are decreased nearly simultaneously.
2. Hereditary deficiency of factor X has been described in dogs and cats.
3. Hereditary defciency of fibrinogen has been described in goats and dogs. Fibrinogen may be
absent, decreased, or abnormal. Affected animals have mild to severe bleeding.
4. Some snake venoms possess enzymes that can activate thrombin, factor V, and/or factor X.
E. Disorders in anticoagulation
1. Antithrombin deficiency. Acquired deficiency is described in dogs (protein-losing nephropathy
protein-losing enteropathy, and sepsis) and horses (colic syndrome). DIC and liver disease also may
cause AT deficiency in animals. Affected animals are predisposed to thrombosis because of poorly
regulated thrombin activity.
2. Protein C deficiency. Acquired deficiency of protein C has been described in horses with colic
of protein C has been described in dogs. Animals with hereditary or acquired deficiency of protein
HE MO STASIS
129
C are predisposed to thrombosis because of poorly regulated activity of factors V and Vll, as well
as impaired control of fibrinolysis
V. MECHANISIMS AND DISORDERS OF VITAIMIN-K-DEPENDENT FACTORS
A. Vitamin K antagonism, which results in inhibition of functional vitamin K-dependent factors, can
occur with rodenticide toxicity. The length of time required to treat with vitamin Kl varies with the
rodenticide class. First generation compounds generally require treatment for seven to 10 days; second
generation compounds may require treatment for four to six weeks.
B. Vitamin K deficiency can occur rarely with malabsorption/maldigestion, including exocrine
pancreatic insuffciency. Because vitamin K is continually recycled, vitamin K deficiency rarely occurs
due to the time it takes to deplete vitamin K stores (approximately six months). Most animals are
diagnosed and treated before vitamin K deficiency occurs
C. Inherited vitamin-K-dependent multifactor coagulopathies have been diagnosed in Devon Rex cats,
decreased due to mutations in the gene encoding gamma-glutamyl carboxylase. Devon Rex cats
respond to vitamin Kl treatment (they synthesize carboxylase protein that has impaired function but is
is a premature stop codon and they do not synthesize the carboxylase enzyme). The mutation in
Labrador retrievers has not yet been described. Inherited multifactor coagulopathy should be suspected
in animals that repeatedly present with vitamin-K-responsive coagulopathies in the absence of
exposure to rodenticides.
Vl. MECHANISMS AND DISORDERS OF FibRINOLySIS (fIGURE 4.3)
Fibrinolysis is initiated almost simultaneously with coagulation. It maintains blood in a fluid state
within the vasculature and is responsible for patency of many tubular structures. Fibrinolysis, like
coagulation, is a complex interaction and balance of inactive proenzymes, active enzymes, activators,
inhibitors, and inactivators.
A. Plasminogen and plasmin
1. Plasminogen is the precursor of plasmin and is present in plasma. Plasminogen is activated to
plasmin when it is cleaved into heavy (A) and light (B) chains. Activators include kallikrein, tissue
a. Lysine binding effector sites of the A chain mediate plasmin's interaction with fibrin and its
plasma inhibitor, C-antiplasmin (A2P)
b. The B chain contains the active enzymatic site that is homologous to other serine proteases,
such as thrombin.
c. The physiologic substrate of plasmin is fibrin; however, plasmin will nonspecifically inactivate
other proteins including prekallikrein, HMWK, factor VIll, factor V, and fibrinogen.
2. Plasminogen activation to plasmin is usually fibrin specific.
a. Artivation of fibrinolysis occurs within developing clots where plasminogen activators and
plasminogen bind to fibrin.
b. After initial proteolysis of fbrin, additional binding sites are uncovered that enhance further
binding of plasminogen and its activators.
3. The activity of plasmin is inhibited by its plasma serine protease inhibitor, α2AP.
a. Inhibition is achieved by formation of stable complexes between plasmin and α2AP (PAP),
which are cleared by the mononuclear phagocytic system.
130
CHAPTER 4
FIBRINOPEPTIDES
A+B
FM
xllla
IIIX
Fibrin
Formation
PLG
FIBRIN
PA
FIBRIN
PAPLG
TM
Protein C
and PLG
Activation
T-TM
PC
Vllla
Inhibitor
FIBRIN
lnactive
P
Xllla
Active
CROSS-LINKED
Fibrinolysis
FIBRIN
F = Fibrinogen
T = Thrombin
FM = Fibrin Monomer 
PA = Plasninogen Activator
FDP
D-DIMER
PAl = Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor
PLG = Plasminogen
 P = Plasmin
TM = Thrombomodulin
AP =Antiplasmin
FDP = Fibrin Degradation Product
PC = Protein C
FIGURE 4.3. Scheme for fibrin formation and fibrinolysis. During formation, plasminogen activator (PA) is
balanced by plasrminogen activator inhibitor (PAl). Fibrinolysis proceeds with activation of plasminogen to plasrmin
when the proportion of PA exceeds PAl. Activated protein C (aPC) inactivates coagulation factors Va and Vllla.
b. Fibrin-bound plasmin is site-protected from inactivation by plasma C-antiplasmin (α2AP);
however, only partial protection is achieved because α2AP is incorporated into cross-linked fbrin
by activated factor Xlll (fbrin stabilizing factor).
C. Additional inhibitors of plasmin include Q-macroglobin, Q,-antitrypsin, AT, and Cl-esterase
inhibitor.
HE MO STASIS
131
4. Thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFl) is a carboxypeptidase that is activated by
thrombin. Activation by thrombin is greatly enhanced by binding of thrombin to thrombomodulin.
Activated TAFl (TAFla) inhibits fibrinolysis by cleaving exposed lysine binding sites on fibrin for
plasminogen and tPA. TAFla also prevents conversion of Glu to Lys-plasminogen. In disease states
where thrombin is not propagated (such as hemophilia), IAFla is not generated and fbrinolysis is
enhanced.
5. Plasmin is capable of hydrolyzing fibrin and fibrinogen, with resultant formation of fibrin(ogen)
degradation products (FDPs) or fragments.
a. FDPs are cleared from circulation by macrophages (especially Kupffer cells of the liver).
b. The terminal degradation product produced by plasmin-mediated hydrolysis of cross-linked
fbrin is D-D/E fragment, which consists of two covalently bonded D-domains (D-dimer) that are
bound noncovalently to fragment E.
B. Activators of plasminogen are derived from endothelium, platelets, and other cells. These activators
are in plasma and efficiently activate fibrin-bound plasminogen.
1. Intrinsic activation of plasminogen
a. Artivated factor Xll can directly activate plasminogen.
b. Artivated factor Xll also indirectly activates plasminogen.
(1)  Activated factor Xll subsequently activates prekallikrein to kallikrein.
(2) Kallikrein activates urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) which, in turn, activates
plasminogen to plasmin.
2.Extrinsic activation of plasminogen
a. uPA and tPA are found in many cells and have high specific activity in conversion of
plasminogen to plasmin.
b. Fibrin-bound tPA activates fbrin-bound plasminogen to plasmin. Plasmin digestion of fibrin
 generates new C-terminal lysine residues that serve as binding sites for more plasminogen and
tPA; thus, further fibrinolysis is enhanced.
C. uPA is primarily responsible for activation of plasminogen on cell surfaces and likely plays an
 important role in extravascular fibrinolysis and enhancement of cell adhesion and migration.
C. Plasminogen activator inhibitors (PAl) are derived from endothelium, platelets, and other cells.
1. PAI-1 inhibits tPA by formation of l:1 reversible complexes that prevent plasminogen activation.
2. The balance between activators and inactivators shifts toward activators and fibrinolysis when:
a. Inhibitors form complexes with other plasma proteins.
b. Thrombin is released downstream and activates protein C. Protein C also enhances fibrinolysis
by inhibition of thrombin generation, which in turn inhibits production of TAFI.
D. Specific disorders of fibrinolysis in domestic animals are poorly understood compared with similar
human disorders. The important concept is that the components of fbrinolysis are balanced to
maintain homeostasis. Imbalance of this process occurs in disease and may predispose the patient to
hypercoagulable or hypocoagulable states.
1. Possible imbalances that favor hypercoagulation:
a. Decreased plasminogen concentration (e.g., horses with severe ischemic bowel disease)
b. Lack of plasminogen activators
c. Lack of protein C or protein S
d. Factor V mutations (factor V Leiden) result in resistance of factor V to inactivation by protein
C
2. Excess plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)
2. Possible imbalances that favor hypocoagulation:
a. Lack of C-antiplasmin and other plasmin inhibitors may occur in fulminating DlC. Plasmin
hydrolysis of factor V, factor Vlll, and fibrinogen contribute to a hypocoagulable state.
b. Systemic uncontrolled plasminogen activation.
132
CHAPTER 4
Vl. AVIAN COAGULATION AND FIBRINOLYSIS
Less is known regarding avian coagulation and fbrinolysis relative to mammals. Most studies have
used human deficient plasma to determine specific avian factor activities.
A. Coagulation. Avian plasma contains most of the coagulation factors found in mammals except
factor Xll, prekallikrein, and HMWK. Factor Xl activity also is markedly reduced. The extrinsic
pathway is considered the initiator of coagulation in birds, as is the case in mammals
B. Chicken brain tissue thromboplastin is necessary for reproducible avian PT test results.
C. AT activity has been detected in avian plasma. It behaves as an acute-phase reactant
D. Fibrinolysis. Antiplasmin and uPA have been detected in avian plasma
Vll. LaBORaTORY EVAlUATION Of COaGULaTION AND fibRINOLySIS
The laboratory tests described here are effective in analysis of hypocoagulation disorders (bleeding
syndromes). The differential diagnosis of important bleeding disorders by use of laboratory tests is
shown in Table 4.1. Hypercoagulable states in animals that precede clinical DIC or increase the risk of
thrombosis are poorly defined by most routine laboratory coagulation screening tests.
Thromboelastography (TEG) is an alternative method for assessment of blood coagulation that is
useful for detection of both hypocoagulable and hypercoagulable states (section Vll, J)
A. Activated clotting time (ACT)
1. This test measures the time (seconds) required for fibrin clot formation in fresh whole blood
after exposure to a contact activator (celite, diatomaceous earth, and/or glass tube). Platelets
provide the phospholipid for assembly of coagulation complexes. The ACT evaluates the intrinsic
and common pathways of coagulation
a. The ACT is prolonged if the activity of a given factor is less than 10% of normal. Mild factor
deficiencies (l0% to 30% of normal activity) do not affect the ACT but will prolong the APTT.
Thus, the ACT is a less sensitive test than APTT in evaluation of the intrinsic and common
pathways.
b. The ACT test is easily performed in a clinical setting and provides reproducible results
provided that careful attention is given to technical requirements.
(1) Iwo ml of whole blood, obtained from a clean venipuncture, are added to 37°C pre-
warmed commercially available ACT tubes that contain diatomaceous earth (a potentiator of
contact activation).
(2) Tubes are maintained at 37oC in a heat block and clot formation is checked at regular
intervals by gently tilting the tube. The endpoint of the ACT test is visible clot formation.
(3) Failure to warm the tube may give a falsely prolonged ACT value because all intrinsic
and common system factors are enzymes except for factors V and Vll and fibrinogen. Lower
temperatures retard enzymatic activity
(4) Reference intervals should be established for each laboratory based on ACT test values
obtained from repeated testing of healthy animals with normal coagulation. Published
reference intervals are inadequate for interpretation of ACT test results in a given laboratory.
c. The ACT test is easier to perform and is more sensitive than Lee-White or capillary tube
clotting times because ACT tubes are commercially prepared and standardized.
2. Prolonged ACT indicates significant deficiency of coagulation factor(s) within the intrinsic
(prekallikrein; HMWK; factors XIl, XI, IX, VIIl) or common (factors X, V, I1; fibrinogen) pathways.
Severe factor deficiency (less than 10% normal activity) is necessary to prolong the ACT.
3. Marked thrombocytopenia (less than 10,0o0/μL) may cause prolonged ACT because platelets
provide the phospholipid that is required for assembly of coagulation complexes.
HE MO STASIS
133
TABLE 4.1.
PAITERNS FOR HEMOSTASIS DISORDERS.
BMBT
APTT
PT
TT
FDP
Disorder
ct
(or ACT)b
D-D
Disseminated intravascular
dec
inc
inc
inc
inc
inc
coagulation (acute,
mcompensated)
Thrombocytopenia
dec
inc
N
N
N
N
Platelet function defect
N
inc
N
N
N
N
von Willebrand disease
N
inc
N
N
N
N
 Severe liver disease/insufficiency
N
inc
inc
N
N
Acquired vitamin K deficiency
 or antagonism
Hereditary factor X deficiency
Hereditary deficiencies of
N
N
inc
N
N
N
factors VIII, IX, X, or XII
Factor VIl deficiency
N
N
N
inc
N
N
Congenital fbrinogen deficiency
N
N/inc
inc
inc
inc
N
aPattern is variable depending on the relative severity of the process.
bThe ACT will be prolonged if 10% or less of intrinsic or common factor activity remains. The APTT is
more sensitive and is prolonged if 30% or less of intrinsic or common factor activity remains.
Plt ct = platelet count
 BMBT = buccal mucosal bleeding time
APTT = activated partial thromboplastin time
ACT = activated clotting time
PI = prothrombin time
TT = thrombin time
FDP = fibrin(ogen) degradation products
D-D = D-dimers
N = normal (within the reference interval)
inc = increased or prolonged
dec = decreased
4. The presence of coagulation inhibitors (e.g., excessive FDPs) or anticoagulants (e.g., heparin,
citrate) also prolong the ACT.
5. The ACT tube also can be used for subjective assessment of clot quality. After holding the tube
at 37°C, the clot should be firm with clear serum appearing within one to two hours. A soft, friable
clot that liquefies in 30 to 60 minutes indicates excessive fibrinolysis or hypofibrinogenemia.
B. Citrated plasma clotting tests
1. Sample management
a. Blood should be collected via clean venipuncture with minimal venous stasis. Difficult
 venipuncture may promote tissue fluid contamination and hemolysis, both of which rapidly
 activate clotting, which may consume coagulation factors and result in falsely prolonged
coagulation test times.
b. Catheters that have been used for administration of heparin or flushed with heparinized saline
solutions are not recommended for sample collection. If no other site for blood collection is
 available, they should be used with precaution and significant blood must be withdrawn (blood
134
CHAPTER 4
either can be discarded or subsequently re-administered to the patient) prior to obtainment of a
sample for coagulation testing.
c. Excitement of the animal at the time of blood collection should be minimized. Excitement has
 been associated with increased factor Vlll:C concentrations.
d. Blood is collected via clean venipuncture with a plastic syringe. Blood is immediately placed
 in commercial citrate tubes at precisely 9 parts fresh whole blood/l part 3.8% trisodium citrate
anticoagulant. Blood and anticoagulant should be mixed thoroughly. Failure to thoroughly mix
blood and citrate anticoagulant or an incorrect blood-to-anticoagulant ratio yields unreliable test
results. Drawing blood directly into syringes containing the appropriate amount of citrate can
greatly facilitate collection of non-activated blood samples.
2. Plasma should be separated from cells by centrifugation within 30 minutes of sample
collection.
(1) If hemostasis analyses are to be done by a distant laboratory, plasma should be frozen
rapidly and kept frozen for transport to the laboratory. Slow freezing or thawing and refreezing
promotes ice crystal formation and precipitation of coagulation factors (cryoprecipitation).
Factor VIll:C is particularly vulnerable to these effects and APTT test results will be
inconsistent.
(2) Plasma held under refrigeration at 4°C is generally stable for 48 hours
(3) Activity of factors Vll and Vll is lost quickly at room temperature, although species
variation has been observed. Factor Vll and Vlll activity appears to be more stable in equine
citrated plasma.
2. Methods
a. Reference values for citrated plasma clotting tests may change when new lots of reagents are
used, even if the reagents are obtained from the same vendor.
b. Because different instruments and sources of reagents cause variations in hemostasis test
 results, each laboratory performing these tests should establish and provide appropriate species-
specific reference intervals. Human reference intervals are inappropriate for interpretation of
veterinary test results.
c. When in doubt about appropriate reference values, the patient's test results can be compared to
those of a healthy animal of the same species that are determined at the same time.
d. Laboratory instruments for routine coagulation screening tests use either mechanical or optical
systems to detect initial fibrin clot formation. Manual test methods are available, but are seldom
 used because test results are less reproducible.
(1) Optical detection of clotting is based on the increased turbidity of recalcified, citrated
plasma as fibrin forms. Values from coagulation screening tests from many animal species
are significantly shorter than those of humans. Therefore, optical-based instrument assays
designed for human specimens must be modified to detect the earlier clot formation that occurs
in animal specimens. If the assays are not modified, the clot may form in some animal specimens
before the instrument can detect it and the instrument will report a “failure" of clot
formation.
(2) Some veterinary hemostasis laboratories use a mechanical fibrin clot detection method
(Fibrometer?) in which a hooked electrode is moved up and down through the sample next to
a stationary electrode. The moving electrode is electrically activated when it is at the highest
point outside the sample and inactivated when it is moving through the sample. When a fibrin
strand forms in the sample, the hook pulls the fibrin strand up out of the sample mixture. The
electrode becomes electrically activated above the mixture by the fbrin strand that completes a
circuit between moving and stationary electrodes. The completed circuit turns off the cam and
timer device and the time of the reaction is recorded
(3) Several point-of-care instruments are available (SCA 2o00 Veterinary Coagulation
analyzer, Synbiotics, San Diego, CA; Idexx Coag DxIM Analyzer, Idexx Laboratories Inc.
HEMO STASIS
135
Westbrook, ME; VetscanTM VSpro, AbaxisIM, Union City, CA). The SCA 200O measures ACT,
PT, and APTT in non-anticoagulated whole blood (centrifugation and harvest of plasma is
not required). PT and APTT tests also are available in citrate anticoagulated whole blood
versions. Similarly, the Idexx Coag DxIM has cartridges to measure PT and APTT by use of
non-anticoagulated or citrated whole blood. The VetscanTM VSpro uses a single cartridge to
measure PT and APTT in citrated whole blood. Reference intervals must be established for
 these instruments and their reagents.
3. Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)
a. APTT measures time (seconds) required for fibrin clot formation in citrated plasma after
addition of a contact activator of the intrinsic system, phospholipid that substitutes for platelet-
derived phospholipid, and calcium.
b. Prolonged APTT indicates a coagulation factor deficiency in the intrinsic (factors Xll, Xl, IX,
 and Vlll) or common (factors X, V, II, and fibrinogen) pathways.
(1)Prolonged APTT is expected in animals affected with hemophilia A or B (deficiency in factor
antagonism or deficiency, and liver failure.
(2) Factor activity must be less than 30% of normal to prolong the APTT.
(a) Hemophiliac carriers (heterozygotes) do not bleed and are not detected by the APTT
because they have 40% to 60% of normal factor VIlI or IX activity
(b) Animals with VWD often have decreased factor VIll:C, but activity usually does not
decrease below 40% of normal. These individuals may have petechial hemorrhages but the
APTT will be within reference interval (Case 28).
(c)  Mild or early rodenticide toxicosis causes prolongation of PT before prolongation of
APTT because factor Vll has the shortest half-life of the vitamin-K-dependent factors.
(3) Thrombocytopenia does not affect APTT because the test reagents provide phospholipid
 In contrast, platelets provide phospholipid for the ACT test and for clotting in vivo.
C.
 Heparin, administered for therapeutic anticoagulation, will prolong APTT.
d. Fibrinogen and factor Vlll concentrations may increase in inflammatory disease with
subsequent decrease in APTT, often shorter than the reference interval.
2.
 APTT test may be used to determine the activity of specific coagulation factors if known factor-
deficient plasmas are available (see below).
f. APTT test, as typically performed, is not affected by prekallikrein deficiency The activator
ssq ' r sie a  r   si nsn ii    s
the augmentation role of prekallikrein. Use of particulate activators, rather than ellagic acid, will
 result in a prolonged APTT in individuals with hereditary prekallikrein deficiency.
 Some variation is allowed in incubation time of citrated plasma samples with test reagents
the system to 37oC, but the equilibration time is not extensive enough to cause heat-induced
 degradation of reagents (typically five minutes). Exact incubation times prior to recalcification
may be necessary to obtain reproducible APTT test results on bovine samples.
4. Prothrombin time (PT)
a. PT measures time (seconds) required for fibrin clot formation to occur in citrated plasma after
addition of tissue thromboplastin (factor Il) and calcium.
(1) Reagents that contain rabbit brain or synthetic tissue thromboplastin are preferred for
determination of PT in mammals.
(2) Chicken brain tissue thromboplastin must be used for reliable determination of PT in birds.
b. Prolonged PT indicates coagulation factor deficiency in extrinsic (factor VIl) or common
(factors X, V, II and fibrinogen) pathways of coagulation.
(1) Prolonged PT is expected in hereditary factor VlI deficiency, DIC, vitamin K antagonism
or deficiency, and liver failure.
136
CHAPTER 4
(2) Factor activity must be less than 30% of normal to prolong PT.
(3) In mild or early stages of rodenticide toxicosis, deficiency of vitamin K-dependent factor
Vll precedes other factor deficiencies because of its shorter half-life (approximately four to
six hours). In these cases, PT may be prolonged while APTT and ACT are within reference
interval. Therefore, PT is the preferred test for assessment of effectiveness of vitamin K
replacement therapy.
(4)  Protein C (half-life approximately eight to 10 hours), a vitamin-K-dependent
(5) Thrombocytopenia does not affect PT because test reagents include phospholipid for
assembly of coagulation complexes.
5. Thrombin time (TT)
a. TT measures time (seconds) required for fibrin clot formation to occur in citrated plasma afte1
addition of calcium and thrombin.
b. TT largely depends upon functional fibrinogen concentration. Hypofibrinogenemia (less
than l00 mg/dL) prolongs TT. Hypofibrinogenemia may include excessive consumption of
fbrinogen (DIC), hereditary deficiency of fibrinogen, or presence of dysfunctional fibrinogen
(dysfibrinogenemia).
C. Infrequently, inhibitors may be present that prolong TT.
(1) Inhibitors may promote inactivation of thrombin (e.g., heparin) or compete with patient
fibrinogen for thrombin-binding (e.g., dysproteinemias).
(2) Sources of heparin may be from patient blood (prior administration of heparin), collection
of blood specimen from an intravenous catheter that is periodically flushed with heparinized
saline solution, or collection of blood specimen in the wrong anticoagulant (heparin instead of
sodium citrate).
d. Vitamin K deficiency or antagonism does not affect TT because exogenous thrombin is added
for performance of the test.
6. Specific factor analysis
a. With use of commercial immunoabsorbed plasma specimens that are deficient in a given
clotting factor, the APTT test can detect specific factor deficiencies. Commercial and patient
plasmas are mixed in a l:l ratio. If the commercial plasma and patient plasma are deficient in the
 sme clotting factor, the APTT will be prolonged. If the commercial plasma provides the clotting
factor that is deficient in the patient, the APTT will be within reference interval (normal) because
 more than 30% of the missing factor activity is restored.
b. Specific factor analyses are available in specialized veterinary or comparative hemostasis
laboratories. Specific factor analysis is useful to identify the most commonly inherited disorders
of hemostasis in animals, which include hemophilia A (factor Vlll deficiency) and hemophilia B
(factor IX deficiency).
coagulation and directly activates the common pathway. A prolonged Russell viper venom time
implies deficiency in one or more factors (factors X, V, Il or fibrinogen) within the common
pathway.
C. Fibrinogen concentration (Chapter 6).
1. The most sensitive assay for detection of hypo- or dysfibrinogenemia is TT determination. TT is
inversely proportional to functional fibrinogen concentration (see above discussion)
 2. Heat precipitation is a relatively crude technique to measure fibrinogen concentration. It may
verify the presence of normal, decreased, or increased fibrinogen concentration, but the assay is
 unable to distinguish normal fbrinogen from dysfunctional fibrinogen.
3. An estimate of fibrinogen concentration also can be made by calculation of the difference
between plasma and serum protein concentrations.
HE MO STASIS
137
D. Fibrin(ogen) degradation products (FDPs) are produced through plasmin-mediated degradation of
both fbrinogen and fibrin.
1. Methods of measurement
a. FDPs are measured in citrated plasma by use of a latex agglutination assay. Particles coated
with antibody to human fibrinogen fragments agglutinate when FDPs are available for binding.
 Degree of agglutination provides a semi-quantitative assessment of plasma FDP concentration.
The latex agglutination assay detects FDPs across species lines.
b. Because FDPs include degradation products of both fibrinogen and fibrin, they cannot be used
to distinguish between primary and secondary fibrinolysis.
2. Increased FDPs
a. Increased FDP production occurs in DIC as a result of diffuse, microvascular thrombosis.
(1) In acute uncompensated DIC, FDPs are more than 20 μg/mL.
(2) In compensated DIC, FDPs may range from more than 5 to less than 20μg/mL.
b. FDP production also may increase after severe internal bleeding or localized thrombosis (such
as jugular vein thrombosis in horses).
c. FDPs may increase in patients with severe liver disease due to lack of clearance.
E. D-dimer is produced through plasmin-mediated degradation of cross-linked fibrin; therefore,
 D-dimer is a specific indicator of secondary fibrinolysis.
1. Methods of measurement
a. D-dimer concentration is measured in citrated plasma by use of immunologic methods that are
semi-quantitative (latex agglutination) or quantitative (immunoturbidimetric). These assays use a
 monoclonal antibody that recognizes the D-dimer epitope.
b. Some assays for human D-dimer can be used for measurement of D-dimer concentration in
citrated plasma specimens from dogs, cats, and horses. Successful application of a particular assay
depends on antibody cross-reactivity between species.
2. In human patients, D-dimer is most commonly applied as a test to exclude the presence of
pulmonary thromboembolism or venous thrombosis. In dogs, high D-dimer concentration has been
shown to be a sensitive indicator of thromboembolic disease, including DIC
3. D-dimer concentration may be increased in a variety of disease states that result in internal
hemorrhage and thrombosis, and is not always an indicator of pathologic thromboembolism.
F. AT interacts with heparin to irreversibly inactivate thrombin and other serine proteases. AT activity
is measured on automated chemistry instruments by use of a chromogenic substrate.
1. AT is a small protein synthesized by hepatocytes. AT activity may be low as a result of decreased
production due to decreased liver function, consumption in hypercoagulative disorders such as
DIC, or loss in protein-losing enteropathy or nephropathy.
a. In healthy individuals, AI activity typically ranges from 85% to 125% of the activity found in
plasma control samples that are assayed concurrently. Control samples consist of species-specific
pooled plasma from healthy animals or human control plasma samples.
b. Animals with reduced AT activity (below 80% of the control values) are considered to be at
increased risk of thrombosis.
c. Animals with AI activity of below 70% of the control value may be unresponsive to heparin
treatment, and AT replacement therapy is required.
G. Thrombin-antithrombin complexes (TAIs) form rapidly when thrombin is produced. Increased TAT
concentration may reflect systemic activation of coagulation. TAT can be measured by ELISA or RIA
assays in dogs, horses, pigs, and sheep with immunologic reagents developed for people.
1. This protein can be quantitated by chromogenic and Laurell rocket techniques.
138
CHAPTER4
Hypercoagulable
10 millimeters 
 Norma]
Hypocoagulable
i s  a  s a  s  o  t 
normal, hypocoagulable).
2. Protein C concentration decreases in hypercoagulative disorders (e.g., septicemia in horses and
 dogs) and in vitamin K antagonism.
3. Hereditary deficiency of protein C is an autosomal dominant disorder; heterozygosity is
associated with thrombosis in human patients. Patients with homozygous protein C defciency
develop fatal neonatal purpura fulminans (fulminant thrombosis).
1. Assays for fibrinolytic factors
1. Commercial reagent kits are available for human plasma, but fail to function with animal
 plasminogens. Modifications of the assay are required, including acidification and neutralization of
plasma and use of urokinase as activator rather than streptokinase (the activator included in human
reagent kits). Plasminogen activity has been measured in horses, cattle, dogs, and cats.
2. Assays for Qz-antiplasmin, tPA, and PAI have not been evaluated for clinical use in veterinary
medicine.
J. Thromboelastography (TEG) measures viscoelastic changes that occur in blood during
polymerization of fibrin. Because this method evaluates clot formation in whole blood, it provides an
assessment of the influence of cellular elements of blood as well as plasma coagulation factors. TEG
tracings can be used to recognize both hyper- and hypocoagulable states, and may guide decisions
regarding the need for blood transfusion or other blood products (Figure 4.4).
1. Methods
a. TEG can be performed as a patient-side test with fresh whole blood, but in veterinary medicine
TEG is more commonly performed with whole blood anticoagulated with sodium citrate.
Anticoagulated blood samples are held for a standard period of time (approximately 30 minutes)
prior to addition of calcium chloride to initiate coagulation. Activators of coagulation (kaolin or
tissue factor) also may be added to the sample immediately before recalcification.
b. A computerized thromboelastograph such as the TEG 50oo? (Haemoscope Corp., Niles, IL)
is used for analysis. Citrated whole blood is added to a disposable cup that contains calcium
chloride. A disposable pin connected to a torsion wire is lowered into the cup. The cup oscillates,
and initially the blood moves freely around the pin. As the blood sample clots, the motion of the
cup is impeded. This generates torque, which is detected by the torsion wire and transmitted to
 the computer where it is converted into a graphical representation.
c. Parameters that are measured from TEG tracings include time to initial fibrin formation
(reaction time; R), time from initial clot formation until a predetermined clot strength is
reached (clotting time; K), rate of clot formation (angle; α), and maximum clot strength (MA)
(Figure 4.5). R and K are affected primarily by coagulation factor activity. The angle depends on
coagulation factor activity, fibrinogen concentration, and platelets. MA is determined primarily
by platelet number and function, with continued contributions from factors related to fbrin
formation.
HE MO STASIS
139
10 millimeters
angle
MA
FIGURE 4.5. TEG tracing. Solid line(s) show the racing produced by the instrument as formation of a fbrin clot
is detected. Verical lines indicate regions of the tracing that define R and K R is the time when lines of the racing
diverge by l mrm, which indicates initial fibrin formation. K is the time from R until the lines diverge by 20 mm
and is a measure of the rate of clot forrmation. The angle between the baseline and a line drawn tangential to the
TEG curve beginning at R is also an indication of the rate of clot formation. MA is the maximum divergence of the
s n    e d   o
REFERENCES
Avgeris S, Lothrop CD, McDonald TP: 1990. Plasma von Willebrand factor concentration and thyroid
function in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:921-924.
Ayers JR, Leipold HW, Padgett GA: 1988. Lesions in Brangus cattle with Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
Vet Pathol 25:432-436.
Bajaj MS, Birktoft JJ, Steer SA, et al: 200l. Structure and biology of tissue factor pathway inhibitor.
Thromb Haemostasis 86:959-972.
Bateman SW, Mathews KA, Abrams-Ogg ACG: 1998. Disseminated intravascular coagulation in dogs:
Review of the literature. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 8:29-45.
Benson KF, Li FQ, Person RE, et al: 2003. Mutations associated with neutropenia in dogs and humans
disrupt intracellular transport of neutrophil elastase. Nature Genetirs 35:90-96.
Berndt MC, Shen Y, Dopheide SM, et al: 2001. The vascular biology of the glycoprotein Ib-IX-V
complex. Thromb Haemostasis 86:178-188.
Boisver AM, Swenson CL, Haines CJ: 2ool. Serum and plasma latex agglutination tests for detection of
fibrin(ogen) degradation products in clinically ill dogs. Vet Clin Pathol 30133-136.
Boudreaux MK, Dillon AR, Ravis WR, et al: l99l. The effects of treatment with aspirin and aspirin/
dipyridamole in heartworm-negative, heartworm-infected, and embolized heartworm-infected dogs. Am
J Vet Res 52:1992-1999
 Boudreaux MK, Dillon AR, Sartin EA, et al: 1991. The effects of treatment with ticlopidine in
heartworm-negative, heartworm-infected, and embolized heartworm-infected dogs. Am J Vet Res
52:2000-2006.
Boudreaux MK, Crager C, Dillon AR, et al: 1994. Identification of an intrinsic platelet function defect
in Spitz dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8:93-98.
Boudreaux MK, Kvam K, Dillon AR, et al: 1996. Type I Glanzmann's thrombasthenia in a Great
Pyrenees dog. Wet Pathol 33:503-511.
Boudreaux MK, Catalfamo JL: 2ool. The molecular basis for Glanzmann's thrombasthenia in
Otterhounds. Am J Vet Res 62:1797-1804.
140
CHAPTER 4
Boudreaux MK, Panangala VS, Bourne C: 1996. A platelet activation-specific monoclonal antibody that
recognizes a receptor-induced binding site on canine fibrinogen. Vet Pathol 33:4l9-427.
Boudreaux MK, Lipscomb DL: 2ool. Clinical, biochemical, and molecular aspects of Glanzmann's
Thrombasthenia in humans and dogs. Vet Pathol 38:249-260.
Boudreaux MK, Catalfamo JL, Klok M: 2007. Calcium Diacylglycerol Guanine Nucleotide Exchange
Factor I gene mutations associated with loss of function in canine platelets. Iranstational Research
150:81-92.
Boudreaux MK, Schmutz S, French PS: 2007. Calcium diacylglycerol guanine nucleotide exchange
factor I (CalDAG-GEFI) gene mutations in a thrombopathic Simmental calf. Wet Pathol 44:932-935
Boudreaux MK: 2008. Characteristics, diagnosis, and treatment of inherited platelet disorders in
mammals. J Am Vet Med Assor 233:1251-1259.
Boudreaux MK, Wardrop KJ, Kiklevich V, et al: 20l0. A mutation in the canine kindlin-3 gene
associated with increased bleeding risk and susceptibility to infections. Thromb Haemostasis
103:475-477
Boudreaux MK: 2010. Platelet structure. In: Wardrop KJ, Weiss D (eds): Schalm's Veterinary
Hematology, 6th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames, pp 56l-568.
Bounous Dl, Stedman NL: 200o. Normal avian hematology chicken and turkey. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl
JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
Philadelphia, pp. 1147-1154.
semiquantitative latex-agglutination assays for D-dimer measurement in canine plasma. Vet Clin Pathot
38:7882
Brooks MB, Dodds JW, Raymond SL: 1992. Epidemiologic features of von Willebrand's disease in
Doberman Pinschers, Scottish Terriers, and Shetland Sheepdogs: 260 cases (1984-1988). J Am Vet Med
Assoc 200:1123-1127.
Brooks M: 1999. A review of canine inherited bleeding disorders: Biochemical and molecular strategies
for disease characterization and carrier detection. J Heredity 90:112-118.
Veterinary Internal Medicine. Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 5th ed. WB. Saunders Co., Philadelphia.
pp. 1829-1841.
Brooks MB, Catalfamo JL, Brown HA, et al: 2002. A hereditary bleeding disorder of dogs caused by a
lack of platelet procoagulant activity. Blood 99:2434-2441.
Brooks MB, Catalfamo JL, Friese P, et al: 2007. Scott syndrome dogs have impaired coated-platelet
formation and calcein-release but normal mitochondrial depolarization. J Thromb Haemostasis
5:1972-1974.
Bruchim I, Aroch I, Saragusty J, et al: 2008. Disseminated intravascular coagulation. Compend Cont
Edur Prart Vet 30:El-E15.
citrated plasma. Vet Clin Pathol 29:51-54.
Callan MB, Bennett JS, Phillips DK, et al: 1995. Inherited platelet delta-storage pool disease in dogs
causing severe bleeding: An animal model for a specific ADP deficiency. Thromb Haemostasis
74:949-953.
HE MO STASIS
141
Callan MB, Giger U: 200l. Assessment of a point-of-care instrument for identification of primary
hemostatic disorders in dogs. Am J Vet Res 62:652-658
Catalfamo JL, Raymond SL, White JG, et al: 1986. Defective platelet-fibrinogen interaction in
hereditary canine thrombopathia. Blood 67:1568-1577.
Christopherson PW, Insalaco IA, van Santen VL, et al: 2006. Characterization of the cDNA encoding
cllb and β3 in normal horses and two horses with Glanzmann thrombasthenia. Vet Pathol 43:78-82.
Christopherson PW, van Santen VL, Livesey L, et al: 2007. A 10-base-pair deletion in the gene
encoding platelet glycoprotein Ib associated with Glanzmann Thrombasthenia in a horse. J Vet Intern
Med 21:196-198.
Cowan SM, Bartges JW, Gompf RE, et al: 2004. Giant platelet disorder in the Cavalier King Charles
Spaniel. Exp Hematol 32:344-350.
Davis B, Toivio-Kinnucan M, Schuller S, et al: 2008. Mutation in Sl-tubulin correlates with the
macrothrombocytopenia of Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. J Vet Intern Med 22:540-545
 Debili N, Coulombel L, Croisille L, et al: 1996. Characterization of a bipotent erythro-megakaryocytic
progenitor in human bone marrow. Blood 88:1284-1296.
DelGiudice LA, White GA: 2009. The role of tissue factor and tissue factor pathway inhibitor in health
and disease states. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 19:23-29
DiGiacomo RF, Hammond WP, Kunz LL, et al: 1983. Clinical and pathologic features of cyclic
hematopoiesis in grey collie dogs. Am J Pathol 1ll:224-233.
Domestic Animals, 5th ed. Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 24l-283.
Donahue SM, Otto CM: 2005. Thromboelastography: A tool for measuring hypercoagulability,
hypocoagulability, and fibrinolysis. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 15:9-16.
 Dunn JK, Heath MF, Jefferies AR, et al: 1999. Diagnostic and hematologic features of probable essential
thrombocythemia in two dogs. Vet Clin Pathol 28:131-138.
Epstein KL, Brainard BM, Lopes MA, et al: 2009. Thromboelastography in 26 healthy horses with and
without activation by recombinant human tissue factor. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 19:96-101.
Estrin MA, Wehausen CE, Lessen CR, et al: 2006. Disseminated intravascular coagulation in cats. J Vet
Intern Med 20:1334-1339
Fox JEB: 2001. Cytoskeletal proteins and platelet signaling. Thromb Haemostasis 86:198-213.
Frojmovic MM, Wong T, Searcy GP: 1996. Platelets from bleeding Simmental cattle have a long delay
aggregation. Thromb Haemostasis 76:1047-1052.
Gentry PA, Cheryk LA, Shanks RD, et al: 1997. An inherited platelet function defect in a Simmental
crossbred herd. Can J Vet Res 6l:128-133.
Griffen A, Callan MB, Shofer FS, et al: 2003. Evaluation of a canine D-dimer point-of-care test kit for
use in samples obtained from dogs with disseminated intravascular coagulation, thromboembolic
disease, and hemorrhage. Am J Vet Res 64:1562-1569.
Hickford FH, Barr SC, Erb HN: 20ol. Effect of carprofen on hemostatic variables in dogs. Am J Vet Res
62:1642-1646.
Jergens AE, Turrentine MA, Kraus KH, et al: 1987. Buccal mucosa bleeding times of healthy dogs and
of dogs in various pathologic state, including thrombocytopenia, uremia, and von Willebrand's disease.
Am J Vet Res 48:1337-1342.
142
CHAPTER 4
Jin RC, Voetsch B, Loscalzo J: 2005. Endogenous mechanisms of inhibition of platelet function.
Microcirculation 12:247-258
Johnson JS, Laegreid WS, Basaraba RJ, et al: 2006. Truncated gamma-glutamyl carboxylase in
Rambouillet sheep. Vt Pathol 43:430-437.
Johnstone IB, Lotz F: l979. An inherited platelet function defect in basset hounds. Can Vet J
20:211-215.
Kaser A, Brandacher G, Steurer W, et al: 2o0l. Interleukin-6 stimulates thrombopoiesis through
thrombopoietin: role in inflammatory thrombocytosis. Blood 98:2720-2725.
Konigsberg W, Kirchhofer D, Riederer MA, et al: 200l. The TF:Vlla complex: Clinical significance,
structure-function relationships and its role in signaling and metastasis. Thromb Haemostasis
86:757-771.
by use of impedance or buffy coat analysis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assor 219:1552-1556.
Kramer JW, Davis WC, Prieur DJ: 1977. The Chediak-Higashi syndrome of cats. Lab Invest
36:554562.
Kristensen AT: 2000. Section VIl, Hemostasis: Platelets-clinical platelet disorders. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl
JG, Jain NC (eds): Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins
Philadelphia, pp. 467-515.
Kunieda I, Nakagiri M, Takami M, et al: 1999. Cloning of bovine LYST gene and identification of a
missense mutation associated with Chediak-Higashi syndrome of cattle. Mammalian Genome
10:1146-1149.
Lanevschi A, Kramer JW, Greene SA, et al: 1996. Evaluation of chromogenic substrate assays for
fibrinolytic analytes in dogs. Am J Vet Res 57:11241130.
Leclere M, Lavoie U-P, Dunn M, et al: 2009. Evaluation of a modified thromboelastography assay
initiated with recombinant human tissue factor in clinically healthy horses. Vt Clin Pathol 38:462-466
Lipscomb DL, Bourne C, Boudreaux MK: 2000. Two genetic defects in cIIb are associated with Type I
Glanzmann's thrombasthenia in a Great Pyrenees dog: A 14-base insertion in Exon 13 and a splicing
defect of Intron 13.Vet Pathol 37:581-588.
Livesey L, Christopherson P, Hammond A, et al: 2005. Platelet dysfunction (Glanzmann's
Thrombasthenia) in horses. J Vet Intern Med 19:917-919.
Lothrop CD, Candler RV, Pratt HL, et al: 199l. Characterization of platelet function in cyclic
hematopoietic dogs. Exp Hematol 19:916-922
Macieira S, Rivard GE, Champagne J, et al: 2007. Glanzmann thrombasthenia in an Oldenburg filly. Vet
Clin Pathol 36:204-208.
Mason DJ, Abrams-Ogg A, Allen D, et al: 2002. Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy in a black Labrador
retriever. J Vet Intern Med 16:485-488.
Morrissey JH: Tissue factor: 2o0l. An enzyme cofactor and a true receptor. Thromb Haemostasis
86:66-74.
Nagasawa I, Hasegawa Y, Shimizu S, et al: 1998. Serum thrombopoietin level is mainly regulated by
megakaryocyte mass rather than platelet mass in human subjects. Br J Haematol 10l:242-244.
Nelson OL, Andreasen C: 2003. Utility of plasma D-dimer to identify thromboembolic disease in dogs.
J Vet Intern Med 17:830-834
HEMOSTASIS
143
inhibitory activity for feline blood cell counts. Vet Clin Pathol 30:124-132.
Norman EJ, Barron RCJ, Nash AS, et al: 200l. Prevalence of low automated platelet counts in cats:
Comparison with prevalence of thrombocytopenia based on blood smear estimation. Vet Clin Pathol
30:137-140
Padgett GA, Leader RW, Gorham JR, et al: 1964. The familial occurrence of the Chediak-Higashi
syndrome in mink and cattle. Genetics 49:505-512
 Papasouliotis K, Cue S, Graham M, et al: 1999. Analysis of feline, canine and equine hemograms using
the QBC VetAutoread. Vet Clin Pathol 28:109-115.
Pedersen HD, Haggstrom J, Olsen LH, et al: 2002. Idiopathic asymptomatic thrombocytopenia in
Rijken DC, Lijnen HR: 2008. New insights into the molecular mechanisms of the fbrinolytic system. J
Thromb Haemostasis 7:413
Sabino EP, Erb HN, Catalfamo JL: 2006. Development of a collagen-binding activity assay as a
screening test for type II von Willebrand disease in dogs. Am J Vet Res 67:242-249.
Searcy GP, Frojmovic MM, McNicol A, et al: 1994. Platelets from bleeding Simmental cattle mobilize
calcium, phosphorylate myosin light chain and bind normal numbers of fbrinogen molecules but have
abnormal cytoskeletal assembly and aggregation in response to ADP. Thromb Haemostasis 7l:240-246.
Sjaastad OV, Blom AK, Stormorken H, et al: 1990. Adenine nucleotides, serotonin, and aggregation
properties of platelets of blue foxes (Alopex lagopus) with the Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Am J Med
Genetirs 35:373-378.
Smith SA: 2009. The cell-based model of coagulation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 19:3-10.
Soute BA, Ulrich MM, Watson AD, et al: 1992. Congenital deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood
coagulation factors due to a defective vitamin K-dependent carboxylase in Devon Rex cats. Thromb
Haemostasis 68:521-525.
Steficek BA, Thomas JS, McConnell MF, et al: 1993. A primary platelet disorder of consanguineous
Simmental cattle. Thromb Res 72:145-153.
Stokol T, Brooks MB, Erb HN, et al: 2000. D-dimer concentrations in healthy dogs and dogs with
disseminated intravascular coagulation. Am J Vet Res 6l:393-398.
Stokol T: 2003. Plasma D-dimer for the diagnosis of thromboembolic disorders in dogs. Vet Clin N Am
Small Anim Prart 33:1419-1435.
   s  xi o g   a 'i  a  q 1 ios
fibrin(ogen) degradation products and D-dimer in healthy horses and horses with severe colic. Vet Clin
Pathol 34:375-382.
Tarnow I, Kristensen AI, Olsen LH, et al: 2005. Dogs with heart diseases causing turbulent high-
velocity blood flow have changes in platelet function and von Willebrand factor multimer distribution.
J Vet Intern Med 19:515-522.
Tasker S, Cripps PJ, Mackin AJ: 1999. Estimation of platelet counts on feline blood smears. Vet Clin
Pathol 28:42-45.
Thomas JS: 1996. von Willebrand's disease in the dog and cat. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim Pract
26:1089-1110.
144
CHAPTE R 4
Topper MJ, Prasse KW: 1996. Use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to measure thrombin-
antithrombin Ill complexes in horses with colic. Am J Vet Res 57:456-462
Tornquist SJ, Crawford TB: 1997. Suppression of megakaryocyte colony growth by plasma from foals
infected with equine infectious anemia virus. Blood 90:2357-2363.
platelet status in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. Vet Clin Pathol 37:266-271.
Umemura I, Katsuta O, Goryo M, et al: 1983. Pathological findings in young Japanese black cattle
affected with Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Jap J Vet Sti 45:241-246.
Vitrat N, Cohen-Solal K, Pique C, et al: 1998. Endomitosis of human megakaryocytes are due t0
abortive mitosis. Blood 9l:3711-3723
Wagg CR, Boysen SR, Bedard C: 2009. Thromboelastography in dogs admitted to an intensive care
unit. Vet Clin Pathol 38:453-461.
Weiss DJ, Monreal L, Angles AM, et al: 1996. Evaluation of thrombin-antithrombin complexes and
Fibrin fragment D in carbohydrate-induced acute laminitis. Res Vet Sei 6l:157-159.
51:1080-1085.
Welles EG, Williams MA, Tyler JW, et al: 1993. Hemostasis in cows with endotoxin-induced mastitis
Am J Vet Res 54:1230-1234.
Welles EG, Boudreaux MK, Crager CS, et al: 1994. Platelet function and antithrombin, plasminogen,
and fibrinolytic activities in cats with heart disease. Am J Vet Res 55:619-627.
thromboelastography on citrated whole blood from clinically healthy dogs. Vet Clin Pathol 34:389-393.
Winberg B, Jensen AL, Johansson Pl, et al: 2008. Thromboelastographic evaluation of hemostatic
function in dogs with disseminated intravascular coagulation. J Vet Intern Med 22:357-365
Wilkerson MJ, Shuman W, Swist S, et al: 200l. Platelet size, platelet surface-associated IgG, and
reticulated platelets in dogs with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. Vet Clin Pathol 30:14l-149.
Wilkerson MJ, Shuman W: 200l. Alterations in normal canine platelets during storage in EDTA
anticoagulated blood. Vet Clin Pathol 30:107-113.
Zelmanovic D, Hetherington EJ: 1998. Automated analysis of feline platelets in whole blood, including
platelet count, mean platelet volume, and activation state. Vet Clin Pathol 27:2-9.
Chapter 5
WATER, ELECTROLYTES,
AND ACID BASE
Jeanne Wright George, DVM, PhD, and Shanon M. Zabolotzky, DVM
TOTAL BODY WATER AND OSMOLALITY
1. TOTAl BODY WATER (TBW)
A. TBW is approximately 60% of body weight in healthy, non-obese adult animals.
B. TBW is divided among multiple sub-volumes or spaces:
1. Intracellular fluid (ICF)
2. Extracellular fluid (ECF), which can be further subdivided:
a. Blood. The term "volemia" describes changes in blood volume (e.g., hypovolemia is
decreased blood volume).
b. Intercellular fluid
c. Transcellular fluid, including peritoneal, pericardial, and pleural fluids. These areas are called
the “third space."
dl. Gastrointestinal tract. The quantity of fluid within the gastrointestinal tract can be quite large
in ruminants.
C. TBW volume (hydration status) is primarily controlled by water intake (thirst) and renal output.
Water loss via sweating, salivation, or panting may have minor effects.
1. These control mechanisms respond to the "effective circulating volume." This is the portion of
ECF that effectively perfuses tissues and stimulates volume receptors.
2. The effective circulating volume is influenced not only by blood volume, but also by arterial
blood pressure, arterial resistance, and delivery of blood to volume receptors.
D. Decreased total body water (dehydration) (Cases 3, 6, 8, 9, 14, 18, 22, 23)
1. Dehydration is manifested as decreased body weight (e.g., 10% dehydration is a 10% decrease in
body weight).
2. Dehydration is best evaluated by accurate measurement of loss of body weight; this is rarely
attained in clinical practice.
3. Dehydration is most often inferred by clinical evidence of hypovolemia. Loss of skin elasticity,
dryness of mucous membranes, retraction of eyes, and signs of shock are evidence of dehydration.
4. Certain laboratory abnormalities, especially increased hematocrit, serum or plasma total
proteins, albumin urea, and creatinine, along with high urine specifc gravity, can help confrm the
clinical finding of dehydration.
a. Many other conditions alter these values (e.g., renal disease, anemia); therefore, they should
be used only in conjunction with physical examination.
145
146
CHAPTER 5
b. Once baseline values are established for these analyses, day-to-day changes are fairly sensitive
markers of changes in hydration status.
E. Increased total body water (Case 19)
aa on i si i iq ian aoq pasi o as i a si iam ao ps 1
in clinical practice.
2. Increased total body water accumulates in extracellular fluid or third spaces (e.g., edema,
ascites, hydrothorax). Clinical examination is used to identify sites of fluid accumulation
3. Hypovolemia and increased TBW may occur at the same time when water accumulates in third
spaces or the gastrointestinal tract (especially in ruminants). Clinical evaluation of the patient is
the best way to recognize this situation.
II. EXTRACELLULAR OSMOLALITY
number of solute particles/unit volume of solution. For ECF, osmolality or osmolarity are about equal.
health. Changes in ECF osmolality cause shifts between the ECF and intracellular fluid (ICF), as water
moves passively to the compartment with the higher osmolality
C. Electrolytes and small molecules (e.g., glucose, urea) are the major contributors to osmolality. Large
molecules (e.g., proteins) contribute little to osmolality.
D. Tonicity is the effective osmolality of a solution—the concentration of solutes that can cause shifts
of HzO across a semipermeable membrane. Only solutes that do not cross a semipermeable membrane
(i.e., effective osmoles) contribute to the tonicity of a solution. Because urea freely passes between the
ECF and ICF, it is an ineffective osmole that does not contribute to tonicity
E. Serum osmolality
1. Serum osmolality is used as a measure of ECF osmolality, but it cannot be used as a measure of
total body water.
 aad aq uo 'anssd odea no uissdap d zaa u pasq 'sn nn 7
an osmometer. Results are expressed as milliosmoles/kilogram (mOsm/kg)
3. Serum osmolality can be estimated based on the most numerous osmoles: electrolytes, glucose
and urea. Iwo formulas correlate well with measured osmolality.
a. For samples with normal glucose and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentrations:
mOsm/kg = 2[Na+ + K+(mmol/L)].
b. For samples with either increased glucose or BUN concentration:
mOsm/kg = 1.86([ Na+ + K+(mmol/L)]+ [glucose (mg/dl)÷ 18] +[BUN (mg/dl)÷ 2.8].
4. Ideally, the formula for calculation of osmolality should be validated for electrolyte measurement
techniques used by a given laboratory.
F. Osmolal or osmolar gap
(also called the osmolar gap).
2. In health, the size of the osmolal gap depends on both the method used to measure osmolality
and electrolyte concentrations and the mathematical formula used to estimate osmolality For most
calculations, the osmol gap ranges from -5 to 15 mOsm/L.
molecular-weight substances (e.g., ethylene glycol, propylene glycol). Estimation of serum
osmolality alone does not reveal this abnormality.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE 
¥147
G. Hyperosmolality
1. All animals that are hypernatremic also are hyperosmolal (Cases 29 and 34)
2. Accumulation of other endogenous solutes (e.g, glucose, BUN) also can produce
hyperosmolality (Cases 15, 20, 22).
3. Hypertonicity, an increase in effctive osmoles (e.g., Na*, glucose, ethylene glycol), causes water
to shift from the ICF to the ECF
a. Shift of water to the ECF causes cellular shrinkage.
b. Dehydration may be masked and hypovolemia may not be evident on physical examination
because of these internal water shifts.
c. Rapid return of hypertonic ECF to isotonicity causes cellular edema, which may have dire
consequences. For example, cerebral cellular edema can produce damage to the brain that leads
to death.
4. Not all instances of hyperosmolality produce hypertonicity Increased BUN concentration does
not increase tonicity or produce ICF to ECF water shifts because BUN is freely diffusible across
membranes.
5. Hypertonic rumen contents from urea toxicity, propylene glycol toxicity, and grain overload can
produce a rapid shift of water from the ECF into the rumen. (In this situation, urea is an effective
osmole, because it does not readily cross the thick epithelium of the rumen into plasma.)
Secondary hypernatremic hyperosmolality may develop due to the rapid decrease in ECF water
without loss of sodium.
H. Hypo-osmolality
1. Hypo-osmolality always is associated with hyponatremia (Case 8), but not all cases of
hyponatremia are hypo-osmolal (e.g., when associated with hyperglycemia) (Cases 8, 15, 20, 22).
2. Hypo-osmolality produces hypotonicity, causing shifts of ECF water into the ICF with
subsequent cellular swelling.
3. Rapid development of hypo-osmolality can produce intravascular hemolysis and neurologic
disorders.
4. In dehydration accompanied by hypo-osmolality, loss of ECF volume is amplified by movement
of water into the ICF: Therefore, circulatory collapse and shock may occur.
DETERMINATION OF BLOOD GASES AND ELECTROLYTES
I. BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS
Blood gas analysis directly measures the partial pressure of oxygen (PO2), partial pressure of carbon
dioxide (PCO2), and hydrogen ion concentration (pH). The actual blood bicarbonate (HCO), standard
HCO3, and base excess (BE) values (mmol/L) are calculated from the measured values.
A. Instrumentation
1. Laboratory-based blood gas instruments measure blood gases by ion-selective electrodes.
2. Blood gas analysis also can be performed on hand-held instruments that can be used at the
patient's side. Manufacturers' instructions for sample handling and quality control must be followed.
B. Sample management
1. Arterial vs. venous samples. Only arterial blood samples are suitable for PO, determinations.
Either arterial or venous samples are adequate for pH, HCO, and PCOz measurements, but
reference intervals differ. It is important to use the appropriate reference intervals based upon the
type of sample (arterial vs. venous).
2. The sample should be collected from a large, free-flowing vessel and not exposed to air before
measurement.
148
CHAPTER 5
should be covered with a tight-fitting cap and delivered to the laboratory or analyzed by a point of
care instrument as soon as possible.
4. Arterial samples should be analyzed immediately for accurate PO, determination. Analysis can
be delayed up to 30 minutes, if samples are collected in glass syringes and kept on ice. Oxygen
diffuses from room air through most plastic, producing falsely high results.
5. Blood pH and PCO, are more stable in samples than PO, and can be measured within 30
minutes, if samples are kept on ice.
6. Blood gas machines measure the blood sample at 37°C. Actual in vivo partial pressure of gas is
affected by body temperature. Therefore, the patient's body temperature should be taken and
reported to the laboratory or entered into the point of care instrument when a blood sample is
submitted. Knowledge of the patient's body temperature allows the laboratory to make the required
corrections in test values.
C. Arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PO)
1. PO2 can be used to determine the amount of O dissolved in plasma using the following
formula:
O2(mEq/L)= 0.01014x PO2
2. PO2 does not reflect the total O2 carried in the blood. Most O2 is combined with hemoglobin
and does not contribute to PO2.
3. The total O concentration depends on total hemoglobin, O2-carrying capability of hemoglobin,
body temperature, blood pH, erythrocytic 2,3-diphosphoglycerate concentration, and PO2. The PO2
 influences the percent saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen.
  a n      s  e       t
cage or anesthetic machine).
5. Low PO (hypoxemia) can occur in respiratory disorders or with derangement of the respiratory
control mechanisms (Case 24).
D. Partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2)
1. PCO, is proportional to dissolved CO, in the plasma.
2. Dissolved CO, is in equilibrium with carbonic acid (HCOs) as expressed by the formula
HCO (mmol/L) = 0.03× PCO2.
3. PCO, is a measure of alveolar ventilation. Decreased alveolar ventilation increases PCO2
(hypercapnia, also called hypercarbia) (Case 23), whereas increased ventilation decreases
PCO,(hypocapnia, also called hypocarbia).
E. Hydrogen ion concentration (pH)
1. Blood pH is maintained within narrow limits in health by proteinic, phosphate, and bicarbonate
buffer systems. The bicarbonate buffer system is the only one of these buffer systems that is
measured for clinical evaluation of the patient.
2. Decrease in blood pH is acidemia. The condition producing this change is acidosis (Case 18).
3. Increase in blood pH is alkalemia. The condition producing this change is alkalosis (Cases 22,
23, 24).
F. Bicarbonate ion (HCO)
1. HCO concentration is calculated from the pH and PCO, by the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation:
pH = 6.1 +log[HCO ÷(0.03 x PCO2)1; where 6.1 = pK of carbonic acid.
2. HCO concentration is maintained in health by the conservation and production of NaHCO by
the renal tubules.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
149
3. Blood gas analyzers report two calculations of HCO called the actual and standard HCO values.
a. Actual HCO is the value calculated from the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation.
people, the concentration of HCO if the plasma were exposed to a PCO, of 40mm Hg, and the
 presumed normal hemoglobin concentration of the blood.
c. Standard HCO; has questionable validity in domestic animals because of interspecies
variation in PCO, and HCO3
G. Base Excess
1. Many blood gas analyzers calculate base excess (BE), based on an expected value for blood from
a healthy person having a BE of O ± 2.
2. Standard HCO, measured hemoglobin, PCO2, and body temperature are used for BE calculations
3. BE is the mEq/L of strong base or acid added to the sample that would produce a pH of 7.40 at
37°C and PCO, of 40 mmHg.
4. BE reflects metabolic acid-base disorders. BE greater than O indicates metabolic alkalosis and BE
below O indicates metabolic acidosis.
5. The usefulness of BE as an indicator of metabolic acid-base status has been questioned for both
humans and animals.
6. In health, BE varies among domestic animals. It is usually above O in horses and ruminants and
below O for dogs and cats.
7. BE is often used to calculate the total body deficit or excess of HCO3, but the results should be
considered an estimate rather than an exact determination.
8. For most animal samples, BE and standard HCO add little information compared to actual
HCO; in determining appropriate fluid therapy in animals.
. TOTAL CO, CONTENt (TCO,)
ICO, is another way of measuring plasma HCO. TCO2 is the total CO2 gas released when a serum or
 plasma sample is mixed with a strong acid.
A. Measurement
 as n n i aq d  n s n    oi 
techniques. It is stable in samples handled for routine clinical chemistry.
2. Blood samples for TCO, should completely fll the sample tube. Collection of small volume
samples in large-volume tubes can produce falsely low test results due to diffusion into surrounding
air.
3. TCO2 can be calculated from blood gas data, and is reported by some blood gas analyzers
4. Severe muscle damage may cause falsely high TCO2 as measured by enzymatic technique. TCO2
measured by ion selective electrode or blood gas analysis is unaffected and can be used if
factitiously high TCO, is suspected in an animal with extensive muscle damage.
B. Components of TCO2
1. HCO is the major contributor to TCO2. Therefore, changes in TCO2 concentration are
interpreted as changes in HCO (Cases 6, 9, 15, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24).
2. Small amounts of TCO, come from dissolved HzCO and carbamino acids
primarily to the contribution of HzCO3
Il. PULSE OXIMEtRY
Pulse oximeters provide rapid, non-invasive evaluation of oxygen saturation of arterial hemoglobin
(SaO2).
150
CHAPTER 5
A. SaO, is proportional to arterial PO2 (PaO,). It is an indirect measure of arterial oxygenation.
B. Oximeter probes designed for people can be attached to various body sites of domestic animals to
provide estimated oxygen saturation (SpO2).
  yo uonose a u s and h aa os di s as 
0xygenated and reduced hemoglobin.
D. Different probes designed for human use result in variation in results from pulse oximetry, as well
as different rates of failure to produce readings.
E. Pulse oximetry has been found to be reliable in horses and dogs, but not in cats.
F. Oximetry is not a replacement for blood gas analysis, but it can be a useful technique to monitor
animals during surgery or other procedures requiring anesthesia.
IV. ACID-BASE REGULATION
A. Ratio of HCO7/H,CO; (HCO3 + [0.03 x PCO,])
1. The ratio is about 20:1 in most species (slightly less in the dog and cat) in health.
a. Decreases in the ratio cause acidemia and denote acidosis, while increases in the ratio cause
alkalemia and denote alkalosis.
b. The ratio, not individual concentrations, determines pH.
2. If either HCO or H,CO increases or decreases, normal homeostatic mechanisms cause changes
in the other component. The net effect is to return the ratio to 20:1.
a. Changes in HCO (called metabolic acidosis or metabolic alkalosis) produce respiratory
ultimately resolving the acid-base disturbance
b. Changes in HCO; (called respiratory acidosis or respiratory alkalosis) produce metabolic
compensation (changes in HCO) after a much longer period, often several days. In clinical
 practice, HzCO; concentration is assessed indirectly as PCO2. Ventilatory assistance or oxygen
therapy may be part of the treatment.
3. Compensation is an active physiologic process. Lesions in the respiratory or renal system interfere with
 normal compensation and potentiate the seriousness of the acid-base disorder.
4. Modulation of production of small organic acids, such as lactic acid and β-hydroxybutyric acid,
is another method of physiologic compensation for fluctuations in body pH (Chapter 6).
a. Lactic acid or B-hydroxybutyric acid production increases rapidly in response to either
respiratory or metabolic alkalosis
b. Increased concentration of these organic acids modulates pH increase by titrating the
HCO; in plasma.
C. Conversely, acidosis leads to a decrease in production of small organic acids.
d. The relative importance of this mechanism for pH control in disease states of animals is not
yet known.
5. Serum electrolyte values are needed to fully evaluate the cause of blood gas, pH, and HCO3
abnormalities as well as to determine appropriate therapy
B. Patterns of acid-base abnormalities (Table 5.1)
1. The common types of imbalance and laboratory differentiation are shown in Table 5.l. Note that
compensation produces unidirectional change in the components of the buffer to restore the HCO7/
HzCO, ratio (e.g., if HCO; is low, the compensatory change is a decrease in PCO2).
2. Overcompensation does not occur. Shifts in HCO and PCO, in opposite directions indicate
mixed respiratory and metabolic disorders (see Disorders of Respiratory Function).
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
151
TABlE 5.1.
LABORATORY DIFFERENTIATION OF ACID-BASE IMBALANCE.
Condition
Blood pH
PCO,
HCO,
HCO,/H,CO, ratiob
Metabolic acidosis
个个
N
个
个
 Uncompensated
 Partial compensationd
个
个
↑
↑
Respiratory acidosis
个
个
N
个
Uncompensated
 Partial compensation
↑
个
↑
↑
Metabolic alkalosis
个个
N
个
个个
Uncompensated
 Partial compensationd
↑
个
个
↑
Respiratory alkalosis
个
个
N
个个
 Uncompensated
 Partial compensation
个
个
个
个
*Total CO2 (TCO2) can be used as a close estimate of HCO, concentration.
HCO; concentration = 0.03 × PCO2; HCO/H;CO, is approximately equal to 20:1 in health.
 Arrows indicate direction of change from reference interval: ↑↑ or ↓1 = marked change, ↑ or  = mild to
moderate change, N = no change.
dRespiratory compensation ocurs within hours of onset of metabolic disorder.
Metabolic compensation may not occur for days after onset of respiratory disorder.
V. EleCTrOLYTeS AND ANION GaP
The electrolytes measured in most dinical situations are Na*, K+, Cl, and HCO as either HCO from
blood gas analysis or as TCO2
A. Methods of measurement
1. Sample management
a.
 Serum is the best sample for electrolyte analysis. Heparinized plasma also can be used.
b. Serum should be separated from the clot as quickly as possible and kept in an airtight
 container to prevent in vitro alteration.
c. Laboratories measure electrolytes either with or without prior dilution, techniques that give
slightly different results. Oftentimes, they do not state which technique is used, but should
provide that information on request.
2. Measurement techniques using undiluted smples:
a.
 Electrolytes are present only in the aqueous phase of serum, which constitutes about 96% of
serum volume in health. Electrolytes are excluded from the portion of serum comprised of
proteins and lipoproteins.
b. Measurement techniques that use undiluted samples give results as mmol/L of serum water,
whereas techniques using diluted samples give results as mmol/L of serum.
c. Values for healthy animals derived from techniques using undiluted samples are about
1.04-fold greater than those of other techniques.
d. Reference intervals are higher (especially for Nat and Cl) from laboratories using these
techniques.
e. Increases in the non-aqueous phase lipemia and hyperproteinemia) of serum does not affect
the test results (however, test results will be affected using diluted samples).
152
CHAPTER 5
f. Certain ion selective electrode (IsE) instruments use undiluted samples.
(1) Many electrolytes can be measured, including Na, K', Cl, TCO2, and ionized Ca (for
sample handling of the latter, see Chapter 11).
(2) Measurement is based on electrical potential across a membrane designed to be
selectively sensitive to a certain electrolyte.
(3) Machines are available to measure multiple electrolytes in a single sample using a series
of electrodes (e.g., Na*, K', Cl, and TCO2).
0. A point of care instrument that performs blood gas analysis and measures electrolyte
concentrations can be used on the clinic floor. It determines electrolyte concentrations in undiluted
samples by ISE techniques.
3. Techniques using diluted samples
a. Techniques using diluted samples measure electrolytes per volume of serum, including the
proteins and lipoprotein non-aqueous fractions of serum.
b. Reference intervals for these techniques are lower than those for techniques using undiluted
samples.
c. Falsely low values can occur in serum samples with an increased non-aqueous phase (e.g.,
lipemia, increased protein concentration).
d. Many instruments that measure electrolytes use diluted samples:
(1) Ion-specific electrodes. Many instruments using ISE technology use diluted samples.
(2) Flame photometry Nat and K+ concentration can be measured by the intensity of light
emitted when the sample is burned in a propane flame. An internal lithium standard is used
for calibration of the instrument.
(3) Cl can be measured by ISE, coulombmetric techniques, and colorimetric methods.
Bromine toxicosis or treatment with potasssium bromide (e.g., for seizures) may causes
falsely high Cl results by either ISE or colorimetric methods, but not by coulombmetric
methods.
B. Anion gap calculations
1. The anion gap (AG) is a calculated value
([Na++K+]-[Cl-+HCO 」)
that can aid in determining the cause of acid-base abnormalities. Total serum cations equal those
commonly measured (Na + K') plus all remaining unmeasured cations (UC). Total serum anions
equal those commonly measured (Cl + HCOs) plus all remaining unmeasured anions (UA) (Figure
5.1).
2. By the law of electrical neutrality,
a. Total cations = total anions.
b. Na++K++UC=Cl +HCO +UA.
3. Rearrangement of the above equations yields the following:
a. Na+ +K+ -Cl--HCO =UA-UC
b. AG = UA - UC.
4. Frequently, TCO, is used to calculate AG.
a. AG =([Na+ +K+]-[Cl-+ ICO])
5. AG calculated using HCO is slightly larger than AG calculated using TCO,. Therefore, each
calculation requires its own reference interval.
C. Interpretation of the anion gap
1. In health, the major anionic components of the AG are albumin (an anion at physiologic pH),
Mg", and some Yglobulins (cations at physiologic pH). Some antibiotics are cations and contribute
to the UC when present in large amounts
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACiD BASE
153
Total
Total
mEq/1
Cations
Anions
Ca++&Mg++
 Protein,
(unmeasured)
Organic Acids,
140
K
SO4 & HPO4
"AnionGap”=
(unmeasured)
Na+ +K+ -(HCOj + CI)
120
HCOj
100
Na+
80-
60-
C1
40-
20-
FIGURE 5.l. Ihe ionic composition of serum. Notice that the anion gap equals unmeasured anions minus
unmeasured cations and that total anions equal total cations.
2. The UC remain quite constant in health and disease. Most changes in AG occur
because of changes in UA, such as small organic acids, inorganic phosphate, albumin, and
exogenous toxins.
3. Increased AG occurs in many diseases, including lactic acidosis (lactate), diabetic ketoacidosis
(acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate), renal insufficiency (salts of uremic acids), and certain toxicities
(metabolites of ethylene glycol) (Cases 15, 18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 34). A false high anion gap may occur
with in vitro loss of HCO caused by improper sample handling.
4. Decreased anion gap is uncommon. Causes include hemodilution, hypoalbuminemia, and an
increase in certain cations (e.g., hypercalcemia)
5. Albumin is a major contributor to the AG and can influence the gap in two ways.
a.
Hyperalbuminemia increases AG; hypoalbuminemia decreases AG.
b.
 The number of Ht ions bound to albumin changes with blood pH.
(1) Alkalemia causes a small decrease in albumin-bound H', increasing the AG slightly
(2) Acidemia increases albumin bound H', decreasing the AG slightly.
c. Albumin-mediated changes in AG are primarily due to changes in albumin concentration,
rather than pH-mediated shifts in bound H'. In most instances, the influence on the AG gap is
mild, but can produce diffculties in its interpretation (e.g., an animal with lactic acidosis and
hypoalbuminemia may have a normal AG)
6. AG should be considered an aid in interpreting electrolyte data, not a precise measure of the
amount of salts of unmeasured acids in circulation.
154
CHAPTER 5
ACID-BASE INTERPRETATION BASED ON STRONG ION DIFFERENCE: STEWART'S SID THEORY
In 1983, PA. Stewart proposed an alternative theory of acid-base regulation. This theory was based on
d s   n  n  s sn  s    a
differs from classical acid-base interpretation. It is often referred to as the “strong ion difference" (SID)
influenced by other factors.
1. BASIS OF bLooD pH ACCoRDING tO SID tHEoRY:
A. PCO2 (which is converted to H,CO)
B. Total weak acids [Aul, primarily weak acid moieties on plasma proteins and phosphates
C. Strong ion difference (SID). Total SID is the difference between all cations and anions that
completely dissociate at body pH. It includes inorganic ions, such as Na', K', Cl Caf, Mg", and
organic ions of acids that completely disassociate at body pH, such as lactate, β-hydroxybutyric acid,
and acetoacetic acid.
D. Increased SID is associated with metabolic alkalosis and decreased SID with metabolic acidosis.
Il. LiMItATIoNS Of Sid ThEORY
A. Calculation of all the independent variables requires complicated equations that are best handled by
computers.
B. The equations developed for human plasma cannot be transferred to animal plasma until the
constants used to determine [Aul are determined experimentally.
IM. SIMPLIFIED SID THEORIES
A. Simplified SID calculations have been proposed to allow SID-based evaluation without the need for
complicated calculations.
  n n o '  s  sa     a
does not have a single definition.
IV. USEfULNESS OF SId tHEORY
A. Evaluation of TCO2, serum electrolytes, and AG usually suffices for interpretation of most
metabolic acid-base abnormalities in domestic animals.
B. The SID approach to evaluation of acid-base disorders is most helpful when multiple disorders
occur together, such as mixed metabolic acid-base disorders or acid-base disorders in a
hypoproteinemic patient.
VARIATIONS OF BLOOD pH AND ELECTROLYTE CONCENTRATIONS
I. CAUSES OF VARIATION IN blooD pH AND EleCTROLYTe CoNCENTraTIoNS
IN HEaLTHY ANiMAlS
A. Postprandrial increase in blood pH.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE 
155
1. In monogastric animals, ingestion of food leads to a transient but slight increase in blood pH.
2. Concomitantly, urine becomes alkaline (postprandrial alkaline tide).
3. Production and secretion of gastric HCl leads to an increase in plasma NaHCO that is rapidly
excreted by the kidneys, raising urine pH.
 e            t
B. Alteration of ruminant blood pH by manipulation of dietary electrolytes.
1. Iypical bovine diets have a net alkalinizing effect on the body, with a resultant slight increase in
blood pH and production of alkaline urine.
2. Diets can be acidified by increasing the number of strong inorganic anions in the diet in relation
to the number of strong inorganic cations.
C. Lowering blood pH, just prior to parturition, increases blood ionized Caf and reduces the
incidence of hypocalcemic postparturient paresis (milk fever) in cows.
D. The dietary cation anion difference (DCAD) is a calculation that quantifies the important ions that
determine the alkalinizing or acidifying affects of a diet. One commonly used formula is:
DCAD = Na+ +K -Cl-SO- (mEq/kg dry weight matter).
E. Effect of DCAD on blood and urine pH:
1. DCAD greater than O produces a slight metabolic alkalosis and alkaline urine (pH 8 to 9).
2. DCAD below O produces a slight decrease in blood pH and the production of acid urine.
3. Diets with DCAD below -50 produce mild acidosis with urinary pH of about 6. These diets have
been shown to prevent milk fever.
4. Negative DCAD diets are fed to cows during late pregnancy. After calving, the cows are returned
to a high DCAD diet.
5. Measurement of urine pH is used to monitor the effectiveness of the dietary acidifying regimen
for dry cows.
I. INFLUENCE OF EXERCISE ON ACID-BASE BALANCE AND ELECTROLYTES
A. During intense, short-term exercise, two opposing changes can occur
1. Lactic acid production by hypoxic muscles can lead to systemic lactic acidosis.
2. Hyperventilation decreases PCO2, increasing blood pH by hypocapnia.
B. The final blood pH depends on the balance of lactic acid production vs. hypocapnia.
C. Racing Greyhounds have moderate to marked acidemia and hypocapnia, with marked decrease in
both HCO and PCO, after an intense sprint.
D. Labrador Retrievers develop respiratory alkalosis with little metabolic change after exercise that
includes repeated retrievals of an object.
E. Endurance exercise produces changes in Na', K', and Cl.
1. Horses used in endurance events may become hypokalemic, hypochloridemic, and slightly
hyponatremic after one to two days of continuous exercise.
2. Equine sweat has higher concentrations of Cl- and K+ and approximately equal concentrations
of Na+ compared to plasma.
3. Mild changes occur in all horses used in endurance races. More severe electrolyte and acid-base
changes are sen in horses that develop “exhaustion syndrome."
4. Racing dogs develop hyponatremia and hypokalemia, although they do not sweat. The exact
routes of their excess electrolyte loss are not known.
156
CHAPTER 5
DISORDERS OF ELECTROLYTES AND METABOLIC ACID BASE IMbALANCE
It is best to have complete electrolyte profiles (Na*, K+, Cl), some measure of blood acid-base status
(blood gas analysis or TCO2), and calculation of anion gap (AG). Incomplete data may give false
information about the status of the patient, leading to inappropriate treatment. Electrolyte and acid-
base profiles are used primarily to assess the severity of body fluid disorders rather than to make a
electrolyte pattern may be characteristic of a specific disease.
I. SErUM SodIUM
A. Physiologic considerations
1. Nat maintains ECF osmolality and is essential for renal water retention, a control mechanism for 
hydration status.
2. Essentially all Nat is in the ECF, making ECF Na+ an estimate of total body Na*.
3. Serum Nat (mmol/L) can be used as a measure of total body Nat if ECF volume (hydration
status) is considered.
4. Total ECF Nat (mmol) = serum Nat (mmol/L) x ECF volume (L).
B. Hyponatremia, normonatremia, or hypernatremia may occur with low, normal, or high ECF volume
(Table 5.2).
TABLE 5.2.
CONCENTRATION AND HYDRATION STATUS.
Hyponatremia
Decreased ECF H,O (hypotonic dehydration)
Loss of Na*-rich fluids
 Diarrhea (foals and horses, occasionally dogs)
 Hypoaldosteronism
Osmotic diure sis (diabetes mellitus)
Renal disease (cattle)
Salmonellosis (calves)
Normal ECF HO (normal hydration)
Dietary salt deficiency (cattle)
Early hypoaldosteronism
Early renal disease (cattle)
Loss of Nat rich flhuid and treatment with low Na* fluids (e.g., diarrhea, blood loss treated with 5%
dextrose solution)
 Psychogenic polydipsia
 Rapidly occurring hyperglycemia (water shift from ICF to ECF due to ECF hypertonicity)
Ruptured urinary bladder (foal, cow, dog)
Saliva loss (horse)
Sustained exercise (horse, dog)
Increased ECF HO
Rapidly developing edema; hydroperitoneum (ascites) and/or hydrothorax
Repeated drainage of chylothorax (dog)
 Ireatment during oligouric renal failure with excessive low Nat fluids
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
157
TABLE 5.2
CONTINUED.
Normonatremia
Decreased ECF H0 (isotonic dehydration)
Loss of isonatremic fluids
Diarrhea
Exudation
Gut flhuid sequestration
Hemorrhage
Renal disease
Vomiting
Normal ECF H0 (normal hydration)
He alth
Disease without ECF and Nat abnormalities
(o ao )   
Cardiac failure
Hypoalbuminemia
Liver disease
Retention of water
Ireatment with isonatremic fluids during above diseases
Hypermatremia
Decreased ECF H0 (hypertonic dehydration)
 Adipisia due to abnormal thirst mechanism (neurologic dise ase, damage to hypothalamic
osmore ceptors)
Adipsia due to lack of water
Diabetes insipidus with restricted access to water
Severe insensible H0 loss (panting, sweating)
Normal ECF H,0 (normal hydration)
With normovolemia
Osmore ceptor defect
 Primary hyperaldosteronism (dogs)
(iod iies) aenu iaem pansa  iatp ies u oi ss
Consumption of seawater
 Force feeding improperly formulated diet by pharyngostomy tube with inadequate water intake
With hypovolemia and incre ase d gastrointestinal or transcellular H,O
 Shift of water into gastrointestinal tract (ruminants)
Grain overload-lactic acidosis
Propylene glycol toxicosis 
Urea toxicosis (cattle)
Shift of water into third space (bile peritonitis)
Increased ECF H,0 (edema, ascites, hydrothorax)
 Rare situation: Ireatment with hypematremic fluids during renal shutdown
1. Normonatremia (serum Na+ within reference interval) can occur with normal, decreased or
increased total body Na*. For example:
a. Normomatremia in acute blood loss represents decreased total body Na*: the patient has lost
both Nat and water in physiologic proportions.
b. Normonatremia in the presence of ascites or edema represents increased total body Na': the
 increase in ECF water has been matched by increase in Na*.
158
CHAPTER 5
2. Hyponatremia or hypernatremia occur when Na losses or gains do not match ECF volume
               s
a. Hyponatremia in a dehydrated animal is due to loss of both Nat and water, with Nat losses
being greater than water losses. The result is severe decrease of total body Na*.
b. Hyponatremia in an animal with edema or ascites is due to water accumulation greater than
Na+ increases. The total body Nat is normal to increased.
c. Hypernatremia in a dehydrated animal is due to loss of water without loss of Na*: Total body
Nat is normal, but ECF volume is decreased.
d. Hypernatremia in an animal with normal ECF volume is due to increased total body Nat
(usually excess intake of salt without access to water)
C. The mechanisms and diseases responsible for each possibility are given in Table 5.2.
D. Evaluation of the Na*/Kt ratio has been advocated as a method of recognizing hypoaldosteronism,
but has some important limitations.
1. Hypoaldosteronism (Addison's disease) is associated with a calculated Na'/K+ ratio less than 24.
 2. Many other conditions may produce similar Na/K ratios, including the following:
a. Renal disease
b. Gastroenteritis treated with low Nat fluids
c. Diarrhea caused by Trichuris vulpis infection
d. Repeated drainage of chylothorax
e. Large volume peritonitis and pleuritis
f. Illness during late-term pregnancy
3. The probability of hypoaldosteronism increases as the Na'/K+ ratio decreases. A ratio less than
19 is highly associated with, but is not specific for, hypoaldosteronism.
E. The Na'/K+ ratio should be considered along with presence or absence of hyponatremia and
hyperkalemia when evaluating the electrolyte status of a patient.
Il. SERUM POTASSIUM
A. Physiologic considerations
1. Serum K+ is maintained within narrow limits for normal neuromuscular and cardiac function
2. Serum Kt is not a reliable indicator of total body K+ because most ion concentration is in the
ICF Serum Kt can be altered by the following:
a. Shifts of Kt between the ICF and ECF (internal K+ balance).
b. Increases and decreases in total body Kt (external Kt balance).
Cc. Mixed disorders of both internal and external types.
3. Species vary in the amount of intra-erythrocytic potassium.
a. The erythrocytes of horses, pigs, and primates are high in K.
b. Intra-erythrocytic Kt concentration varies from moderate to low in certain breeding groups of
cattle and sheep.
c. Intra-erythrocytic K concentration is low in most cats and dogs, except:
(1) Erythrocytes of Akitas, Shiba Inus, and some other Japanese breeds of dogs have a high
intracellular Kt concentration.
(2) Occasionally, dogs of other breeds or mongrels have inherited high Kt erythrocytes.
4. Reticulocytes are higher in K+ compared to mature erythrocytes.
5. Sources of erroneously high serum K+ from sampling error (pseudohyperkalemia) include the
following:
a. Serum K+ is slightly higher than plasma K of healthy animals due to release of K+ from
platelets during clotting.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
159
b. Marked thrombocytosis may produce markedly increased serum K'; measurement of K+ in
heparinized plasma reduces this source of error.
c. Leakage from high Kt erythrocytes. Hemolysis or prolonged contact between the sample's
serum and clot may produce factitious hyperkalemia, especially in those species or situations
with high K+ erythroctyes. The hemolysis may be covert; although the serum or plasma is not
discolored, K' concentration is significantly increased.
6. Because serum K' is affected by both internal and external K+ balance or a combination of the
two, both possibilities should be considered when determining proper K+ therapy
B. Mechanisms and causes of hyperkalemia (Table 5.3). Hyperkalemia can lead to life-threatening
 cardiac conduction abnormalities, bradycardia, and electrocardiogram changes.
1. Hyperkalemia secondary to changes in external K+ balance may be due to the following:
a. Decreased urinary excretion
(1) Normally, most excess K is excreted in urine (kaliuresis).
(2) Anuric or oliguric renal disease, postrenal blockage (feline urologic syndrome), or ruptured
bladder (foals) can produce hyperkalemia (Cases 18, 20).
(3) Dogs and ruminants usually do not have hyperkalemia with postrenal obstruction or
ruptured bladder.
b. Hypoaldosteronism
(1) Aldosterone is one of the mediators of renal Kt excretion.
(2) Hypoaldosteronism (Addison's disease) is characterized by hyperkalemia and
hyponatremia.
c. Increase in body cavity fluid volume may produce hyperkalemia and hyponatremia (dogs and
cats).
(1) Repeated drainage of chylothorax causes retention of Kt and can result in hyperkalemia
by unknown mechanisms (dogs, clinical and experimental data).
(2) Peritoneal effusion in cats may cause hyperkalemia and hyponatremia.
d. Hyperkalemia and hyponatremia have been seen in ill bitches during late pregnancy.
2. High doses of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole decrease K+ excretion by inhibiting an enzyme
 needed for distal renal tubular Na'-K+ exchange.
f. Parenteral administration of Kt
(1) Rapid administration of therapeutic K may produce life-threatening hyperkalemia. In
general, large animals are less susceptible to this problem than small animals.
(2) Oral K+ supplementation can be used in many conditions with less danger to the patient.
2. Hyperkalemia, secondary to changes in internal K+ balance, can occur from the following:
a. Some instances of acidemia:
(1) Hyperkalemia occurs in some forms of acidosis, due to ECF H+ exchanging with ICF K'.
(2) Hyperkalemia occurs most frequently in acidosis due to selective loss of NaHCO; and
retention of Cl (e.g., acidosis from secretory diarrhea). ICF K+ exchanges with excess ECF
 H+ to maintain electrical neutrality. This cation exchange occurs because the acidosis is
accompanied by increased plasma Cl, which does not readily diffuse into the ICF
(3) Hyperkalemia is infrequent in titration (organic acid excess) acidosis. It is thought that
organic acid anions enter cells with the excess H', maintaining electrical neutrality and
eliminating the need for cation exchange.
(4) Hyperkalemia is rare with respiratory acidosis. It is thought that dissolved CO, diffuses
 freely into cells, maintaining pH equality between ECF and ICF
(5) Rapid administration of alkalinizing fluids to acidotic patients may cause the reverse
cation exchange (Kt going to the ICF as H+ moves to the ECF), producing life-threatening
hypokalemia.
b. Hyperosmolality. Hypertonicity can produce a shift of ICF K+ to the ECF This shift is
independent of blood pH; the mechanisms are unknown.
TABLE 5.3.
MECHANISMSAND CAUSES OFSERUMK*ABNORMALITIES
Hyperkalemia
 Changes in extermal balance (net accumulation of ECF-K from environment)
Anuric or oliguric renal failure
Postrenal obstruction (cats, foals, but not dogs, ruminants)
Hypoaldosteronism
Drainage of chylothorax (dogs)
Marked pleural or peritoneal effusion (dogs, cats)
Ireatment with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (dogs)
Hyperkalemic fluid therapy
Polyuric renal disease (horse)
Changes in intermal balance (shifts from ICF-K* to ECF-K')
Secretory diarrhea with loss of HCO; (calves, rarely dogs)
Insulin deficiency—diabetes mellitus (may be masked by extermal K+ loss)
Hypertonicity
Marked muscle exertion (mild K+ increase)
Massive tissue necrosis (saddle thrombus, rhabdomyolysis)
Oleander toxicity (inhibition of Na*-K+ ATPase)
 Inherited hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (horses)
(kjuo enep tenuaadxasop) asiiaxa Sum wusipioiauidk
Hypokalemia
Changes in extermal balance (decreased Kt intake or increased K+ loss to environment)
Anorexia (especially herbivores)
 Low potassium diet
 Loss of gastrointestinal fluids
Vomiting
Abomasal stasis and intermal vomiting into rumen
Draining of stomach by naso-gastric tube (horse)
Diarrhea (especially horses)
 Increased renal loss (kaliuresis)
Hyperaldosteronism (pathologic or iatrogenic)
Metabolic acidosis (acute)
Metabolic alkalosis
Polyuric renal disease (especially cat and cow, but not horse)
Renal tubular acidosis
Some acidifying diets (cat)
Profuse sweating (horse)
Prolonged exercise (horse, dog)
Changes in intermal balance (shifts from ECF-Kt to ICF-K*)
Alkalemia (mild if ICF-Kt is replete)
Insulin therapy
Rapid correction of metabolic acidosis (marked if ICF K* is depleted)
 Rapid food replenishment after starvation (refeeding syndrome)
160
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE 
161
C. Cell membrane damage. Loss of cell membrane integrity produces efflux of ICF Kt to the
ECF
d. Tissue necrosis
(1) Necrosis of a large mass of tissue, especially muscle, may release a large amount of K+
and produce hyperkalemia (e.g., saddle thrombus in cats, white muscle disease in cattle).
(2) Less severe cell damage may produce the same shifts, but restoration of normal cell
function may cause rapid reversal of K+ balance, leading to ECF K+ depletion and
hypokalemia.
. The toxin of oleander (Nerium oleander) causes inhibition of cardiac Na*-K+ ATPase,
producing hyperkalemia soon after ingestion.
f. Insulin deficiency
(1) Insulin facilitates the entry of K+ into the ICF; therefore, deficiency of insulin may be
accompanied by loss of ICF Kt to the ECF and hyperkalemia.
(2) Diabetes causes renal loss of K+ that can be greater than the internal shift of K+ to the
ECF
(3) Hyperkalemia, normokalemia, or hypokalemia may occur depending on the balance of
the rates of internal shifts and external losses.
(4) Administration of exogenous insulin causes rapid entry of Kt into the ICF and K+
supplementation may be needed to prevent hypokalemia.
g. Inherited periodic hyperkalemic paralysis (horses) produces transient paralysis accompanied
by hyperkalemia that resolves as the episode ends.
h. Exercise induces transient hyperkalemia in hypothyroid dogs due to deficiency of Na'-K*-
ATPase concentration in muscle (experimental data).
i. Intracelluar Kt depletion can increase the magnitude of ECF to ICF Kt shift after the
correction of the above problems. Because no clinical measure can accurately assess K+
depletion, sufficiency of Kt replacement should be a consideration in any condition known to be
associated with external K+ loss.
j. Many conditions that produce hyperkalemia due to internal shifts (e.g., renal tubular
acidosis, severe diarrhea, diabetic ketoacidosis) also cause increased external Kt losses. The
 patient may progress from hyperkalemia to normokalemia to hypokalemia, depending on the
balance of internal shift and external loss.
C. Mechanisms and causes of hypokalemia (Table 5.3) include the following:
1. Hypokalemia is almost always associated with depletion of ICF K+. Loss of Kt can potentiate the
seriousness of a disease by producing life-threatening cardiac abnormalities, skeletal muscle
weakness and myopathy, loss of renal concentrating ability, and perpetuation of metabolic alkalosis
(paradoxical aciduria).
2. Hypokalemia secondary to changes in external Kt balance may be due to the following:
a. Decreased oral intake
(1) Anorectic animals (especially herbivores) may have a negative K balance, especially
during the two to three days needed for the kidneys to convert from K+ excretion to K+
conservation.
(2) Some K'-deficient acidifying diets for cats produce hypokalemia and acidosis. These cats
b. Increased gastrointestinal losses. Loss of gastric and intestinal fluids, which are rich in K',
can produce K depletion (e.g., vomiting, abomasal disorders, and diarrhea, especially severe in
horses).
c. Increased urinary loss (kaliuresis). Several conditions cause this, including polyuric states
(e.g., osmotic diuresis, rapid rehydration), metabolic alkalosis, acute metabolic acidosis,
 increased mineralocorticoid concentration, renal tubular acidosis, and diuretic therapy.
162
CHAPTER 5
d. Primary hyperaldosteronism from aldosterone secreting tumors may produce marked
 kaliuresis with hypokalemia so severe that myopathy and profound muscle weakness can occur
(cats, dogs, ferret)
3. Hypokalemia secondary to changes in internal K+ balance may be due to the following:
a. Alkalemia (Cases 23, 24)
(1) Low ECF Ht concentrations may cause ICF H+ to leave cells by exchanging with ECF K'.
This internal shift in K+ is thought to be a minor cause of hypokalemia in alkalosis.
(2) Metabolic allkalosis produces mild hypokalemia, but respiratory alkalosis does not
produce these shifts.
(3) In most diseases associated with metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia is due to decreased
body K+ from increased losses and decreased intake.
(4) Shifts of K+ to the ICF may occur upon therapeutic alkalinization with parenteral fluids
producing life-threatening hypokalemia in a patient that was normokalemic or hyperkalemic
prior to therapy
b. ICF K depletion
(1) K moves more quickly from ECF to ICF if K+ depletion has occurred.
(2) Therapy that leads to K+ shifts into the ICF (e.g., insulin, HCO3) may produce profound
life-threatening hypokalemia in the K+-depleted patient.
Ill. SerUM ChloRIdE
A. Physiologic considerations
1. Cl is the major anion of ECF
2. Cl is an important component of many secretions (e.g., gastric fluid, sweat, and saliva in
horses), as either NaCl, KCl, or HCl.
B. Abnormalities
1. NaCl-related changes include:
a. Increase and decrease in serum Cl may parallel changes in serum Na' concentration (Case
24).
b. Total body Cl varies in parallel to Na', and may be increased or decreased without
 hypochloridemia or hyperchloridemia being present if the ECF volume is increased or
decreased.
2. Selective Cl changes include the following:
a. Cl may increase or decrease due to changes not related to alterations in NaCl concentration
b. Loss of HCl- or KCl-rich secretions leads to hypochloridemia due to greater loss of Cl compared
to Nat (Cases 23 and 34).
3. Loss of NaHCO-rich fluid in intestinal secretions or urine causes a relative increase in serum or
plasma Cl , although a total body Cl deficit exists if dehydration is present.
C. Iwo calculations can be used to distinguish NaCl related abnormalities from selective
Cl abnormalities.
1. Corrected Cl [Cl (cor)]. When Na+ is abnormal, Cl can be corrected by the following formula
Cl (cor) =Cl (mesued) X(mean Nat +measured Nat); mean Nat = mean of reference range for laboratory.
a. Reference interval of Cl (ror is approximately the same as the reference interval of measured
cl-.
b. Evaluation of Cl (cor) to recognize selective Cl abnormalities is most useful when
hyponatremia exists. In contrast, almost all instances of hypernatremia are due to NaCl
associated abnormalities.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
163
2. Na-Cl difference. This is another calculation to separate NaCl-mediated from selective Cl
abnormalities. The formula is:
Na-Cl difference =Na+ -Cl-.
a. Interspecies variations in Na-Cl difference occur.
b. Approximate reference ranges are:
(1) Dogs and cats: 29 to 42mmol/L.
(2) Horses: 34 to 43 mmol/L.
(3) Cattle: 35 to 45 mmol/L.
(4) Goats: 33 to 43 mmol/L.
c. The reference interval for Na-Cl difference depends on the method used to determine
electrolyte concentrations. Reference intervals should be calculated by individual laboratories.
D. Selective Cl abnormalities are often associated with metabolic acid-base disorders
1. Selective decrease in Cl is almost always associated with loss of HCl-rich fluids and metabolic
alkalosis (see section on metabolic alkalosis).
2. Selective increase in Cl may be present with metabolic acidosis due to selective loss of NaHCO
(see section on secretory acidosis).
3. Metabolic compensation for chronic respiratory disorders, an uncommon clinical situation in
animals, can produce similar selective Cl- changes due to renal retention or excretion of NaHCO3
E. Albumin concentration influences Cl values
1. Hyperchloridemia may occur in hypoalbuminemic animals. Albumin is an anion. When
albumin-related anions are decreased, relatively more Cl is present in plasma. The AG also may be
decreased (see section on anion gap).
2. Low-protein fluids (peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial fluids and CSF) have higher Cl reference
intervals because they contain relatively little albumin.
F. Consequences of Cl deficiency include the following:
1. Selective Cl deficiency often is associated with metabolic alkalosis.
2. Chloride deficiency causes polydipsia and decreased renal concentrating ability, based upon
experimental data in dogs and cattle.
IV. MetaBoLic AcidoSIs
A. Decreased plasma HCO; or serum TCO, concentrations indicate metabolic acidosis.
1. Moderate metabolic acidosis is present when plasma HCO or serum TCO concentrations are as
follows:
a. 15 to 20 mmol/L in most species
b. 12 to 17 mmol/L in the dog and cat
2. Severe metabolic acidosis is present when plasma HCO or serum TCO2 concentrations are as
follows:
a. Less than 15 mmol/L in most species.
b. Less than 12 mmol/L in the dog and cat.
3. Respiratory compensation is achieved by hyperventilation to exhale CO, and restore the HCO/
HCO, ratio.
B. Mechanisms and causes
1. HCO; loss (secretory) acidosis
a. HCO; can decrease when fluids rich in NaHCO, and/or KHCO, are lost from the body
b. NaHCO, is synthesized by renal or secretory cells by rearranging the ions of HHCO, and
NaCl as follows:
164
CHAPTER 5
NaCl + HHCO; →NaHCO, (lost to body) + HCl (retained).
c. When NaHCO,-rich fluids are lost in excess, the net effect is acidification by accumulation of
HCl in the body.
d. Diseases and conditions associated with HCO; loss acidosis:
(l) Saliva in animals that cannot swallow, especially ruminants (but not in the horse).
(2) Intestinal and pancreatic secretions, either trapped in the gut by obstruction or lost as
diarrhea (Case 6).
(3) Urine rich in HCO in cases of renal tubular acidosis.
2. The electrolyte pattern in HCO; loss acidosis (Figure 5.2)
(1) Low plasma HCO or serum TCO2
(2) Serum Cl- that is within the reference interval or increased accompanied by a decreased
Na*-Cl difference
(3) Normal anion gap
mEq/1
140
K+
K
K
K+
AG
AG
AG
AG
HCO
AG
120
HCO
HCO
HCO
100
HCOj
80
Nat
Nat
Na
Na*
Nat
C1
C1
C1
C]-
C1-
60
40
20
Health
Secretion
Titration
Simple
Mixed Alkalosis
(HCO, Loss)
(Organic
Metabolic
and Acidosis,
Acidosis,
Acid Excess)
Alkalosis,
High Anion Gap
Normal Anion Gap
Acidosis,
Normal Anion Gap
High Anion Gap
FIGURE 5.2.
:Electrolyte patterns in common metabolic acid-base disorders.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
165
(4) If hyponatremia exists, the measured Cl may be lower, but the Cl (cor) will be within
the reference interval or increased.
2. Titration (organic acid excess) acidosis
a. Organic acid accumulation can lead to HCO; loss by titration.
b. As HCO acts as a buffer, it is converted to the salt of the organic acid. For the acid HA: HA
+ NaHCO → HzCO, + NaA. The HCO concentration decreases as the concentration of NaA
increases.
c. The presence of the salt of the acid (i.e., NaA in the above example) is recognized by an
increased anion gap.
d. Clinically important organic acids
(1)  L-lactic acid from mammalian anaerobic glycolysis in hypoxia and shock
(2) D-lactic acid due to bacterial catabolism of carbohydrates in adult ruminants with grain
Overload, neonatal calves with diarrhea, neonatal goat kids (floppy kid syndrome), neonatal
lambs and calves with neurologic abnormalities, carbohydrate-induced laminitis (horses and
 ponies), bacterial overgrowth secondary to pancreatic exocrine insufficiency (reported in one
cat)
(3) D-lactic acid from the glyoxalase pathway in mammalian diabetes (cats) and with high
doses of propylene glycol.
(4) Acetoacetic acid and β-hydroxybutyric acid (ketone bodies) in diabetic ketoacidosis, fat
catabolism from starvation, and ketosis of ruminants (Chapter 6, Case 34).
(5) Uremic acids in renal failure (Cases 18, 20)
(6) Some organic poisons and their metabolites (e.g., ethylene glycol, propylene glycol, and
metaldehyde).
e. The electrolyte pattern in titration acidosis (Figure 5.2)
(1) Low plasma HCO or serum TCO2
(2) Serum Cl and Na-Cl difference within the reference intervals
(3) High anion gap
(4) If hyponatremia exists, the Cl concentration may be low, but Cl (cory is within the
reference interval.
f. Mixed titration and secretory acidosis can occur when dehydration from diarrhea leads to
accumulation of lactic acid from hypovolemic shock. Although the acidoses from titration and
secretion are both moderate, they combine to produce marked acidemia. The electrolyte pattern
is as follows:
(1) Markedly low plasma HCO or serum TCO, concentrations
(2) Serum Cl- concentration and Na-Cl difference are usually within the reference intervals
but may have mild changes typical of secretory acidosis.
(3) Mild to moderate increase in anion gap
(4) If hyponatremia exists, the Cl concentration may be low, but Cl (cos is usually within the
reference interval.
V. Metabolic AlkaloSIS
A. Increased plasma HCO or serum TCO, concentrations indicate metabolic alkalosis (Figure 5.2).
1. Moderate metabolic alkalosis is present when the plasma HCO or serum TCO, concentrations
are as follows:
a. 33 to 38 mmol/L in most species
b. 27 to 32 mmol/L in the dog and cat
2. Severe metabolic alkalosis is present when the plasma HCO or serum TCO, concentrations are
as follows:
a. greater than 38mmol/L in most species
b. greater than 32 mmol/L in the dog and cat
166
CHAPTER 5
3. Respiratory compensation by hypoventilation to retain CO2 and restore the HCO/HCO, ratio is
restricted by the need for O2. Therefore, respiratory compensation is often poor.
B. Loss of gastric or abomasal HCl is almost always the cause of metabolic alkalosis (Cases 22, 23).
1. HCl is secreted in the stomach by parietal cells by the following reaction: NaCl + H,CO → HCl
(secreted) + NaHCO, (retained in body fluids). In health, the HCl is later reabsorbed in the lower
gastrointestinal tract, restoring the acid-base equilibrium.
 2. Vomiting in monogastric animals and drainage of gastric contents by stomach tube in horses
with colic leads to loss of HCl.
3. Abomasal or high gut obstruction in ruminants leads to reflux of abomasal contents into the
displacement or torsion, small intestinal obstruction), functional occlusion (e.g., vagal indigestion),
and stasis due to metabolic causes (e.g., renal disease, endotoxemia, hypocalcemia).
4. Proximal jejunitis-ileitis in horses produces mild metabolic alkalosis due to pooling of HCl in
the stomach.
5. Loss of HClleads to a net gain in HCO; Cl is lost as well as H', leading to alkalosis, hypochloridemia,
and an anion gap that is within the reference interval or slightly increased.
6. Without laboratory evaluation, the observation of vomiting alone cannot be taken as an
indication of metabolic alkalosis. With gastric reflux, vomiting may include the loss of HCO -rich
pancreaticoduodenal fluid as well as gastric HCl.
C.Paradoxical aciduria in HCl loss, metabolic alkalosis (Case 23)
1. Renal correction of metabolic alkalosis should be the secretion of excess NaHCO and retention
of H' ions to restore the HCO/HCO, ratio. Often the kidney cannot correct the alkalosis. This
condition is recognized by acidic urine concomitant with metabolic alkalosis (i.e., paradoxical
aciduria)
2. Paradoxical aciduria develops as the result of hypovolemia, hypochloridemia, and total body K
depletion.
a. As the kidneys retain water, they also retain Na+ in an attempt to restore total ECF Na*
concentration to reference intervals. Because Cl concentration is deficient in the glomerular
fltrate, HCO is reabsorbed as the anion with Na*.
b. Nat also can be reabsorbed by exchange and secretion of Ht or K'. Because K+ is deficient in
the plasma, H+ is secreted into the urine.
c. The loss of HCO from and the addition of Hf to the renal filtrate leads to acid urine, and the
retention of HCO perpetuates the state of metabolic alkalosis.
3. Fluid therapy in cases of metabolic alkalosis with paradoxical aciduria should be directed
toward correcting the NaCl deficit. Satisfactory fluids are normal saline and Ringer's solution. When
K+ depletion is severe, treatment with parenteral or oral K+ may be necessary to reverse paradoxical
aciduria.
D. Rare causes of metabolic alkalosis:
1. Hypokalemia associated with hypovolemia may lead to metabolic alkalosis. Possible clinical
situations include dehydration with concomitant diuretic use or mineralocoricoid excess (either
exogenous administration or endogenous release).
2. Liver failure, especially in horses, may result in the presence of excess bases (NH, and amines)
in circulation
3. Use of esophageal tubes for alimentation in the horse may lead to loss of saliva, which is rich in
NaCl. Metabolic allalosis with hyponatremia and hypochloridemia occur after a few days of
salivary loss.
4. Exhaustion in horses used for endurance events produces a mild hypochloridemic metabolic
alkalosis.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
167
5. A blow fly (Lucilia cuprina) of sheep produces large amounts of NH, resulting in
hyperammonemia and metabolic alkalosis in infected animals.
E. The electrolyte pattern in hypochloridemic metabolic alkalosis:
1. Increased plasma HCO or serum TCO, concentrations
2. Decreased plasma or serum Cl concentration
3. If hyponatremia exists, selective hypochloridemia can be recognized by an increased Na-Cl
difference or low Cl (cer)-
Vl. MIXED METABOLIC ACIDOSIS AND ALKALOSIS (CASES 22, 24)
A. Laboratory findings (Figure 5.2)
1. Plasma HCO or serum TCO, concentrations that are close to or within the reference interval
2. Decreased serum Cl concentration
3. If hyponatremia exists, selective hypochloridemia can be recognized by an increased Na-Cl
difference or decreased Cl (cor.
4. Very high anion gap. Measurement of blood gases or TCO, alone will never detect mixed
metabolic allkalosis and acidosis; the high anion gap is an important indicator.
B. Mechanisms and causes of mixed metabolic acidosis and alkalosis
1. Loss of HCl-rich fluids may lead to alkalosis and hypovolemic shock. The increased HCO; from
the metabolic alkalosis is titrated by the lactic acid from shock. The HCO may decline close to 0r
within the reference interval, but the Cl concentration remains low while the anion gap is very
high.
2. Some conditions with titration acidosis may produce vomiting (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis, renal
failure). Vomiting increases HCO from the extremely low concentrations produced by the original
        n   i    
30mmol/L).
3. Restoration of ECF volume by fluids that are low in Cl concentration may correct the acidosis
but perpetuate the alkalosis. Fluid therapy should include suffcient Cl and Kt concentrations to
correct both conditions.
DISORDERS OF RESPIRATORY FUNCTION
 Blood gas analysis is a relatively insensitive measure of pulmonary function and should be used as an
adjunct to physical examination, radiology, and other diagnostic methods. Arterial PO, and PCO can
be helpful in assessing the severity of respiratory disorders and in monitoring respiratory status during
anesthesia. Differentiation of pathologic changes in PCO2 (respiratory acid-base imbalance) from
 se o l e jo uonaa Aq Auo ap aq u sos as-ie ooa on unsuao
electrolyte profile.
1. ARTERIAL PO2
A. POz is a measure of intrapulmonary gas exchange.
1. In health, regional distribution of air to areas of the lungs is balanced with regional blood flow.
2. O, is almost 20 times less diffusible than CO, across the alveolar capillary barrier. Many
intrapulmonary lesions can produce hypoxemia without altering CO, exchange.
B. Conditions that cause hypoxemia and compensatory hyperventilation (low PO accompanied by
normal PCO, or low PCO2, respiratory alkalosis) are caused by decreased gas exchange and
concomitant continuation of CO, exchange (Case 24). Examples include the following:
168
CHAPTER 5
TABLE 5.4.
Abnormalities of neurogenic control
Ane sthe sia
Sedation
Head trauma
 Muscular or mechanical failure in breathing
Pneumothorax
Pleural e ffusion
 Ivermectin toxicity (especially in Collies and Shetland Sheep Dogs)
Muscular weakness associated with Coonhound paralysis
Myasthenia gravis
Neurotoxins (botulism, tetanus)
 Paralytic drugs (succinylcholine)
Upper airway obstruction
Calf diphtheria
Tracheal collapse
 Laryngeal edema or constriction
 Pulmonary abnormalities
Pneumonia (severe*)
Pulmonary edema (severe *)
 Chronic obstructive lumg disease
* Less severe pneumonia and pulmonary edema may lead to hypoxemia without respiratory acidosis.
1. Perfusion/diffusion abnormalities, which include many cases of pneumonia, pulmonary edema,
and pulmonary thrombosis.
2. Decreased intrapulmonary gas difusion caused by thickened alveolar septa, pulmonary fbrosis,
and pulmonary edema.
C. Conditions that cause hypoxemia accompanied by increased PCO2 (hypoxemia and respiratory
acidosis) are caused by decreased alveolar ventilation (Table 5.4).
Il. ARTERIAL PCO,
A. Arterial PCO, is a measure of alveolar ventilation.
1. Minute-to-minute neurologic control of PCO occurs in health.
2. The aortic and carotid bodies respond to total O, content in chronic hypoxemia, and can
become the major controllers of respiration.
3. Well-ventilated areas of the lungs can compensate for regions with poor gas exchange, causing
hypoxemia with normal PCO, as described above.
B. Respiratory acidosis
1. Hypercapnia (hypercarbia), PaCO, above reference interval, indicates hypoventilation.
2. Hypoventilation can occur with deranged central control, failure of the mechanical apparatus of
breathing, and severe pulmonary abnormalities (Table 5.4).
3. Diseases producing respiratory acidosis also produce hypoxemia because O exchange is always
less effcient than CO, exchange.
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACID BASE
169
TABLE 5.5.
CAUSES OF HYPERVENTILATION
PRODUCING HYPOCAPNIA
(HYPOCARBIA), LOW PaCO2, AND
RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS.
Altered respiratory control
Convulsions
Fear or anxiety (panting)
Fever
Heat exposure
Hepatic encephalopathy
Hypoxemia (low PaO)
Hypotension
Pulmonary vascular shumts
Pulmonary fibrosis
Pneumonia
Pulmonary edema
 Iatrogenic causes
Mechanical ventilation
Rapid correction of metabolic acidosis
4. The hypercapnia of respiratory compensation for metabolic alkalosis is blunted by the
development of hypoxemia.
C. Respiratory alkalosis
1. Hypocapnia (hypocarbia), PaCO, below reference interval, indicates hyperventilation and is
always associated with altered respiratory control (Table 5.5).
 2. The respiratory centers may be influenced by physiologic (e.g., heat control) or pathologic (e.g..
hepatic encephalopathy) stimuli (Case 12).
3. Pulmonary lesions (e.g., pneumonia) may produce hypoxemia and hypocapnia, unless diffuse, severe
lung damage prevents alveolar ventilation (see above discussion on arterial PO2).
D. Mixed respiratory and metabolic acid-base disorders
1. The laboratory fndings that indicate this mixed disorder are:
a. Lack of expected compensation (e.g., normal PCO, and abnormal HCO or abnormal PCO2
and normal HCO) (Case 24).
b. PCO, and HCO; changes which produce both alkalosis and acidosis (e.g., low PCO, and
high HCO; or high PCO, and low HCO).
2. Respiratory compensation occurs within minutes after the onset of a blood pH abnormality. It
should be expected in short-term as well as long-term metabolic disorders.
3. Metabolic compensation may lag several days after the onset of a respiratory disorder. Acute
respiratory conditions may need to be re-evaluated after three to four days to determine if
compensation has occurred.
4. Mixed disorders may lead to severe blood pH abnormalities; therapy should be directed toward
returning the blood pH value to the reference interval.
REFERENCES
Ash RA, Harvey AM, Tasker S: 2005. Primary hyperaldosteronism in the cat: A series of 13 cases. J Fel
Med Surg 7:173-182.
170
CHAPTER 5
Bissett SA, Lamb M, Ward CR: 200l. Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia associated with peritoneal
effusion in four cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1590-1592.
Bleul U, Schwantag S, Stocker H, et al: 2006. Floppy kid syndrome caused by D-lactic acidosis in goat
kids. J Vet Intern Med 20:1003-1008.
Boag AK, Coe RJ, Martinez TA, et al: 2005. Acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities in dogs with
gastrointestinal foreign bodies. J Vet Intern Med 19:816-821.
Collins ND, LeRoy BE, Vap L: l998. Artifactually increased serum bicarbonate values in two horses
and a calf with severe rhabdomyolysis. Vt Clin Pathol 27:85-90.
Constable PD: 2000. Clinical assessment of acid-base status: Comparison of the Henderson-Hallelbalch
and strong ion approaches. Vet Clin Pathol 29:115-128.
Davies DR, Foster SF Hopper BJ, et al: 2008. Hypokalaemic paresis, hypertension, alkalosis and
adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in a dog. Aust Vet J 86:139-146.
Desmarchelie M, Lair S, Dunn M, et al: 2o08. Primary hyperaldosteronism in a domestic ferret with an
adrenocortical adenoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 233: 1297-1301
DiBartola S: 2006. Fluid Therapy in Small Animal Practice. 3rd ed. Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis
Durocher LL, Hinchcliff KW, DiBartola SP, et al: 2008. Acid-base and hormonal abnormalities in dogs
with naturally occurring diabetes mellitus. J Am Vet Med Assor 232:13l0-1320.
Flaminio MJ, Rush BR: 1998. Fluid and electrolyte balance in endurance horses. Vet Clin North Am
Equine Pract 14:147-158.
 g     s sd  o o    n
16: 319-337.
Grosenbaugh DA, Gadawski JE, Muir WW: 1998. Evaluation of a portable clinical analyzer in a
veterinary hospital setting. J Am Vet Med Assor 213:691-694.
Grove-White DH, Michell AR: 200l. Comparison of the measurement of total carbon dioxide and
strong ion difference for the evaluation of metabolic acidosis in diarrhoeic calves. Vet Rec 148:365-370.
Heath SE, Peter AT, Janovitz EB, et al: 1995. Ependymoma of the neurohypophysis and hypernatremia
in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:738-741.
Hood VL, Tannen RL: 1998. Protection of acid-base balance by pH regulation of acid production. N
Engl J Med 339:819-826
                 
cerebrospinal fluid and serum. J Vet Med Sci 69:751-754.
Looney AL, Ludders J, Erb HN, et al: 1998. Use of a handheld device for analysis of blood electrolyte
concentrations and blood gas partial pressures in dogs and horses. J Am Vet Med Assor 2l3:526-530.
Lorenz I: 2009. D-lactic acidosis in calves. Vet J 179:197-203.
Lorenz I, Lorch A: 2009. D-lactic acidosis in lambs. Vet Rer 164:174-175
Matthews NS, Hartke S, Allen JC: 2003. An evaluation of pulse oximeters in dogs, cats and horses. Vet
Anaesth Analgesia 30:3-14.
McCutcheon LJ, Geor RJ: 1996. Sweat fluid and ion losses in horses during training and competition
WATER, ELECTROLYTES, AND ACid BASE
171
Ohtsuka H, Ohki K, Tajima M, et al: 1997. Evaluation of blood acid-base balance after experimental
administration of endotoxin in adult cow. J Vet Med Sei 59:483-485.
Ozaki J, Tanimoto N, Kuse H, et al: 2oo0. Comparison of arterial blood gases and acid-base balance in
'1-sozst is joxi f 'apn auee leipudisod oi peai ym 'ssop aseaq pase pue sunok
Packer RA, Cohn LA, Wohlstadter DR, et al: 2005. D-lactic acidosis secondary to exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency in a cat. J Vet Intern Med 19:106-110.
Paulson WD: 1996. Effect of acute pH change on serum anion gap. J Am Soc Nephrol 7:357-363.
Picandet V, Jeanneret S, Lavoie JP: 2007. Effects of syringe type and storage temperature on results of
            
 uo sia i a u asaxa sus  sass ie  a f ao
serum biochemistry and muscle metabolites. Res Vet Sci 47:212-218.
Roth L, Tyler RD: 1999. Evaluation of low sodium:potassium ratios in dogs. J Vet Diagn Invest
11:60-64.
Roussel AJ, Cohen ND, Holland PS, et al: 1998. Alterations in acid-base balance and serum electrolyte
concentrations in cattle: 632 cases (1984-1994). J Am Vet Med Assor 212:1769-1775.
 Rubin Sl, Toolan L, Halperin ML: 1998. Trimethoprim-induced exacerbation of hyperkalemia in a dog
with hypoadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med 12:186-188.
Sattler N, Fecteau G, Girard C, et al: 1998. Description of 14 cases of bovine hypokalaemia syndrome.
Vet Rec 143:503-507.
Schaafsma IA, van Emst MG, Kooistra HS, et al: 2002. Exercise-induced hyperkalemia in hypothyroid
dogs. Domest Anim Endocrinol 22:1l3-125.
Schaer M, Halling KB, Collins KE, et al: 200l. Combined hyponatremia and hyperkalemia mimicking
acute hypoadrenocorticism in three pregnant dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:897-899.
    s     s   
collapse, including response to a standardized strenuous exercise protocol. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
45:3-13
Uystepruyst CH, Coghe J, Bureau F, et al: 2000. Evaluation of accuracy of pulse oximetry in newborn
calves. Vet J 159:71-76.
Verwaerde P, Malet C, Lagente M, et al: 2002. The accuracy of the i-STAT portable analyser for
i    s  s     5  
Wall RE: 200l. Respiratory acid-base disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 3l:1355-1367.
CHAPTER
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND
CARBOHYDRATES
Ellen W. Evans, DVM, PhD
PLASMA PROTEINS
1. FUNCTIONS AND ORIGINS
A. Collectively, plasma proteins perform a nutritive function, exert colloidal osmotic pressure,
participate in immune/inflammatory responses and the clotting process, and aid in the maintenance of
acid-base balance. Individual proteins serve as enzymes, antibodies, coagulation factors, hormones,
acute phase proteins, and transport substances. The major site of plasma protein synthesis is the liver,
and the second major contributor is the immune system.
B. Fresh serum contains all of the plasma proteins except fibrinogen, factor V, and factor Vlll. These
are nonenzymatic coagulation proteins which are consumed during clot formation.
C. Age-related changes in plasma and serum protein concentrations occur in mammals and birds.
1. In mammals, plasma and serum protein concentrations are low at birth, increase after absorption
of colostrum, decline over one to five weeks as colostrum is metabolized, and then increase to adult
levels within six months to one year.
2. In adulthood, albumin decreases slightly over time while globulins, particularly
immunoglobulins and acute phase proteins, progressively increase in old age. These changes over
time should be considered when interpreting protein data.
3. In mammals, globulin and total serum protein concentrations tend to decrease during the last
third of pregnancy. Just prior to parturition, globulin and total protein concentrations increase.
Both albumin and total protein concentrations decrease during lactation.
4. Age-related changes in protein concentration also occur in birds, and significant differences exist
 between avian species. During egg production, albumin and total protein concentrations are
decreased.
 5. Age-related reference intervals are ideal for interpreting protein data but rarely are available.
D. Albumin represents 35% to 50% of the total serum protein concentration in domestic animals.
1. Albumin is synthesized by the liver and regulated by IL-l and other cytokines
2. A direct correlation exists between albumin turnover and body size. The half-life of albumin is
eight days in the dog and 19 days in the horse.
3. Because of its abundance and small size, albumin accounts for 75% of the colloidal osmotic
activity of plasma.
4. Many constituents of plasma are transported by albumin, and changes in albumin affect total
circulating amounts of these constituents
173
174
CHAPTER 6
5. Albumin dampens platelet aggregation and augments antithrombin Ill; therefore, severely low
plasma albumin may have pro-thrombotic implications.
6. Production of albumin decreases during the acute phase response.
E. Globulins are separated into α-, B-, and -globulins by electrophoresis (Figure 6.1).
NORMAL PATTERN
HYTERGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA
T.Protvin = 7.4 g/dl
POLYCLONALCAMMOPATIIY
DX: Clinically nermal
INCREASED IMMUNOGLOBULINS
DX: Faline infecticus peritonilis
T. Prolvin = 8.4 g/ll
TAbumin
Alpha
Bete|
Gamma
Albumin
AlphaIBetaT
Gamma
CAT:
HYPERALPHAGLOBULINEMIA
HYPERGLOHULINEMIA
DOG:
INCREASEDACUTE PHASE PROTEINS
INCREASEINALLCLASSES
1 Protein = 7.9 g/dl
BETA-GIAMMA BRIDGING
DX:Acue pneunonia
T.Prulcin =10.0 g/dl
DX: Chclangiohepatitis
DOG:
HORSE:
YPERGAMMAGIOBUIINEMIA
IIYPOGAMMAGI.ORUIINLMIA
MONOCLONALGAMMOPATHY
DECREASED IMMUNOGLOBULINS
PARAPRUYTEINEMIA
T. Protein = 3.2 g/dl
T. Protcin = 10.2 g/1
 IS   X
DX: Plasima cell nyelonia
Alpha
aTma
Albumin
Alphs
Beta
Gamme
FIGURE 6.l. Examples of normal and abnormal serum electrophoretograms.
PROTEINS, LIPIdS, AND CARBOHYDRATES 
175
1. C- and β-globulins
a. Most of these globulins are synthesized by the liver.
b. Lipoproteins and acute-phase proteins of inflammation are C- and β-globulins.
c. Some immunoglobulins (IgM, IgA) may extend from the  region into the β region of the
serum protein electrophoretogram.
2. globulins
a. Most of the immunoglobulins migrate in the  region of the serum protein electrophoretogram
 b. Immunoglobulins are secreted by B lymphocytes and plasma cells in many tissues, particularly
in the lymphoid organs
Il. METHoDS OF MEASUREMENT
A. Total protein
1. "Total protein" usually is measured as serum protein.
2. The biuret method is a colorimetric, spectrophotometric technique that detects peptide bonds. It
is highly specific for protein measurement
a. The accuracy of this technique ranges from l to l0 g/dL and usually covers the range of protein
concentrations encountered in plasma, serum, or body cavity fluids.
 b. The biuret method is inaccurate in determining protein concentrations that are less than 1 g/
dL
are used in the biuret method. Therefore, species-specific reference intervals should be established 
by the laboratory performing the assay.
3. The Lowry (Folin-Ciocalteau phenol) and modified Lowry (bicinchonic acid or BCA) methods
are the preferred colorimetric methods for dilute fluids such as urine and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
a. This assay detects tyrosine and tryptophan (amino acids) in small quantities (mg/dL) of protein.
4. Precipitation (trichloroacetic acid, sulfosalicylic acid, benzethonium chloride) and dye-binding
(Coomassie Brilliant Blue RG 230) methods also have been used to quantify small amounts of
 protein found in urine and CSF
a. Precipitation methods are accurate for protein concentrations in the range of 2 to 200mg/dL
b. The Coomassie blue-dye-binding method is accurate for protein concentrations in the range of
 10 to l00 mg/dL. Although this technique underestimates globulins, this is not a serious handicap
because albumin usually is the principal protein in CSF and urine.
r. Different standards can be used to vary the albumin/globulin ratio and overcome the above
problem.
5. Refractometry can be used to measure plasma, serum, or body cavity fluid protein.
a. Changes in the refractive index of the specimen are proportional to the protein concentration.
b. Temperature-compensated, hand-held refractometers are calibrated to read protein directly in
 g/dL. They are accurate for protein concentrations that are usually encountered in plasma, serum,
and body cavity fluids.
c. The assumption is made that other solutes in plasma and serum remain constant from sample
 to sample and are within the reference range.
(1) Abnormally high concentrations of glucose, urea, sodium, or chloride may result in falsely
high protein readings.
(2) Lipemia alters light transmission through the specimen, producing an indistinct line of
 demarcation; falsely high protein readings usually result.
d. The serum, plasma, or body cavity fluid must be clear for accurate determination of protein
concentration
(1) Hemolysis may cause a mild increase in protein concentration.
(2)  Turbidity from lipemia or cells may result in falsely high readings.
(3) Icterus alters the color of the specimen but does not alter the reading.
176
CHAPTER 6
2. Refractometry is not an accurate means of measuring total protein in birds. The biuret
method is preferred. As a general guideline, the variability between avian species dictates that
refractometric values should be validated with other methods of protein determination before
using this technique in birds.
B. Albumin
1. The bromcresol green (BCG) dye-binding method is used by most veterinary laboratories to
quantitate albumin.
a. Falsely high test results occur with low albumin concentrations because BCG binds to other
proteins. Test results also may be inaccurate with very high albumin concentrations, which are
seldom encountered clinically.
b. Anticonvulsants and certain antibiotics compete with albumin for BCG binding. A color shift
 in BCG dye, different from that caused by albumin, may result in a falsely low reading.
c. Variability in dye binding occurs between species.
(1) Canine and feline albumin binds BCG less avidly, giving falsely low values. However, feline
albumin exhibits less variability in BCG binding than does canine albumin.
(2) Bovine and equine albumin binds BCG readily, causing falsely high values
(3) Avian albumin has low affinity for BCG. Serum or plasma protein electrophoresis is the
preferred method to quantitate albumin in birds, unless an avian standard is available for the
BCG technique (most laboratory assays use bovine serum albumin as the standard).
(4) The use of species-specifc standards may partially overcome some of these deficiencies in
the BCG technique.
(5) Albumin concentration may be overestimated when heparinized plasma is analyzed
instead of serum.
2. Bromcresol purple determination of albumin concentration is accurate in human specimens but
is inaccurate in animal specimens.
3. Serum protein electrophoresis provides an alternative method to accurately quantitate albumin,
if dye binding techniques prove to be unsatisfactory.
C. Globulin
 1. Globulin concentrations in routine biochemical profles usually are calculated by the following
formula:
[Total protein (g/dL) -albumin (g/dL)] = globulin (g/dL).
 2. Globulins and albumin can be separated and directly quantifed by serum electrophoresis
(Figure 6.1).
a. Overlap of the various globulin fractions as well as species differences in normal patterns and
numbers of peaks may obscure divisions between some protein fractions.
b. The midpoint of the electrophoretogram pattern usually lies between the Q, and β peaks.
species run on the same instrument often facilitates subsequent interpretation.
d. For mammals, the focal point of the electrophoretogram is the albumin peak, and fraction
identification is based on migration distance in relation to albumin. For birds, considerable
species variability exists in electrophoretograms, and it has been suggested that identification of
the fibrinogen peak also should be taken into account in identifying protein fractions. Sample
quality (lipemia, hemolysis) and storage conditions frequently alter results.
3. Immunochemical and radioimmunologic methods allow for specific identification and
quantitation of individual globulins
4. Several screening tests are available to detect failure of passive transfer of colostral antibody in
foals and calves.
a. Serum IgG concentrations below 200mg/dL at 24 to 48 hours after birth confirm failure of
passive transfer, whereas values below 200 to 400 mg/dL suggest partial failure of passive transfer.
Serum IgG greater than 800 mg/dL is required for adequate protection.
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATES
177
b. Screening tests used to detect IgG above these minimal concentrations include the following:
(l) Zinc sulfate turbidity test
(2) Latex agglutination test
(3) Glutaraldehyde coagulation test
(4) Membrane filter and dipstick enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) tests
5. Refractometric total serum protein values above 5 g/dL in neonates have been used to indicate
colostral immunoglobulin absorption; however, false-negative findings limit the usefulness of this
method.
D. The albumin/globulin (A/G) ratio is calculated mathematically. This calculated value has been used
 to aid in the interpretation of total protein values.
1. The A/G ratio will remain within the reference interval if both fractions are altered uniformly
Examples include the following:
a. Loss of both albumin and globulin via hemorrhage
b. Increased concentration of albumin and globulin from dehydration
2. The A/G ratio is abnormal if an alteration of one fraction predominates. Examples include the
following:
a. Decreased A/G ratio with renal proteinuria and/or immunoglobulin production following
antigenic stimulation.
b. Increased A/G ratio from lack of immunoglobulin production in adults or lack of colostrum
absorption in foals and calves. The body does not overproduce albumin.
E. Fibrinogen
1. Fibrinogen concentration may be determined indirectly by refractometry using two centrifuged
microhematocrit blood tubes.
a. The plasma protein concentration is measured using the frst tube. The second
microhematocrit tube is heated at 56°C for 10 minutes, and the fibrinogen is precipitated by heat
 denaturation. Following re-centrifugation, the plasma protein reading is determined again.
b. The mathematical difference between the two readings is assumed to represent the fibrinogen
concentration (mg/dL).
c. This crude procedure may detect a fbrinogen concentration within the reference interval or
the presence of hyperfibrinogenemia, but is too insensitive to detect hypofibrinogenemia.
2. Other methods are necessary to quantitate fbrinogen more accurately, especially to identify
hypofibrinogenemia or normofibrinogenemia
a. Determination of thrombin clotting time. The instrument then compares thrombin time (seconds
to a standard curve) to determine fibrinogen concentration (mg/dL).
b. Direct measurement of fibrinogen by automated method (Chapter 4).
F. Acute phase protein methods include immunonephelometry, immunoblot, turbidometric
immunoassays, latex agglutination, ELISA, radioimmunoassay, and in the case of haptoglobin,
haptoglobin-hemoglobin binding assay and capillary electrophoresis. Automated spectrophotometric
methods for commonly assayed acute phase proteins have been developed. Reagents and diagnostic
kits for use on human samples are the most readily available, and many of the reagents cross-react
across species. However, it is important to ensure that the particular assay being used is appropriate fo1
the species of interest.
IIl. PROTEIN ABNORMALITIES (DYSPROTEINEMIAS)
A. Hyperproteinemia
1. Relative (dehydration) (Cases 6, 9, 14, 18, 22)
a. Water loss concentrates all plasma proteins proportionally, the A/G ratio is within the reference
interval.
178
CHAPTER 6
b. Dehydration is based on clinical findings only. Once the hydration status of the animal is
 known, day-to-day changes can be monitored by determining protein concentration (which
 is better than the hematocrit for this purpose). However, neither the protein concentration
nor hematocrit is a reliable indicator if the magnitude of fluid loss is small (see discussion on
dehydration in Chapter 5).
2. Hyperalbuminemia represents a relative increase in albumin concentration secondary to
dehydration. Concurrent hyperglobulinemia also may be apparent. An absolute increase in albumin
concentration is rare.
3. Hyperfibrinogenemia commonly occurs in inflammatory or neoplastic disease (Cases 6, 21)
because fibrinogen is an acute-phase reactant.
a. Hyperfibrinogenemia is not detected with routine biochemical profiles because serum is
usually evaluated instead of plasma.
b. Hyperfibrinogenemia is particularly useful as an indicator of early inflammation in cattle,
sheep, and horses, and may precede the development of neutrophilia or other significant changes
in the leukogram. It may also occur in the absence of changes in the leukogram, especially in
cattle.
C. Dehydration causes relative increases in fibrinogen concentration that can be differentiated
PP = 8.4 g/dL, F = 600 mg/dL, PP/F ratio = 8.4/0.6 = 14).
(1) PP/F ratio greater than 15 is consistent with dehydration or normofibrinogenemia (normal
fibrinogen concentration).
(2) PP/F ratio below l0 is consistent with true hyperfibrinogenemia.
(3) Lack of precision in determining the fbrinogen concentration by the heat precipitation
 procedure can adversely affect the ratio, limiting its usefulness.
4. Hyperglobulinemia
a. Globulin concentration tends to increase with infection and inflammation and near term
during pregnancy In birds, globulins increase just prior to egg laying.
b. Acute-phase proteins cause mild increases in globulin concentration
(1) Most acute-phase proteins are α-globulins, but some are β-globulins (Figure 6.1).
(2) Hepatic synthesis of positive acute-phase proteins begins within 24 hours after
acute tissue injury (e.g., inflammation, necrosis, surgery, infection, tumors, immune-
mediated processes, etc.), and are also produced in response to estradiol, physical stress, or
corticosteroid administration. Extra-hepatic production also occurs.
(3) Synthesis of acute-phase proteins is stimulated by IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF,
which are released mainly from macrophages at the site of injury, but can also be released by
other cells.
(4) Acute-phase proteins play a role in the immune response, provide protection against
oxidative stress generated in the course of an inflammatory response, and have anti-infective
properties. These functions usually enhance survival.
(5) Detection of acute-phase proteins may be useful in the early diagnosis of tissue injury
and in monitoring the response to treatment and resolution of tissue trauma or inflammation.
They are often more sensitive than the WBC count in identifying an inflammatory rsponse.
High values often correlate with severity of disease but do not necessarily predict outcome.
Sustained high values of rapid-responding acute phase proteins, despite treatment, may suggest
a poorer prognosis.
(6) While they are often increased in various tumors, they are more likely to be increased in
 lymphomas or tumors that are associated with significant inflammation. Acute-phase protein
values do not consistently correlate with response to chemotherapy or relapse.
(7) Measurement of acute-phase proteins other than fibrinogen and albumin is not
performed commonly in clinical practice, but is gaining more utility as assays become more
readily available. In most cases, measurement of acute-phase proteins offers little advantage
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATES
179
in screening for acute-phase response than does the presence of a decreased A/G ratio, but
applications for measurement of specific positive acute phase proteins are growing.
(8)  The acute-phase response, particularly which proteins predominate and the magnitude
of their increase, varies between species and etiology. The patterns have not been thoroughly
worked out for all species and inciting causes. Identification and monitoring of acute-phase
 s n  d   n      s
time points. The concentration of acute-phase proteins may increase (positive acute-phase
proteins) or decrease (negative acute-phase proteins) during inflammation or infection.
(9)  Although acute-phase proteins are useful in screening for inflammatory processes and
tumors, they are nonspecific as to mechanism and may increase during normal physiologic
processes (e.g., pregnancy, perinatal period, parturition, uncomplicated surgery) and in hepatic
lipidosis in cattle.
(10) Increases in some acute-phase proteins (haptoglobin, ceruloplasmin, fibrinogen, and
others) have been proposed as means of pregnancy diagnosis in dogs, but care must be taken
to rule out confounding inflammatory conditions and collect samples at precise intervals after
the mating dates.
(11) Rapid-reacting acute-phase proteins increase rapidly (within 24 hours) and have
relatively short half-lives. These include serum amyloid A- and C-reactive protein. The second
group rises later in the inflammatory response (within 48 hours or later) and may be increased
for up to two weeks. Examples of late responders are haptoglobin, fibrinogen, and LPS-binding
protein. The measurement of at least one rapid responder and one later responder increases the
ability to detect acute-phase responses and monitor progress.
(12) Calculation of acute phase index (API) increases sensitivity and has been used
in research settings, particularly in evaluating herd health. The calculation is based on
multiplying the value for a rapid-reacting positive acute-phase protein with that of a late-
rsponding positive acute-phase protein and dividing the product by one or the product of two
(one rapid and one late) negative acute-phase protein. The acute-phase proteins used should
be appropriate for the species in question
(13) Acute-phase proteins can be measured at local sites (cerebrospinal fluid, peritoneal fluid,
joint fluid, ete.) to aid in the diagnosis of inflammatory conditions.
(14) Serum amyloid A shows the greatest cross-species utility. In addition, for dogs, C-
ractive protein, and for dogs and cats, C,.acid glycoprotein are also particularly useful; and
haptoglobin is a sensitive indicator in ruminants and horses. Major acute phase protein,
haptoglobin, and C-reactive protein generally provide strong responses in pigs, and α,-acid
glycoprotein has shown utility in assessing avian acute-phase responses.
(15) Saliva can be used as a surrogate for blood in assessing acute-phase proteins.
(16) The major positive acute-phase proteins include the following:
(a) Fibrinogen has been used as an index of inflammation in many animal species,
particularly in horses and cattle.
(b) Certain coagulation proteins (factor V, factor Vll, and fibrinogen). Increases in these
nonenzymatic factors may accelerate hemostasis (Chapter 4).
(c) C-reactive protein (CRP; a major responder in dogs, horses, and pigs). Response is
evident within four hours, peaks after 24 hours, and returns to baseline soon after
removal of insult. CRP may be a useful parameter for monitoring recovery from acute
pancreatitis.
(d) Serum amyloid A (SAA; useful in birds, cattle, cats, dogs, pigs, sheep, goats, and
horses); also increases in reactive or hereditary systemic amyloidosis. SAA is considered
more useful than fibrinogen in that the increase in SAA occurs sooner and is of greater
magnitude than that of fibrinogen. For cats with pancreatitis, monitoring SAA may be a
 more sensitive means of assessing response to treatment than monitoring feline trypsin
like immunoreactivity (fTLI)
180
CHAPTER 6
(e) Haptoglobin (Hp; useful in cows, pigs, horses, cats, dogs, sheep, and goats).
Considered more sensitive than fibrinogen. This protein binds to free hemoglobin and
 is decreased in intravascular hemolysis (Chapter l). Increases occur from corticosteroid
 administration regardless of underlying disease, as well as naturally occurring
hyperadrenocorticism. Glycosylation varies in various diseases, which has potential utility
for differential diagnosis.
(f) Ceruloplasmin, a copper transport protein (Cp; cattle, horses, birds, and in pregnancy
diagnosis in the dog)
(g) Complement components, especially C3
(h) C,-acid glycoprotein (AGP), also called acid-soluble glycoprotein (chickens, cattle,
goats, sheep, dogs, and cats). AGP also can be produced by lymphocytes, and high
serum levels are often seen in lymphoma. High serum levels have been demonstrated in
neoplasms of other origins, as well. Increases also have been sho wn to have particular
utility in the diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) and can be measured in both
serum and peritoneal fluid. The degree and nature of glycosylation of AGP shows promise
 in differential diagnosis of disease states and specific infections, particularly active FIP
infection.
(i) C-antitrypsin, a protease inhibitor: the literature is conflicting regarding its usefulness
in domestic species.
(j) Q-macroglobulin appears to be of limited use in domestic species other than
rodents.
(k) Major acute phase protein; also called porcine major acute protein" (MAP; pigs)
(l)TNF-α (cats)
(m) Ovotransferrin (birds)
(m) LPS-binding protein (LBP; identifcation of infection in cattle)
(0)Hepcidin
(p) Sialic acid, while not an acute phase protein, has been measured as an indicator of
the acute phase response. Increases are considered secondary to increased sialylation of c
acid glycoprotein or shedding from damaged cell membranes.
(17) Major negative acute-phase proteins include the following:
(a) Albumin
(b) Transferrin, the iron transport protein (Tf; cattle, pigs)
(c)Transthyretin (TTR; prealbumin)
(d) C,-macroglobulin (cattle)
(e) Retinal binding protein
(f) Cortisol binding protein
(g)α-l apolipoprotein (apoAl)
c. In nephrotic syndrome, increases in low density lipoproteins (LDL, B-lipoprotein), VLDL
(pre-β-lipoprotein), and α-macroglobulin result in an increase in C2-globulins on the serum
electrophoretogram
d. Transferrin, IgM, hemopexin, and/or complement (C3) may increase in acute liver disease,
resulting in increases in B-globulins on the serum electrophoretogram.
e. Acute-phase protein, especially haptoglobin measurement, can be used to assess herd health
 status and stress levels in pigs at various husbandry stages.
f. Healthy Greyhounds have low C-globulin peaks on the serum electrophoretogram compared
with other breeds; this may be due to lower concentrations of haptoglobin and C-acid
glycoprotein.
g. Immunoglobulins (chronic phase proteins) can cause marked increase in the globulin fractions
on the serum electrophoretogram.
(1) Immunoglobulins are located in the β and  regions of the serum electrophoretogram
(Figure 6.1).
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATES
181
(2) Selective increased concentrations of β-globulins seldom occur, they usually are associated
with increased concentration of other globulins.
J aasans aa st aoaa s a ui sui o pe g jo ba ()
chronic active hepatitis.
(4) Polyclonal gammopathies are characterized by an increased globulin fraction with a broad-
 based electrophoretic peak comprised of a heterogeneous mixture of immunoglobulins Figure
6.1).
(a) The protein increase usually involves the Y-globulin region but may extend into the β
region, especially during periods when an IgM response is prominent.
 inflammatory diseases, immune-mediated diseases, and liver disease (Cases 7, 8, 9, 11).
(5) Monoclonal gammopathy (paraproteinemia) is characterized by an increased globulin
fraction with a narrow-based electrophoretic peak that is no wider than the albumin peak
(Figure 6.1).
(a) The monoclonal peak or spike is caused by a homogeneous immunoglobulin
molecule that is produced by a single clone of B lymphocytes or plasma cells.
(b) Monoclonal peaks may be located in y, B-, or α-globulin regions.
(c)  Monoclonal gammopathy occurs most commonly with lymphoid neoplasia including
plasma cell myeloma, lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and macroglobulinemia.
Infrequently, monoclonal gammopathy may be observed with non-neoplastic disorders
such as canine amyloidosis, canine ehrlichiosis, canine visceral leishmaniasis, feline
infectious peritonitis, and plasmacytic gastroenterocolitis. An idiopathic, benign
monoclonal gammopathy also occurs but is rare.
(d) Monoclonal gammopathy may be accompanied by overproduction of immunoglobulin
light chains. Light chains (Bence-Jones proteins) are rapidly fltered from plasma into urine
by the kidneys. Bence-Jones proteins are best detected by electrophoresis of concentrated
urine specimens (Chapter 9).
h. The A/G ratio is decreased in hyperglobulinemia because of marked production of globulin,
especially immunoglobulin. The albumin concentration remains within the reference interval
 or is decreased slightly (possibly by a compensatory mechanism to maintain plasma oncotic
pressure).
B. Hypoproteinemia
1. Relative hypoproteinemia can occur with dilution of plasma protein by excess fluid. This type of
hypoproteinemia is observed with overzealous administration of intravenous fluids, interstitial
water shifts into the plasma after acute blood or plasma loss, and, occasionally, pregnancy.
2. Hypoalbuminemia
a. Diminished production of albumin is associated with pregnancy, lactation, intestinal
 malabsorption, malnutrition, cachexia secondary to neoplasia, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency,
 and chronic liver disease. Egg production is another cause of hypoalbuminemia in birds.
Hypoalbuminemia is not a consistent finding in horses with severe liver disease; the presence of
a postalbumin shoulder on the serum electrophoretogram is highly suggestive of liver disease in
this species.
b. Accelerated loss of albumin occurs with hemorrhage, proteinuria of renal disease, protein-
 losing enteropathy, severe exudative skin disease, burns, intestinal parasitism, and high-protein
effusions
c. Nephrotic syndrome is recognized by the concomitant findings of hypoalbuminemia, azotemia,
and hypercholesterolemia.
d. Albumin is mildly decreased in acute tissue injury or inflammation; it is a negative acute phase
reactant. This mild decrease in albumin is offset by an increase in positive acute-phase reactants
found in the α- and β-globulin fractions, and hypoproteinemia usually does not occur.
182
CHAPTER 6
2. If selective loss (e.g., glomerular disease) or deficient production (e.g., hepatic insufficiency)
of albumin occurs, the A/G ratio will be decreased (Cases 13, 19). If there is a concomitant loss
of or failure to synthesize globulins (e.g., hemorrhage, exudation, protein-losing enteropathies,
malassimilation), then panhypoproteinemia will occur and the A/G ratio will remain within the
reference interval (Cases 1, 16, 25).
3. Hypoglobulinemia
a. Failure of passive colostral transfer or colostral deprivation in neonates leads to a very low
 Yglobulin concentration, because animals have very low immunoglobulin levels at birth (Figure
6.1).
b. Severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) of Arabian foals and other animals results
from failure to produce B lymphocytes (that synthesize immunoglobulins) and T lymphocytes
(that function in cell-mediated immunity). SCID is characterized by low concentrations of
endogenous immunoglobulin after catabolism of maternal colostral antibodies and a concurrent
profound lymphopenia in the blood.
c. Other diseases characterized by a deficiency of immunoglobulin include agammaglobulinemia;
selective IgM, IgA, and IgG deficiencies; and transient hypogammaglobulinemia.
d. With the above conditions, globulins are selectively reduced, and a high A/G ratio occurs
Hypoglobulinemia is more likely to be observed with IgG deficiency because it is present in
the largest quantity in serum. Because IgA and IgM concentrations are generally very low, their
absence seldom causes hypoglobulinemia.
e. Globulins may be lost concurrently with albumin during hemorrhage, exudation, and protein-
losing enteropathy. In addition, defcient protein synthesis in severe malnutrition, maldigestion,
and malabsorption may be associated with hypoglobulinemia as well as hypoalbuminemia. The
A/G ratio usually remains within the reference interval
4. Hypofibrinogenemia is usually caused by disseminated intravascular coagulation (Case ll)
p n a on a n dd u a  s d s 
hypofibrinogenemia in the plasma. The thrombin time test is the preferred method to detect
hypofibrinogenemia.
IV. Serum or PlaSMa ColloId OSMotIC PrEsSuRe (cOP)
A. Physiologic considerations
1. Serum or plasma COP is the contribution to effective osmolality from macromolecules. It is the
principal force opposing the exit of fluid from the vascular system
2. Decreased COP produces edema, ascites or hydrothorax, and increased total body water.
3. In health, plasma proteins are responsible for COP, with albumin being the major contributor.
Globulins contribute approximately 35% (human data).
4. Synthetic colloids, given to animals to increase COP, produce approximately eight times greater
COP per unit weight than plasma proteins.
B. Determination of COP
1. Colloid osmometry
a. Colloid osmometers give the mostaccurate evaluationofCOP,especially inanimals that have been
treated with synthetic colloids.
plasma is placed on one side of the membrane and saline is placed on the other side.
c. Decrease in pressure on the saline side is caused by the flow of water to the sample side of the
chamber. Changes in pressure are reported in mm Hg.
d. COP for healthy animals varies by species, with feline greater than canine, greater than equine,
greater than bovine COP. Published values range from 20 to 30 mm Hg
e. Individual laboratories should establish reference intervals for their analytical instrument.
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATeS
183
f. Colloid osmometry is the only method of evaluating COP from a patient that has been treated
with synthetic colloids.
2. Estimation of COP from serum or plasma protein concentration
a. Protein concentration can be used to estimate COP, but does not give accurate values.
b. The relationship between protein concentration and COP is non-linear. Multiple quadratic
equations have been developed to estimate COP in domestic animals from protein and albumin
concentrations and A/G ratios.
c. These complicated calculations have limited usefulness due to variations in COP from changes
in the protein composition of plasma of sick animals and from the therapeutic use of synthetic
colloids.
V. TROPONINS AND OTHER INDICATORS OF CARDIAC DISEASE
A. Troponins are intracellular myofibrillar proteins involved in calcium-ion regulated striated muscle
contraction
1. There are several isoforms.
2. The major isoforms useful in assessing cardiac muscle integrity are cardiac troponins I and T
(cTnI and cTnT).
a. There is considerable cross-species homology for both cInl and cInT.
b. In human medicine, mutations in troponins are associated with dilated and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathies, and mutations in the feline cTnl gene may have a role in feline familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
C. cTnl and cInT are released into blood during myocardial damage.
d. cTnl appears to be more sensitive than cTnT in assessing myocardial damage; however, cTInT
 increases have been associated with more severe injury.
e. The magnitude of increase for cTnl generally correlates with severity of injury.
(1) Higher cTnl values correlate with higher thyroxine values in feline hyperthyroidism.
(2)  The magnitude of cTnl increases in horses involved in endurance rides correlates with the
duration of the ride.
(3) cInl values have correlated with severity of cardiac involvement and are negatively
 correlated with outcome in gastric dilatation-volvulus in dogs.
f. cInl has shown utility in the differential diagnosis of cardiac vs. noncardiac causes of dyspnea
in cats.
g. Greyhounds normally have higher cTnl in the absence of cardiae disease than do other breeds.
a es  sad   n a  i sis   si a
such as endothelin also have been used to identify cardiac disease or determine severity, but the assays
are less readily available and generally have little advantage over troponins.
1. Natruiuretic peptides and indicators of sympathetic nervous system cardiovascular responses are
early responders in cardiac injury, followed by endothelin, which indicates alterations in the
vasculature.
2. In dogs, beta-type natriuretic peptide has shown greater utility in the differential diagnosis of
cardiac vs. non-cardiac causes of dyspnea than has cTnl or atrial natriuretic peptide.
PLASIMA LIPIDS
I. TYPES AND ORIGINS
A. There are five major types of lipid in plasma.
1. Cholesterol
2. Cholesterol esters
184
CHAPTER 6
3. Triglycerides (triacylglycerols)
4. Phospholipids
5. Nonesterified fatty acids (long-chain fatty acids)
B. Exogenous lipids
1. Most of the dietary lipid consists of long-chain triglycerides with a smaller proportion of
cholesterol, cholesterol esters, phospholipids, and medium-chain triglycerides.
 2. Lipid is digested into monoglycerides and free fatty acids by pancreatic lipase; digestion is
facilitated by emulsification of lipids by bile acids. Following digestion, micelles are formed from
monoglycerides, free fatty acids, cholesterol, bile salts, and fat-soluble vitamins. These micelles are
absorbed by jejunal enterocytes. The remaining bile salts and medium-chain fatty acids may be
 absorbed directly into the portal blood.
3. Jejunal enterocytes degrade the micelles into fatty acids, monoglycerides, and cholesterol.
Subsequently, chylomicra are synthesized from triglycerides (formed from glycerol and fatty acids),
cholesterol esters, cholesterol, phospholipid, and apolipoproteins (peptides involved in lipid
transport). The chylomicra are secreted into intestinal lymph of the lacteals
4. Chylomicra enter plasma via the thoracic duct. Following hydrolysis by plasma lipoprotein
lipase, the fatty acids and glycerol are absorbed, especially by adipocytes and hepatocytes, where
they are stored as triglycerides. Alternatively, the hepatocytes can oxidize certain lipids for energy.
C. Endogenous lipids (Figure 6.2)
1. Most lipids are transported in plasma attached to apolipoproteins. These lipid-peptide
complexes are very large and consist of varying quantities of triglyceride, cholesterol, cholesterol
esters, and phospholipid. They are called lipoproteins.
2.1
 Lipoproteins are synthesized by the liver and small intestine and secreted into plasma.
3.
 The fate of endogenous lipids is complex and not well characterized in most species. Plasma
from blood.
Pancrea
1
INTESTINAL LUMEN
Thoracic duct
MUCOSAL EPITHELIUM
PLASMA
C
Chylomicron
Dietar
ipid
FFA
Cholesterol
Bile
alts
proprotei
Phospholipid
lipase
apolipoprotein
Liver
Monoglycerides
Glycerol
Dther tissues
Fat
UU
Fatty acids
Fatty acids
Lymphatics
FIGURE 6.2.
 Overview of lipid metabolisrm. Panel l: lngested dietary lipids are digested by pancreatic lipase and
 emulsified by bile salts to monoglycerides and fatty acids. Micelles are formed (from monoglycerides, fatty acids,
and cholesterol), and absorbed by enterocytes. Panel 2: Micelles are degraded in the enterocyte and chylomicra are
formed from free fatty acid, cholesterol, phospholipid, and apolipoprotein. The chylomicra are secreted into the
by hepatocytes, adipocytes, and other cells.
PROTeiNS, LiPidS, ANd CARBOHYdRATeS
185
4. Exercise, diet, body condition, and reproductive cycle affect plasma lipid profiles
5. Plasma lipoproteins are characterized by their density via ultracentrifugation and
electrophoretic mobility Lipoprotein density depends upon the ratio of protein to lipid.
    p   n  s    s
fractions or classes, listed in order of increasing density, include the following:
a. Chylomicra. Chylomicra are synthesized by enterocytes and are the least dense of the
lipoproteins. They are comprised primarily of triglycerides of dietary origin, which they
transport in the blood
b. Very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL). The lipid component of VLDLs consists of
 triglyceride, cholesterol, and phospholipid in an approximate ratio of 4:1:1. They are synthesized
primarily in the liver. VLDLs export hepatic triglyceride and cholesterol and distribute
triglyceride to adipose tissue and striated muscle.
c. Intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL). IDLs are formed in the vasculature following
lipoprotein hydrolysis of VLDLs. IDLs contain approximately equal quantities of cholesterol
and triglyceride in addition to lipoprotein. They subsequently are catabolized to LDLs (below).
 Because of their transient nature, they frequently are not quantitated.
d. Low-density lipoproteins (LDL). LDLs are rich in protein with small amounts of cholesterol
 and triglyceride. They are formed in the vasculature when hepatic lipoprotein lipase removes
additional lipid from IDLs. LDLs distribute cholesterol to peripheral tissues.
2. High-density lipoproteins (HDL). HDLs contain cholesterol, protein, and phospholipid with
very little triglyceride (hence their "high" density). They are formed in the intestine and liver.
There are three types of HDL, designated HDL, HDL2, and HDL,. HDL, has more cholesterol
and less protein than HDL,. HDLs transport cholesterol to the liver.
 6. There are large species differences in lipoprotein profles and the percentage of total cholesterol
carried by each lipoprotein class. Although reports of percent and absolute values of VLDL, HDL,
and LDL cholesterol vary, several generalizations can be made.
a. In humans, the majority of cholesterol is transported as LDL cholesterol.
b. In pigs, more than half of the total cholesterol circulates as LDL and VLDL combined. The
lipoprotein profile of pigs resembles that of humans.
c. In ruminants and horses, the majority of cholesterol circulates as HDL
T g ad ns an aa (se li-i- p ) s p 'so 'si 
of the domestic species characterized to date. Dogs have HDLs l and 3, while cats have HDLs
 2 and 3. Egg-laying female birds have decreased HDL and high levels of VLDL compared with
their non-egg-laying counterparts.
7. Dogs and cats generally are resistant to atherosclerosis, even in disease states associated with
hyperlipidemia. This is due in part to the very low concentration of LDLs in these species. In
   n          s
exchange of cholesterol and triglycerides between lipoproteins. A lack of CETP is associated with
 more cholesterol transported as HDL. Although dogs and cats are resistant to atherosclerosis,
instances of lipid-related vascular disease have been reported with primary and secondary
hyperlipidemic disorders in dogs and cats.
 8. Dogs have significant interbreed differences in lipoprotein profiles but do not have significant
differences in total plasma cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations.
9. Nonesterified fatty acids (NEFAs, long-chain fatty acids, LCFAs)
a. NEFAs are synthesized in liver, adipose, and mammary tissue. Synthesis is regulated by
glucagon (decreases synthesis) and insulin (promotes synthesis). The liver of ruminants makes
only a small contribution to NEFA concentration in health.
b. NEFA synthesis increases with high-carbohydrate/low-fat diets.
C. NEFA synthesis decreases with fasting, diabetes mellitus, and high-fat/low-carbohydrate diets.
d. During states of negative energy balance and increased lipolysis, NEFAs are released into
plasma, processed in the liver, and can become triglycerides or acetyl-CoA. As plasma NEFAs
186
CHAPTER 6
increase, much of the acetyl-CoA undergoes combustion in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
for energy or is converted to ketones.
e. Examples of conditions associated with increased plasma NEFAs are hyperlipidemias with
increased lipase activity; diabetes mellitus; equine fasting hyperlipidemia; postexercise ketosis in
horses and dogs; hepatic lipidosis in cats, horses, and cattle, equine hyperadrenocorticism; and
bovine ketosis
f. NEFAs may be measured in ruminants to assess metabolic status in conditions of altered lipid
10. Ketones are organic anions produced by fatty acid breakdown. In health, they do not appear in
significant quantities in plasma or urine. Because of the complex interrelationship between lipid and
carbohydrate metabolism, ketones are discussed in the carbohydrate section of this chapter.
Il. MEASUREMENT AND CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF PLASMA LIPiDS
A. Lipemia-refrigeration test. If a plasma or serum specimen is refrigerated for four to eight hours
turbidity indicates the presence of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and/or chylomicra.
1. A flocculent layer on top with clearing below indicates chylomicra.
2. Persistent turbidity suggests triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (e.g., VLDL).
3. If a cream layer is seen on top with turbidity below, both chylomicrons and triglycerides are
increased.
B. Serum cholesterol determination
1. Increased serum cholesterol concentrations reflect increased concentration of the cholesterol-
rich lipoproteins (e.g., LDL, HDL). These lipoprotein increases commonly occur secondary t0
endocrine, hepatic, or renal diseases. Inherited or primary disorders of cholesterol metabolism are
rare in domestic animals with the exception of Miniature Schnauzer dogs.
 2. Serum cholesterol concentration generally is inversely related to thyroid hormone activity in
's8op
C. Serum triglyceride determination
1. Fasting samples should be analyzed because postprandial hypertriglyceridemia occurs four to six
of triglyceride-rich chylomicra.
 2. Hypertriglyceridemia usually indicates chylomicronemia and/or increased VLDL. These changes
may be postprandial if the patient was not fasted or may be secondary to endocrine, hepatic,
pancreatic, or renal disease.
3. Lipoprotein lipase clears triglyceride-rich lipoproteins from the plasma. The activity of this
              
due to contamination of heparin products with lipoprotein lipase activator). Lipoprotein lipase
activity increases in certain conditions such as equine hyperlipemia
D. Lipoprotein determination
1. Combined ultracentrifugation and precipitation techniques have been used, and assays are also
available for direct measurement of HDL and LDL. Formulas that calculate VLDL on the basis of
HDL and total cholesterol concentrations are based on human VLDL triglyceride content. These
formulas should not be used to calculate VLDL concentration in specimens from animals
2. Serum lipoproteins also can be identified and quantified by their electrophoretic position in
relation to those of serum proteins.
3. In general, HDLs migrate in the α region and LDLs in the β region of the lipoprotein
electrophoretogram; however, considerable species variation exists in lipoprotein electrophoretic
patterns. Five zones are present in canine lipoprotein electrophoretic patterns. The C,-globulin zone
contains HDL2, the C2-globulin zone contains HDL, the pre-B-globulin zone contains VLDL, the
PROTEiNS, LiPidS, ANd CARBOHYdRATeS 
187
       i    sn  
bovine lipoprotein electrophoretograms, LDLs may migrate in the C or β region.
4. Because routine serum protein electrophoresis only stains for the protein component
(apolipoprotein) and not for the lipid component of lipoproteins, this procedure is not specific
enough to allow adequate assessment of the lipoprotein profle.
u pe sinn  ss nn ans rede sudod u anaa mn snbiuoi ss
but not all are suitable for specimens from dogs.
6. Most commercial laboratories analyze and interpret lipoprotein data on the basis of human
patterns. Interpretation of veterinary data should be done by individuals who are familiar with
animal lipoprotein electrophoretograms
E. Nonesterified fatty acid determination
1. NEFAs are quantified by colorimetric spectrophotometry. They are extracted from serum or
  s r n n n  a e p s   
intensity of the reaction is proportional to NEFA concentration.
2. NEFAs also may be measured by enzymatic assays.
3. Plasma lipase may degrade NEFAs in improperly handled specimens. Degradation of NEFAs by
plasma lipase can be prevented.
a. Specimens should be analyzed immediately
b. If a variable delay is anticipated prior to analysis of the specimen, paraoxon can be added to
inhibit plasma lipase activity. Alternatively, after the blood specimen is centrifuged immediately,
the plasma is removed and frozen for future analysis.
F. Lipoprotein lipase determination. Samples are collected before and 15 minutes after an intravenous
injection of heparin (9o IU/kg) in dogs or before and 10 minutes after an intravenous injection of
heparin (45 IU/kg) in cats. Cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations are measured, and the heparin-
mediated lipoprotein lipase release should result in decreased triglycerides and cholesterol. Failure to
decrease these values suggests decreased or absent lipoprotein lipase activity.
G. Adipokine assays. Currently available assays are immunology-based (RIA or ELISA). Although
considerable cross-species homology exists, it is important to ensure that the assay used is appropriate
for the species of interest.
IIl. HYPERLIPIDEMIA (TABLE 6.1)
A. Hyperlipidemia is an increase in plasma lipids (e.g., triglyceride, cholesterol, phospholipid).
 Increased nonesterified fatty acids alone do not constitute hyperlipidemia
1. In clinical practice, the term hyperlipidemia usually refers to either hypertriglyceridemia or
hypercholesterolemia or both.
2. Postprandial hyperlipidemia is a transient rise in blood lipids that follows ingestion of a fatty
meal. This form of hyperlipidemia is primarily due to the presence of chylomicrons.
3. Fasting or persistent hyperlipidemia is the presence of excess lipids in the blood following at
least a 12-hour fast before the blood specimen was obtained. As the name implies, lipemia is a
persistent rather than a transient phenomenon.
B. Hyperlipoproteinemia is used synonymously with hyperlipidemia because both triglyceride and
cholesterol in plasma are contained in special complexes called lipoproteins.
C. Primary hyperlipidemia encompasses proven or suspected hereditary alterations in lipoprotein
metabolism. These conditions generally are infrequent to rare, but have been reported in dogs and cats.
1. Idiopathic hyperlipidemia with hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, and
hyperchylomicronemia. This condition occurs in Miniature Schnauzers, is probably hereditary, and
188
CHAPTER 6
Table 6.1.
CAUSES OF HYPERLIPIDEMIA.
Primary hyperlipidemia (infrequent to rare)
x(adand jauou) Aouayap ased uaiidod renuasu
Familial hyperlipoproteinemia (Beagles)
Hypercholesterolemia with cormeal lipodystrophy (dogs)
Hypertiglyceridemia (Brittany Spaniels)*
Idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia of Miniature Schnauzers*
Inherite d hyperchylomicronemia
(primary hypercholesterolemia) of cats*
Hyperniglyceridemmia in Burmese cats*
(uouo Aaaela) euapidadu Aepuosas
Acute pancreatitis*
Cholestasis
Diabetes mellitus*
Diets high in saturated fat or cholesterol
Enterocolitis (horses)
Equine hepatic lipidosis syndrome (ponies, mules, horses)*
Hepatic disease (lipidosis)*
Hyperadrenocorticism, exogenous corticosteroids*
Hypothyroidism*
Nephrotic syndrome
Postprandial*
* Lipemia may occur in these conditions.
is associated with excess VLDLs. Similar syndromes have been reported in Beagles, Brittany
Spaniels, mixed-breed dogs, and cats.
2.
 Insulin-dependent hypertriglyceridemia. This condition has been reported in dogs.
results in increased plasma concentrations of cholesterol and triglycerides. Affected individuals may
have xanthomas, granulomas, lipemia retinalis, and peripheral neuropathies. Familial lipoprotein
lipase deficiency also has been reported in dogs.
4. Primary hypercholesterolemia. This condition has been observed in dogs with corneal
lipodystrophy.
5. Primary hypercholesterolemia of Briard dogs. Afected Briards have an increased HDL cholesterol
concentration but appear clinically healthy.
6. Lipid aqueous in Burmese cats. Affected cats have moderately increased triglycerides (VLDL and
chylomicrons). Lipoproteins cross the blood-aqueous barrier, resulting in "blue eye.'
D. Conditions causing secondary hyperlipidemia are relatively common and include the following:
1. Postprandial hyperlipemia. Following ingestion of a meal, particularly one high in fat,
hypertriglyceridemia occurs due to chylomicronemia. Dietary fat supplementation of horses may
diminish postprandial plasma hypertriglyceridemia due to increased lipoprotein lipase activity.
2. Hypothyroidism (Case 28). In hypothyroidism, cholesterol use decreases while cholesterol
synthesis increases. LDL cell receptor expression and lipoprotein lipase activity are reduced.
Hyperlipidemia is variable, ranging from mildly increased cholesterol and HDL concentrations to
marked lipemia with hypercholesterolemia (above 1 ,000 mg/dL), hypertriglyceridemia, and
panhyperlipoproteinemia.
PROTEiNS, LiPidS, ANd CARBOHYdRATeS 
189
3. Diabetes mellitus. In diabetes mellitus, lack of insulin results in reduced lipoprotein lipase activity
(insulin enhances lipoprotein lipase activity). Lipolysis is increased as lipids are used as an alternative
source of energy. Marked hypertriglyceridemia is associated with increased VLDL concentration;
cholesterol concentration is mildly increased. Hyperchylomicronemia also may be present.
4. Equine hepatic lipidosis syndrome of pony mares and horses. This syndrome is associated with
 decreased feed consumption and a negative nitrogen balance in pregnant, lactating, recently
transported, or debilitated animals. Hyperlipidemia varies from mild hypertriglyceridemia with clear
plasma to marked lipemia with severe hypertriglyceridemia (as high as 10,0o0 mg/dL), increased
NEFAs, and increased VLDLs. Plasma ketones also may be increased. Affected horses may be
azotemic.
5. Other causes of secondary hyperlipidemia exist in which the mechanism and characteristics
remain unclear.
a. Acute necrotizing pancreatitis. This condition is observed in dogs. The necrotic pancreas is
thought to release inhibitors of lipoprotein lipase. Both triglyceride and cholesterol concentrations
are increased. Hyperlipidemia also may increase the risk of pancreatitis.
b. Hepatic disease. Some dogs with cholestasis may have hypercholesterolemia and
hypertriglyceridemia, but the hyperlipidemia usually is not of sufficient magnitude to be
increases in triglycerides and enrichment of LDL with triglycerides and of HDL with cholesterol
have been reported. Cholestasis and icterus may be prominent.
c. Nephrotic syndrome. In nephrotic syndrome, hypercholesterolemia is secondary to enhanced
synthesis of cholesterol-containing lipoproteins. Lipoprotein synthesis presumably is stimulated
by hypoalbuminemia and decreased plasma oncotic pressure (Case 19). Sometimes triglyceride
concentration also is increased
d. Exogenous corticosteroid administration. Excess administration of corticosteroids may result
in hypertriglyceridemia from increased lipolysis, insulin resistance, and decreased lipoprotein
lipase activity. Moderate hypercholesterolemia, predominantly due to increased LDLs, may occur.
 Decreased liver LDL receptor activity has been suggested as the mechanism for these changes.
if present. Although increased concentrations of NEFAs and ketones often accompany equine
hyperadrenocorticism, hyperlipidemia/ipemia is not a common feature of this disease.
Hyperlipidemia of enterocolitis. In miniature horses, hyperlipidemia may be secondary to
enterocolitis. However, these horses normally may have increased incidence of hyperlipidemia.
horses. This is likely due to increased mobilization of fat to meet energy demand and may be
 ameliorated with administration of parenteral nutrition or IV dextrose administration. Fasting
hypertriglyceridemia occurs in dogs, and may be familial in Miniature Schnauzers and Beagles
In parvovirus enteritis, hypertriglyceridemia may be seen, accompanied by
hypocholesterolemia.
E. Lipemia is a term used for the milky appearance of serum or plasma caused by increased
concentrations of triglyceride-carrying lipoproteins (i.e., chylomicra and VLDL). Increased
concentrations of cholesterol do not cause lipemia.
1. Effects of lipemia on laboratory tests and management of the problem
a. Major effects of lipemia in vitro
(1) Lipemia enhances hemolysis, presumably due to a detergent effect on the cell membrane.
Hemolyzed serum may alter test laboratory results (e.g., lipase activity is markedly inhibited by
 free hemoglobin).
(2) Lipemia-induced turbidity of the serum may impair end-point spectrophotometric
determinations of selected serum analytes (e.g., glucose, calcium, phosphorus, total bilirubin
values may be falsely high and total protein and albumin may be falsely low).
06L
CHAPTER 6
(3) Serum Na+ and K+ values measured in lipemic samples may be flsely low due to lipid
displacement of the aqueous phase of serum. This problem occurs with flame photometers and
Values determined by ion-selective electrodes that require undiluted serum are clinically
accurate in lipemic samples.
(4) Plasma protein values, measured by refractometry, may be falsely high. An indistinct line
of demarcation on the protein scale usually is interpreted as an increased reading.
(5) Lipemia may interfere with hemoglobin determination, producing a falsely high value.
Subsequently, calculation of the MCH and MCHC will be erroneous.
b. Management of lipemia for purposes of acquiring better laboratory specimens
(1) Fasting the patient for 24 hours usually eliminates lipemia.
(2) Lipemic serum may be refrigerated and the aliquot for analysis may be collected below the
lipid layer.
q A ne udd e se og poa auaaod po an ai no uonn ()
used to clear lipemic serum.
(4) In cases in which lipemia persists after fasting, in vivo clearing of plasma lipids may be
enhanced by administering intravenous sodium heparin (loo IU/kg in dogs) and collecting the
blood sample 15 minutes later.
2. Causes of lipemia are listed in Table 6.l.
V. OBESITY
A. Research pertaining to causes of obesity and metabolic consequences of obesity have identified
associated perturbations in traditional blood parameters as well as additional factors that are involved
in lipid metabolism.
1. In dogs, chronic obesity is associated with increases in total cholesterol (all fractions increased)
and triglyceride concentrations. Obese cats have increased non-esterified fatty acids, triglycerides.
and VLDL, with lower HDL. Obesity has been identified as a risk factor for developing diabetes in
cats.
2. Adipokines are produced by adipocytes and/or macrophages and participate in a variety of
functions including fat metabolism, cardiovascular dynamics and angiogenesis, inflammatory and
immune responses, and hematopoiesis. Alterations in circulating values of adipokines are associated
with a variety of co-morbidities seen in obesity, for example, insulin resistance. Some emerging
factors whose circulating values are affected by obesity include the following:
a. Leptin is highly conserved across vertebrate species, promotes energy burning, and suppresses
sisuaonue siens pue 'sisondode sissaiddns ronoen ymoa e e suonung ose in 'aiadde
Leptin commonly is increased in obese individuals, who develop leptin resistance; leptin levels
correlate with body fat content. Circadian rhythm, proximity to feeding, gender, glucocorticoids,
and stage of estrous cycle can influence circulating leptin levels at the time of measurement.
b. Adiponectin circulates in a number of forms of varying sizes; the high-molecular-weight
(HMW) forms have the most biological activity. Some of the biological activities include anti-
inflammatory properties, vasodilation, increasing insulin sensitivity, lowering blood glucose, and
c. Resistin (demonstrated in cattle, pigs, humans, and mice to date) is secreted primarily by
adipocytes or macrophages, depending on the species, and increases with increasing body fat
 Resistin is proinflammatory and contributes to insulin resistance.
PLASMA CARBOHYDRATES
Glucose metabolism and blood glucose concentration are abnormal in many diseases, and
hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia are common laboratory findings. Disorders of glucose metabolism
PROTEiNS, LiPidS, ANd CARBOHYdRATeS 
191
caused by diseases of the endocrine system, particularly the endocrine pancreas, are described in
during abnormal carbohydrate metabolism. Laboratory assessment of ketones and lactate is described
in this section.
I. GLUCOSE
A. Sources of blood glucose
1. Dietary carbohydrate
a. After partial processing by salivary enzymes and stomach acid, the majority of carbohydrate
hydrolysis occurs in the small intestine in monogastric animals. Pancreatic amylase digests
carbohydrates to disaccharides. Mucosal disaccharidases subsequently digest disaccharides to
monosaccharides (e.g., glucose, fructose, galactose), which are absorbed.
  a    a n o rd  s a s a
energy, stored as glycogen, or converted to amino acids or fats.
C.
 Blood glucose increases for two to four hours postprandially in monogastric animals.
(1)  A l2-hour fast should eliminate dietary carbohydrate ingestion as a cause of
hyperglycemia.
(2) Postprandial hyperglycemia may be prolonged in hepatic disease because of reduced
hepatocellular glycogenesis (storage of glucose as glycogen).
d. Ruminants have an absence of or minimal postprandial hyperglycemia because most of the
dietary carbohydrates are ferrmented by microbes to volatile fatty acids (acetic, propionic, and
butyric acids) in the rumen.
2. Starvation and malabsorption may cause hypoglycemia by restricting dietary intake and
absorption of glucose, respectively (Case 16)
f. Birds have higher blood glucose values in health compared to mammals. Avian blood glucose
values range from 209 to 399 mg/dL (see below).
2. Glycogenolysis
a. Glycogenolysis is the degradation of glucose.
b. Glycogen is the primary source of glucose during short periods of fasting. Depletion of
 liver glycogen stores occurs in many disease states that are characterized by a negative energy
balance.
c. In the liver, glycogen is degraded to glucose that is released into the blood, resulting in
hyperglycemia. Muscle glycogenolysis produces lactate and pyruvate, which are transported to the
liver and converted (predominately lactate) to glucose.
d. Glycogenolysis is promoted by the following:
(1) Catecholamines (epinephrine)
(a) Catecholamines are released during fear, excitement, and muscular exertion (Cases
14, 18, 21, 22, 23)
(c) Blood glucose concentration seldom exceeds 150 mg/dL in the dog, but values may
exceed 300mg/dL in the cat. Hyperglycemia may be accompanied by glucosuria in the cow
or cat (Chapter 9).
(d)  The mild hyperglycemia often seen with hyperthyroidism in cats may be partially
 mediated by increased sensitivity to epinephrine.
(e) Hyperglycemia and glucosuria seen in moribund cattle or cattle with neurological
signs may be caused by catecholamine release.
(2) Glucagon (Case 14)
(a) Glucagon is released in response to hypoglycemia (low blood glucose).
(b) Glucagon only promotes hepatic glycogenolysis.
(c) Glucagon antagonizes the effect of insulin
192
CHAPTER 6
(3) Certain drugs may cause hyperglycemia. Examples include glucocorticoids, dextrose-
containing parenteral fluids, thiazide diuretics, megesterol acetate, growth hormone, and
morphine.
2. Glycogenolysis is inhibited in glycogen storage diseases; hypoglycemia may occur.
f. Glucocorticoids decrease glycogenolysis; therefore, hepatic glycogen stores are increased.
Hypoglycemia does not occur, due to the hyperglycemic effects of glucocorticoids via other
mechanisms, including gluconeogenesis (formation of glucose from protein or fat).
g. Reduced glycogen stores in hepatic disease may lead to fasting hypoglycemia
h. Neonates have decreased glycogen stores and are prone to hypoglycemia during fasting
3. Gluconeogenesis is the synthesis of glucose from amino acids and fats. Protein catabolism
promotes gluconeogenesis and may be characterized by muscle wasting. Gluconeogenesis is
promoted by the following:
a. Corticosteroids
(1) Excessive endogenous corticosteroid (cortisol) release in response to pain, extremes in
body temperature, and other stressful events may lead to hyperglycemia in mammals (Cases
20, 22, 23).
(2) Hyperglycemia may be associated with hyperadrenocorticism (Case 26), while
hypoglycemia may occur with hypoadrenocorticism.
(3) Corticosteroids are antagonistic to insulin and decrease uptake and use of glucose by
tissues.
b.Glucagon
C.
Growth hormone
d. Certain drugs (see above)
B. Fate of blood glucose
1. Glycogenesis
a. Insulin shifts glucose metabolism in the liver and muscle toward glycogen synthesis
2. Tissue utilization
a. Cellular uptake of glucose is stimulated by insulin.
(1) Muscle, liver, and fat are the major tissues affcted.
(2) Insulin is not as necessary for glucose uptake by erythrocytes, neurons, and renal tubular
epithelial cells.
(3) Blood glucose concentrations greater than 90 mg/dL usually stimulate insulin release.
b. Increased tissue use of glucose and hypoglycemia may occur with the following:
(1) Excess administration or secretion of insulin or insulin analogs
(a) Iatrogenic insulin overdose
(b) β-cell tumor (insulinoma, islet cell tumor) of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans
(c)Paraneoplastic syndromes (e.g., leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma)
(2) Reduction of hormones that maintain glucose homeostasis
(a) Hypoadrenocorticism
(3) Reduced hepatic storage of glycogen
(a) Advanced liver disease
(b) Sepsis due to Gram-negative endotoxemia and Gram-positive anaerobes
(c) Glycogen storage diseases
(4) Excessive use of glucose
(a) Sepsis
(b)  Extreme physical exertion (hunting dogs)
(c)Pregnancy
(d) Polycythemia
(e) Extreme leukocytosis
(f)  Neoplasia
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATES
193
(5) Reduced glucose intake or inadequate gluconeogenesis
(a) Neonates (especially toy breeds of dogs)
(b) Severe malnutrition
(c) Severe malabsorption
(d) Starvation
(6) Prolonged contact of serum with erythrocytes in vitro. Failure to remove the serum
from the clot or to separate plasma from blood cells is the most common cause of
pseudohypoglycemia in clinical laboratory specimens.
c. Decreased tissue use of glucose with subsequent hyperglycemia may occur with the following:
(1) Insulin antagonists that increase peripheral resistance of tissues to the effects of insulin
(a)  Exogenous corticosteroid administration
(b) Excessive endogenous cortisol (mammals) or corticosterone (birds) production and/
or release
(c) Glucagon
(d) Growth hormone
(2) Diabetes mellitus (Case 15)
(a)  Iype I (type l) diabetes with decreased insulin production
(b)  Type II (type 2) diabetes with delayed or inadequate insulin secretion
(3) Increased tissue breakdown and carbohydrate metabolism caused by hyperthyroidism
C. Maintenance of blood glucose concentration
 1. Glucose concentration is governed by multiple factors that affect entry and removal of glucose
from the blood.
2. A balance between glucose absorption, insulin production, and insulin antagonists (glucagon,
corticosteroids, growth hormone) maintains appropriate blood glucose concentrations in health.
D. Glucose metabolism in birds
1. Basic glucose metabolism in birds is similar to that in mammals.
2. Fasting blood glucose values (209 to 399 mg/dL) in birds are considerably higher than those of
mammals.
3. The avian pancreas has lower insulin and higher glucose stores than does the mammalian
pancreas.
4. Plasma glucagon concentration is higher in birds than in mammals.
E. Means of evaluating glucose metabolism
1. Blood glucose concentration
a. Proper sample management is imperative to correctly interpret blood glucose values.
(1) Sampling of frightened animals should be avoided; excessive catecholamine release may
cause hyperglycemia.
(2) If the medical history precludes the likelihood of hypoglycemia, nonruminants and very
young ruminants should be fasted at least 12 hours to avoid postprandial hyperglycemia.
(3) If the medical history or clinical signs (e.g., weakness, muscle twitching, depression,
sizures) suggest hypoglycemia, fasting of the patient should be avoided. A non-fasting.
baseline glucose concentration is determined.
(a) If the baseline glucose value is within the reference interval, the patient is fasted and
blood glucose concentrations are determined every two hours
(b) Hypoglycemia is confirmed if the blood glucose concentration falls below
40 mg/dL, whereas glucose values greater than 50 mg/dL after a 24-hour fast are less
suggestive of hypoglycemia.
(4) Serum or plasma should be separated from blood cells (i.e.,the clot in a specimen without
anticoagulant) if more than 30 minutes will lapse between sample collection and assay.
(a) In vitro glycolysis is the most common cause of pseudohypoglycemia in laboratory
specimens.
194
CHAPTER 6
(b) In vitro glycolysis by blood cells decreases blood glucose concentration approximately
10%/hour at room temperature.
(c) An alternative to serum or plasma separation is use of an anticoagulant solution
containing sodium fluoride to inhibit glycolysis. Sodium fluoride specifically inhibits
enolase, an enzyme that converts 2-phosphoglycerate to phosphoenolpyruvate in the
glycolytic pathway Sodium fluoride also inhibits some diagnostic enzymes. If the
anticoagulant is potassium oxalate, glucose measurement may be artifactually decreased.
b. Lipemia markedly interferes with the accuracy of glucose measurement in some assays (e.g.,
end-point colorimetric tests). It is often present in diseases characterized by hyperglycemia (e.g.:
diabetes mellitus). The management of lipemic specimens is described earlier in this chapter (see
Plasma Lipids).
C. Assay techniques are primarily spectrophotometric using colorimetric end-point or kinetic
assays.
(1) Colorimetric end-point assays are inaccurate with lipemic specimens; decreased light
transmittance accompanies sample turbidity.
(2) Kinetic assays are enzymatic and self-blanking. They detect changes in optical
density of the specimen over time. The laboratory results are more accurate with this type of
assay.
estimating glucose concentration in fresh whole blood
(1)  The strips may reliably detect hyperglycemia, but hypoglycemia may be missed.
(2) Proper controls should be run if point-of-care analyzers are used; the instrument should
be validated and maintained to provide accurate results.
(3) Anemia may result in overestimation of blood glucose concentrations.
(4) The accuracy of abnormal glucose values, determined by colorimetric reagent strips,
should be verified before clinical decisions are made rgarding treatment.
2. Portable blood glucose meters have a place in daily monitoring of diabetics, but they are not
always accurate for veterinary specimens, particularly at higher concentrations of glucose.
f. Continuous glucose monitoring devices have been used in dogs, cats, and horses, and greatly
refine the assessment of diabetes control. These devices record interstitial glucose concentrations
which correlate with blood glucose. By recording values frequently (typically every five minutes)
fluctuations and response to insulin, feeding, etc. can be monitored. In addition, the assessments
 can be done in the animal's normal environment, which minimizes handling, caging, and
 transport stres-related effects on blood glucose. Additional uses for the devices include managing
ketoacidotic diabetic patients and other critical care patients with hypo- or hyperglycemia in a
hospital setting.
2. Urine glucose (see Chapter 9)
a. The resorptive capacity of the proximal renal tubule is exceeded when blood glucose
concentration exceeds 100 mg/dL in the cow, 180 mg/dL in the dog, 280 mg/dL in the cat, and
600 mg/dL in birds.
c. Because urine collects in the bladder over time, previous transient hyperglycemia results in
mild glucosuria, even though the blood glucose concentration has returned to the reference
interval.
3. Serum insulin and amended insulin/glucose ratios (Chapter ll, Endocrine Pancreas). These
measurements and calculations are used to detect hyperinsulinism; they have generally replaced
glucose tolerance tests for this purpose
4. Glucose tolerance tests
a. Indications
(1) Intravenous or oral glucose tolerance tests may be used to detect hyperinsulinism
PROTEiNS, LiPidS, ANd CARBOHYdRATeS 
195
(2) Intravenous or oral glucose tolerance tests also may be used to detect glucose intolerance
in animals with persistent hyperglycemia below the renal threshold. Once persistent
hyperglycemia exceeds the renal threshold, glucose tolerance testing adds no further diagnostic
information.
(3) For patients in which diabetes mellitus has been confirmed, the intravenous glucose
tolerance test, combined with the measurement of serum insulin after the glucose injection,
may be used to identify the type of diabetes mellitus (Chapter ll). The type of diabetes is
identifed by the insulin response pattern.
(4) The most common use of the oral glucose tolerance test is to evaluate intestinal
absorption.
b. Dosages and interpretive guidelines. Blood glucose concentration is measured after a
12-hour fast (if the animal is not hypoglycemic) and at appropriate intervals after glucose
administration.
(1) Oral glucose tolerance test
(a) Dogs are given 1.75 g glucose/kg body weight per os. Horses are given 1g glucose/kg
as a 2o% solution via stomach tube. Oral glucose tolerance tests cannot be performed in
ruminants because ruminal microflora ferment ingested carbohydrates.
(b) Blood samples for glucose measurement are collected at 30-minutes intervals.
(c) The blood glucose concentration should approach 160mg/dL by 30 to 60 minutes
post glucose administration and return to baseline values by 120 to 180 minutes in normal
dogs. In horses, the blood glucose concentration should approach 175 mg/dL by 120
minutes and return to baseline values within 360 minutes.
(d) Failure to reach these maximal blood glucose concentrations suggests intestinal
malabsorption, delayed gastric emptying, or vomiting. Increased glucose tolerance and
lower than expected peak values may be seen in hypothyroidism, adrenal insuffciency,
hypopituitarism, and hyperinsulinism.
(e) Failure of the blood glucose concentration to return to baseline values within the
expected time suggests glucose intolerance, which is a feature of diabetes mellitus,
hyperadrenocorticism, hyperthyroidism, and hepatic insufficiency. Impaired glucose
tolerance also may occur as a consequence of high fat content of the diet
(f) After glucose concentrations reach baseline values, a brief hypoglycemic phase occurs.
The glucose concentration subsequently returns to baseline as glucagon is released. Severe
hypoglycemia may occur if glucagon secretion is impaired.
(2) Intravenous glucose tolerance test
(a) After a l2-hour fast (ruminants do not require fasting), a baseline blood glucose
specimen is drawn and then glucose is administered. In dogs and cats, l g glucose/kg is
given intravenously over a 30-second period. In large animals, the calculated dosage of
glucose is given within two to three minutes. Timing of the test begins at the midpoint of
glucose injection. Blood samples are collected at 5, 15, 25, 35, 45, and 60 minutes after
administration. In cats, an additional blood sample is collected at l20 minutes.
(b) Using semilog graph paper, the glucose values are plotted on log scale vs. time on the
arithmetic scale. The time required for the glucose value to decrease by 50% is determined
from the graph (usually 45 minutes or less in the dog).
(c)  Prolonged glucose disappearance indicates intolerance (the same diseases as described
for the oral test above).
(d) Insulin response also can be assessed; the peak insulin concentration should occur
within 15 minutes of glucose administration with a return to baseline values at 60 minutes
 in most species, 120 minutes in the cat. Insulin response is most useful in differentiating
types of diabetes mellitus (Chapter ll).
(e) Glucose clearance is enhanced and circulating insulin concentrations (both pre- and
post-glucose injection) are decreased in horses with polysaccharide storage myopathy.
196
CHAPTER 6
5. Glycated proteins
a. Glucose molecules irreversibly bind to proteins, providing a means of assessing long-term
blood glucose concentrations.
b. Glycated protein assays include fructosamine (FrAm), hemoglobin Alc (HbAlc), and
glycoalbumin (Galb).
C. Fructosamine is an amino sugar formed by the reduction of the osazone glucosamine.
 Fructosamine quantitation is the most commonly used glycated protein assay in veterinary
medicine. This colorimetric test is based on the reduction of fructosamine. In this assay,
the glycated proteins are albumin and other serum proteins. Their measurement allows a
determination of average blood glucose over the previous two to three weeks, which roughly
corresponds to the protein half-life.
(1) Fructosamine measurement is useful in diagnosing diabetes mellitus, differentiating
diabetes mellitus from stress-induced hyperglycemia in cats or renal glucosuria, and monitoring
treatment of diabetics. Fructosamine concentration is increased with chronic hyperglycemia, but
is within the reference interval in transient hyperglycemia
(2) There is considerable inter-individual variability in fructosamine in hyperglycemic cats,
resulting in a wide range irrespective of the degree of hyperglycemia. Serial fructosamine
measurements in individual cats to monitor diabetic control are more useful than estimation of
mean glucose concentration from a single plasma fructosamine concentration.
species-specific reference intervals are critical. Fructosamine values can be used to identify and
monitor diabetic psittacines; however, fructosamine values increase and decrease more rapidly
than in mammals, resulting in fructosamine increases in transient hyperglycemia and decreases
similar to those of glucose after insulin administration. Thus, fructosamine is less useful for
long-term monitoring of blood glucose in these species.
(4) Hypoproteinemia (cats) and/or hypoalbuminemia may result in decreased fructosamine
concentrations.
(5) If albumin and protein values are within the reference interval and fructosamine values
are below the reference interval, the patient should be evaluated further for hyperinsulinism
 Insulinoma has presented with normal fasting glucose concentrations and low fructosamine
values.
d. Glycoalbumin measurement has been demonstrated as an acceptable alternative to
 fructosamine assessment in dogs and cats.
e. HbAlc concentration is measured less frequently. Its concentration reflects the blood glucose
concentration over the previous two to three months.
f. Glycated hemoglobin measurement has been used to assess resource intake, growth, and body
condition of birds
6. Less commonly used diagnostic tools to evaluate glucose metabolism
a. Insulin tolerance and glucagon stimulation tests have been used to evaluate carbohydrate
metabolism.
b. Epinephrine's ability to promote glycogenolysis and increase blood glucose concentration has
been exploited to assess liver glycogen stores.
7. Beta-cell function in cats can be determined using immunoradiometric or enzyme-linked
immunosorbent methods to measure proinsulin and determine proinsulin:insulin ratios in blood.
Proinsulin is converted to insulin by beta cells
F. Hyperglycemic disorders (Cases 14, 15, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27). Diseases and circumstances
G. Hypoglycemic disorders (Case l6). Diseases and circumstances associated with hypoglycemia are
listed in Table 6.3.
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATES
197
TABLE 6.2.
CAUSES OF HYPERGLYCEMIA.
Persistent hyperglycemia
Acromegaly
 Diabe tes mellitus
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hyperglucagonemia
Hyperpituitarism
Hyperthyroidism
Pheochromocytoma
Iransient hyperglycermia
 Acute pancreatitis
Acute severe colic
Ammonia toxicosis
 Bovine displaced abomasum
Bovine milk fever
 Bovine neurologic diseases
 Diestrus
 Drugs and chemicals
ACTH
Corticosteroids
Detomidine
Ethylene glycol toxicosis
 Glucose -containing parenteral fluids
Halothane (prolonged anesthesia in horses)
Ketamine
Megestrol acetate
 Morphine
 Phenothiazine
Progestogens
Thiazide diuretics
Xylazine
Equine acute abdominal disease
Fear, excitement, exertional catecholamine release (especially cats)
Head trauma (dogs, cats)
 Hyperthyroidism
Moribumd animals (particularly cattle)
Ovine enterotoxemia
Ovine listeriosis
 Ovine transport tetany
 Postprandial
 Stress, endogenous corticosteroids
Il. KETONES
A. Basic concepts
1. The ketone bodies (anions of buffered ketoacids) are acetoacetate, B-hydroxybutyrate, and
acetone. The former two ketones are intermediary metabolites of lipid metabolism, while the latter
is a waste product.
TABlE 6.3.
CAUSES OF HYPOGLYCEMIA.
 Excess administration or secretion of insulin and insulin analogs
Beta-cell tumor (insulinoma, islet cell tumor) of the pancreas
Extrapancreatic neoplasms, including those with possible secretion of abnormal insulin-like growth
factor (paraneoplastic syndrome)
Hemangiosarcoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma
Melanoma
 Renal carcinoma
 Salivary adenocarcinoma
latrogenic insulin overdose
Re duction of hormones that maintain glucose homeostasis
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hypopituitarism
Hypothyroidism
Re duced hepatic storage of glycogen
 Advanced liver disease/hepatic insufficiency (paradoxically, prolonged postprandial hyperglycemia and
glucose intolerance)
Aflatoxicosis in horses
Fat cow syndrome
Glycogen storage diseases
Hyperlipidemia in ponies
 Sepsis (Gram-negative endotoxemia and Gram-positive anaerobes)
Increased use of glucose
Extreme leukocytosis
Extreme physical exertion (hunting dogs, endurance-ride horses)
 In vitro glycolysis (common cause of pseudohypoglycemia)
Neoplasia (paraneoplastic syndrome)
Polycythemia
Pregnancy toxemia in sheep, dogs, cows, and goats
Sepsis (Gram-negative endotoxemia and Gram-positive anaerobes)
 Reduced glucose intake or inadequate gluconeogenesis
Juvenile hypoglycemia (piglets, toy and miniature breeds of dogs)
Ketosis in cattle
 Malabsorption syndromes
 Neonatal hypoglycemia
 Severe malnutrition
Starvation
Drug effects causing hypoglycemia
Ethanol
 Insulin overdose
o,p'-DDD
Salicylates
Sulfonylurea
198
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATeS
661
 2. Ketone production always increases when carbohydrate depletion and increased gluconeogenesis
occur. In these circumstances, oxaloacetate depletion in the Krebs cycle and suppressed lipogenesis
lead to acetoacetyl coenzyme A production, the precursor to ketogenesis.
3. Routine laboratory tests usually detect ketonuria before ketonemia can be identified.
a. The renal threshold for ketones is low. Following glomerular filtration, ketones are
incompletely reabsorbed by the renal tubular epithelial cells, resulting in ketonuria. Ketonuria is
specifically detected by dipstick analysis via the nitroprusside reaction (Chapter 9).
b. Routine biochemical profiles do not specifically detect ketones. Their presence in serum is
suggested indirectly by titration acidosis (decreased HCO, or TCO2) and an increased anion gap.
However, lactic acidosis can produce similar laboratory abnormalities (chapters 5 and 9).
4. Ketones can provide an important alternate energy source to numerous tissues. Their production
is a survival mechanism in situations of energy deficit. The highly acidic nature of acetoacetate and
B-hydroxybutyrate often results in the clinical syndrome of ketoacidosis if they are present in high
concentrations in the plasma (Chapters 5 and 1l).
B. Measurement of ketones
1. Most qualitative tests detect ketones by the nitroprusside reaction. This reaction is specific for
acetoacetate and to a lesser extent acetone; B-hydroxybutyrate is not detected. Because
B-hydroxybutyrate is a major ketone in diabetic ketoacidosis, the degree of intensity of the
nitroprusside reaction does not correlate with the severity of ketosis. Beta-hydroxybutyrate strips
have been developed for use in milk; however, reports of their advantages over the nitroprusside
 method in diagnosing bovine ketosis are conflicting.
2. Specimens of milk, urine, or serum for ketone quantitation should be fresh to avoid false-
negative reactions following the degradation of acetoacetate:
a. Milk may be tested directly.
b. Urine should be diluted l:10 with distilled water to avoid false-positive reactions on urine
reagent strips.
C. Serum should be diluted 1:1 with water to avoid false-positive reactions.
3. An enzymatic and colorimetric method has been developed for quantification of
B-hydroxybutyrate. Consult the laboratory performing the test for specimen handling instructions.
4. Several drugs and endogenous substances can cause false positive reactions in urine.
5. Ketonemia may be suspected when the calculated anion gap (Chapter 5) is increased. Diabetic
ssu    no s m 'axa n  ad si 
reagents. Therefore, a negative serum ketone test does not exclude ketonemia as the cause of an
increased anion gap.
C.Causes of ketonemia and ketonuria
1. Anorexia, starvation, diabetes mellitus (Case 15), bovine ketosis, displaced abomasum, ovine
 pregnancy toxemia, equine hyperadrenocorticism, high-fat diet, and bovine hepatic lipidosis
syndrome are the major causes of ketonemia and ketonuria.
2. Lactation in dairy goats and pregnancy in dogs, goats, and cattle (paricularly with multiple
fetuses) may cause ketosis.
3. Heavy exercise in dogs and horses may result in a negative energy balance with development of
ketosis. Increased release of fatty acids into the plasma and subsequent conversion of the fatty acids
to ketones by the liver causes ketosis
4. The ketonemia of diabetes mellitus is accompanied by hyperglycemia, whereas ketonemia of
other causes usually is accompanied by normoglycemia or hypoglycemia.
Ill. LACTATE
A. Basic concepts
1. Lactate is the organic anion of buffered lactic acid. It is produced in excess during anaerobic
metabolism.
200
CHAPTER 6
Lactic acid diffuses immediately into extracellular fluid and dissociates into hydrogen ion and
lactate.
         s g 
occasionally with diarrhea. Absorbed lactic acid also dissociates into hydrogen ion and lactate.
B. Measurement of lactate
1. Blood samples for quantitative lactate analysis must be collected into sodium fluoride-containing
anticoagulant, which prevents in vitro glycolysis and increased lactate production. A test method
using a portable hand-held meter has been developed for point-of-care evaluation of lactate
concentrations.
2. Most test methods use L-lactate dehydrogenase. This enzymatic assay detects L-lactate, but does
not detect D-lactate (Chapter 5). D-lactate can be measured by gas-liquid chromatography or
D-lactate dehydrogenase methods.
3. Increased serum lactate concentration may be suspected when the calculated anion gap (Chapter
5) is increased and clinical circumstances are consistent with lactic acid production
4. Serum lactate measurement may be used to determine exercise tolerance in assessing adequacy
of cardiac function.
C. Causes of hyperlactatemia include shock, grain overload, sustained heavy exercise, diabetic
ketoacidosis, and colic in horses that is characterized by torsion, strangulation, or rupture. Patient
REFERENCES
as determined by 3 analyzers. J Vet Intern Med 20:1136-1142.
I and I immunoassays in serum from rats, dogs, and monkeys with induced acute myocardial injury.
Clin Chem 54:1982-1989.
Ardia DR: 2006. Glycated hemoglobin and albumin refect nestling growth and condition in American
kestrels. Comp Biochem Physiol 143:62-66.
Baker JL, Aleman M, Madigan J: 200l. Intermittent hypoglycemia in a horse with anaplastic carcinoma
of the kidney. J Am Vet Med Assor 218:235-237.
Baker RJ, Valli VEO: 1986. A review of feline serum protein electrophoresis. Vet Clin Pathol 15:20-25.
Barrie J, Nash AS, Watson TDG: 1993. Quantitative analysis of canine plasma lipoproteins. J Small
Anim Prart 34:226-231.
Barrie J, Watson TDG, Stear MJ, et al: 1993. Plasma cholesterol and lipoprotein concentrations in the
dog: The effects of age, breed, gender and endocrine disease. J Small Anim Pract 34:507-512.
geriatric companion animal health programmes. J Vet Med, Series A 43:50l-508.
Bauer JE: 2004. Lipoprotein-mediated transport of dietary and synthesized lipids and lipid
abnormalities of dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assor 224:668-675.
Bauer JE: 1992. Diet-induced alterations of lipoprotein metabolism. J Am Vet Med Assoc
201:1691-1694.
Bauer JE, Brooks TP: 199o. Immunoturbidimetric quantification of serum immunoglobulin G
concentration in foals. Am J Vet Res 5l:121l-1214
PROTEiNS, LIPIdS, AND CARBOHYdRATeS 
201
Bauer JE, Meyer DJ, Campbell M, et al: 1990. Serum lipid and lipoprotein changes in ponies with
experimentally induced liver disease. Am J Vet Res 51:1380-1384.
Blanchard G, Paragon BM, Serougne C, et al: 2004. Plasma lipids, lipoprotein composition and profle
during induction and treatment of hepatic lipidosis in cats and the metabolic effect of one daily meal
in healthy cats. J Anim Phys and Anim Nutr 88:73087.
Boswood A: 2oo9. Biomarkers in cardiovascular disease: Beyond natriuretic peptides. J Vet Cardiology
11:S23-32
Boswood A: 2004. Editorial: The rise and fall of the cardiac biomarker. J Vet Intern Med 18:797-799
Bruss ML: 1997. Lipids and Ketones. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds): Clinical Biochemistry
of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. San Diego, Academic Press, pp. 83-115.
Burgener IA, Kovacevic A, Mauldin GN, et al: 2006. Cardiac troponins as indicators of acute
myocardial damage in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 20:277-283.
Caldin M, Tasca S, Carli E, et al: 2009. Serum acute phase protein concentrations in dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism with and without concurrent inflammatory conditions. Vet Clin Pathol 38:63-8.
glycoproteinin feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). Vet Immunol Immunopathol 99:229-236.
Ceron JU, Eckersall PD, Martinez-Subiela S: 2005. Acute phase proteins in dogs and cats: current
knowledge and future perspectives. Vet Clin Pathol 34:85-99.
Christopher MM: 1997. Hyperlipidemia and other clinicopathologic abnormalities associated with
canine hypothyroidism. Canine Prart 22:37-38
Christopher MM, ONeill s: 2000. Effect of specimen collection and storage on blood glucose and
lactate concentrations in healthy, hyperthyroid and diabetic cats. Vet Clin Pathol 29:22-28.
Clabough DL, Conboy HS, Roberts MC: 1988. Comparison of four screening techniques for the
diagnosis of equine neonatal hypogammaglobulinemia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1717-1720.
Cohn LA, McCaw DL, Tate DJ, et al: 2000. Assessment of five portable blood glucose meters, a
point-of-care analyzer, and color test strips for measuring blood glucose concentration in dogs. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 216:198-202.
Connolly DJ, Cannata J, Boswood A, et al: 2003. Cardiac troponin I in cats with hypertrophic
after treatment with radioactive iodine. J Feline Medicine and Surgery 7:289-300.
Cook NB, Ward WR, Dobson H: 20ol. Concentrations of ketones in milk in early lactation, and
reproductive performance of dairy cows. Vet Rec 148:769-772.
Couto CG, Ceron J, Parra MD, et al: 2009. Acute phase protein concentrations in retired racing
greyhounds. Vet Clin Pathol 38:219-23.
Cray C, Rodrigueaz M, Zaias J: 2007. Protein electrophoresis of psittacine plasma. Vet Clin Pathol
36:64-72.
Crenshaw KL, Peterson ME, Heeb LA, et al: 1996. Serum fructosamine concentration as an index of
glycemia in cats with diabetes mellitus and stress hyperglycemia. J Vet Intern Med 10:360-364.
Crispin SM, Bolton CH, Downs LG: 1992. Plasma lipid and lipoprotein profile of working and pet
border collies. Vet Rec 130:185-816.
202
CHAPTER 6
 DeBowes LJ: 1987. Lipid metabolism and hyperlipoproteinemias in dogs. Compend Contin Educ Pratt
Vet 9:727-736
DeFrancesco TC, Rush JE, Rozanski EA, et al: 2007. Prospective clinical evaluation of an ELISA B-type
natriuretic peptide assay in the diagnosis of congestive heart failure in dogs presenting with cough or
dyspnea. J Vet Intern Med 21:243-259.
De La Corte FD, Valberg SJ, MacLeay JM, et al: 1999. Glucose uptake in horses with polysaccharide
storage myopathy. Am J Vet Res 60:458-462.
Diehl KJ, Lappin MR, Jones RL, et al: 1992. Monoclonal gammopathy in a dog with plasmacytic
gastroenterocolitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1233-1236.
Dorfman M, Dimski DS: 1992. Paraproteinemias in small animal medicine. Compend Contin Edur Pract
Vet 14:621-632.
Downs LG, Bolton CH, Crispin SM, et al: 1997. Plasma lipoprotein lipids in five different breeds of
dogs. Res Vet Sei 54:63-67.
  ss    sd un s t  ia ' s   'i so
the bitch. Res Vet Sci 56:82-88.
Duncan JR, Prasse KW, Mahaffey EA: 1994. Proteins, Lipids, and Carbohydrates. In: Duncan JR, Prasse
KW, Mahaffey EA (eds): Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical Pathology, 3rd ed. Ames, Iowa State
University Press, pp. 112-129.
treatment, and outcome. Equine Vet J 35:590-595
              
acute phase proteins. Adv Vet Med 41:643-55.
Eckersall PD, Saini PK, McComb C: 1996. The acute phase response of acid soluble glycoprotein,
alpha-l-acid glycoprotein, ceruloplasmin, haptoglobin and C-reactive protein, in the pig. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 51:377-385.
Ford RB: 1993. Idiopathic hyperchylomicronaemia in miniature schnauzers. J Small Anim Pract
34:488-492.
Frank N, Sojka JE, Latour MA: 2002. Effect of withholding feed on concentration and composition of
plasma very low density lipoprotein and serum nonesterified fatty acids in horses. Am J Vet Res
63:1018-1021.
Garry F, Adams R, Aldridge B: 1993. Role of colostral transfer in neonatal calf management: Current
concepts in diagnosis. Compend Contin Edu 15:1167-1176.
Gascoyne SC, Bennett PM, Kirkwood JK, et al: 1994. Guidelines for the interpretation of laboratory
134:7-11.
Gebhardt C, Hirschberger J, Rau S, et al: 2009. Use of C-reactive protein to predict outcome in
 dogs with systemic inflammatory response syndrome or sepsis. J Vet Emergency and Critical Care
19:450-8.
Geishauser I, Leslie K, Kelton D, et al: 1998. Evaluation of five cowside tests for use with milk to
detect subclinical ketosis in dairy cows. J Dairy Sci 8l:438-443.
George JW: 2001. The usefulness and limitations of hand-held refractometers in veterinary laboratory
medicine: An historical and technical review. Vet Clin Pathol 30:20l-210.
PROTEINS, LIPIDS, AND CARBOHYDRATeS 
203
German AJ, Hervera M, Hunter L, et al: 2oo9. Improvement in insulin resistance and reduction in
plasma inflammatory adipokines after weight loss in obese dogs. Domestic Animal Endocrinology
37:214-226.
Giraudel JM, Pages JP, Guelf JF: 2002. Monoclonal gammopathies in the dog: A retrospective study of
18 cases (1986-1999) and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:135-147.
Gonzales FHD, Tecles F, Martinez-Subiela S, et al: 2008. Acute phase protein response in goats. J Vet
Diagn Invest 20:580-584.
Grau-Roma L, Heegaard MPH, Hjulsager CK, et al: 2009. Pig—major acute phase protein and
haptoglobin serum concentrations correlate with PCV2 viremia and the clinical course of postweaning
multisystemic wasting syndrome. Vt Microbiol. 138:53-61.
Greeve J, Altkemper I, Dieterich J-H, et al: 1993. Apolipoprotein B mRNA editing in 12 different
lipoproteins. J Lipid Res 34:1367-1383.
Grosche A, Schrodl W, Schusser GF: 2006. Specific parameters of blood and peritoneal fluid to indicate
the severity of intestinal ischaemia in colic horses. Tierarztliche Praxix 34:387-396.
Lampreave F, Heegaard P, Godeau J, Ceron J, Evans G, Hoff B, Torgerson P: 2005. The 5th International
Colloquium on Animal Acute Phase Proteins Abstracts and Proceedings Book. Dublin, Ireland March
14-15.
Gutierrez AM, Martinez-Subiela S, Soler L, et al: 2009. Use of saliva for haptoglobin and C-reactive
 protein quantifications in porcine respiratory and reproductive syndrome affected pigs in field
conditions. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 132:2l8-23.
Hall WF; Eurell TE, Hansen RD, et al: l992. Serum haptoglobin concentration in swine naturally or
experimentally infected with Artinobacillus pleuropneumoniae. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1730-1733.
Higai K, Aoki Y, Azuma Y, Matsumoto K: 2005. Glycosylation of site-specific glycans of alphal-acid
glycoprotein and alterations in acute and chronic inflammation. Biochimica et Biophysica Arta
1725:128-35.
Herndon WE, Kittleson MD, Sanderson K, et al: 2002. Cardiac troponin I in feline hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med 16:558-565.
Herndon WE, Rishniw M, Schrope D, et al: 2008. Assessment of plasma cardiac troponin I
concentration as a means to differentiate cardiac and noncardiac causes of dyspnea in cats. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 233:1261-1264.
Hirvonen J, Pyorala S: 1998. Acute-phase response in dairy cows with surgically-treated abdominal
disorders. Vet J 155:53-61.
Hoenig M, Wilkins C, Olson JC, et al: 2003. Effects of obesity on lipid profles in neutered male and
female cats. Am J Vet Res 64:299-303.
Holbrook TC, Birks EK, Sleeper MM, et al: 2006. Endurance exercise is associated with increased
plasma cardiac troponin I in horses. Equine Vet J 36:27-31.
Hollis AR, Boston RC, Corley KTT: 2007. Blood glucose in horses with acute abdominal disease. J Vet
Intern Med 2l:1099-1103
Hulten C, Sandgren B, Skioldebrand E, et al: 1999. The acute phase protein serum amyloid A (SAA) as
an inflammatory marker in equine influenza virus infection. Ata Vet Scand 40:323-333.
Ileri-Buyukoglu I, Guldur T: 2005. Dyslipoproteinemias and their clinical importance in several
species of domestic animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1746-1751.
204
CHAPTER 6
Itoh H, Horiuchi Y, Nagasaki I, et al: 2009. Evaluation of immunological status in tumor-bearing dogs
Vet Immunol and Immunopathol 32:85-90.
Itoh N, Koiwa M, Hatsugaya A, et al: 1998. Comparative analysis of blood chemical values in primary
ketosis and abomasal displacement in cows. Zentralbl Veterinarmed 45:293-298.
Jacobsen S, Kjelgaard-Hansen M: 2008. Evaluation of a commercially available apparatus for measuring
the acute phase protein serum amyloid A in horses. Vet Rer 163:327-330.
Jacobsen S, Kjelgaard-Hansen M, Hagbard Petersen H, et al: 2006. Evaluation of a commercially
concentrations. Vet J 172:315-319
Jacobsen S, Thomas MH, Nanni S: 2006. Concentrations of serum amyloid A in serum and synovial
fluid from healthy horses and horses with joint disease. Am J Vet Res 67:1738-1742.
Jensen AL: 1995. Glycated blood proteins in canine diabetes mellitus. Vet Rec 137:40l-405.
Jeusette IC, Lhoest ET, Istasse LP, et al: 2005. Influence of obesity on plasma lipid and lipoprotein
    5
Jones BR: 1993. Inherited hyperchylomicronaemia in the cat. J Small Anim Pract 34:493-499
Jones PA, Bain FT, Byars TD, et al: 2o0l. Effect of hydroxyethyl starch infusion on colloid oncotic
pressure in hypoproteinemic horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1130-1135.
Jordan E, Kley S, Le N-A, et al: 2008. Dyslipidemia in obese cats. Domestic Anim Endocrinol
35:290-299.
Jorritsma R, Jorritsma H, Schukken YH, et al: 2ool. Prevalence and indicators of post partum fatty
infiltration of the liver in nine commercial dairy herds in the Netherlands. Livestorck Prod Sri 68:53-60
Kajikawa T, Furuta A, Onishi T, et al: 1996. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for detection of
feline serum amyloid A protein by use of immunological cross-reactivity of polyclonal anti-canine
serum amyloid A protein antibody. J Vet Med Sri 58:1l4l-l143.
Kaneko J: 1997. Carbohydrate Metabolism and its Diseases. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds):
Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. San Diego, Academic Press, pp. 45-81.
Kaneko J: 1997. Serum Proteins and the Dysproteinemias. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds)
r  s      s    s
Kent J: 1992. Acute phase proteins: Their use in veterinary medicine. Br Vet J 148:279-282
Kern MR, Stockham SL, Coates JR: 1992. Analysis of serum protein concentrations after severe thermal
injury in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol 2l:19-22.
Kittleson MD, Johnson LE, Pion PD: 1996. Submaximal exercise testing using lactate threshold and
venous oxygen tension as endpoints in normal dogs and in dogs with heart failure. J Vet Intern Med
10:21-27
Kjelgaard-Hansen M: 2009. The use of canine C-reactive protein in clinical practice. Svensk
Veterinartidning 6l:14, 19-24.
Kley S, Caffall Z, Tittle E, et al: 2008. Development of a feline proinsulin immunoradiometric assay
beta cell function in cats. Dom Anim Endocrinol 34:3ll-318
Kluger EK, Hardman C, Govendir M, et al: 2009. Triglyceride response following an oral fat tolerance
test in Burmese cats, other pedigree cats and domestic crossbred cats. J Fel Med Surg 1l:82-90.
PROTeiNS, LiPidS, ANd CARbOHYdRATeS 
205
Klusek J, Kolataj A, Swiderska-Kolacz G: l997. The influence of starvation on the level of some lipids
in pigs (short communication). Archiv Tierzucht 40:365-369
 s  pe  ' s  gs h  na  s a n  
standardbred mares and their foals at parturition. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:64-68
Kothe R, Mischke R: 2o09. Fructosamine concentration in blood plasma of psittacides-relevance for
diagnostics of diabetes? Praktishe Tierarzt 90(2):102-109.
Kraft W, Weskamp M, Dietl A: 1994. Untersuchungen zum serum-cholesterin des hundes. Tierarztl
Prax 22:392-397.
LaVecchio D, Marin LM, Baumwart R, et al: 20o9. Serum cardiac troponin I concentration in retired
racing greyhounds.J Vet Intern Med 23:87-90.
Larsen I, Moller G, Bellio R: 2ool. Evaluation of clinical and clinical chemical parameters in
periparturient cows. J Dairy Sci 84:1749-1758.
Link KR, Rand JS: 2008. Changes in blood glucose concentration are associated with relatively rapid
changes in circulating fructosamine concentrations in cats. J Feline Med Surg 10:583-592.
Link KR, Rand JS: 1998. Reference values for glucose tolerance and glucose tolerance status in cats. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 213:492-496.
Linklater AKJ, Lichtenberger MK, Tham DH, et al: 2007. Serum concentrations of cardiac troponin I
and cardiac troponin T in dogs with dlass IV congestive heart failure due to mitral valve disease. J
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 17:243-249.
Lipperheide C, Gothe C, Petersen B, et al: 1997. Haptoglobin quantifications in sera of cattle, pigs and
horses with the Nephelometer 100. Tieraerztliche Umschau 52:420-422, 425-426
Lobetti R, Dvir E, Pearson J: 2002. Cardiac troponins in canine babesiosis. J Vet Intern Med 16:63-68.
Lumeij JT: 1997. Avian Clinical Biochemistry. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds): Clinical
Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. San Diego, Academic Press, pp. 857-883.
Maldonado EN, Casanave EB, Aveldao Ml: 2002. Major plasma lipids and fatty acids in four HDL
Mansfield CS, James FE, Robertson ID: 2008. Development of a clinical severity index for dogs with
acute pancreatitis. J Am Vet Med Assor 233:936-44.
Martinez-Subiela S, Ginel PJ, Ceron J: 2004. Effects of different glucocorticoid treatments on serum
acute phase proteins in dogs. Vet Rec 154:814-7.
McGrotty YL, Knottenbelt CM, Ramsey IK, et al: 2003. Haptoglobin concentrations in a canine
hospital population. Vet Rec 152:562-564.
McGuire TC: 1988. Failure of colostral immunoglobulin transfer to calves: Prevalence and diagnosis
Compend Contin Edu 4:S35-S39.
Mellanby RJ, Herrtage ME: 2002. Insulinoma in a normoglycaemic dog with low serum fructosamine. J
Small Anim Prart 43:506-508.
Merlo A, Rezende BC, Franchini ML, et al: 2008. Serum amyloid A is not a marker for relapse of
multicentric lymphoma in dogs. Vet Clin Pathol 37:79-85.
multicentric lymphoma undergoing chemotherapy. J Am Vet Med Assor 230:522-6.
206
CHAPTER 6
Mogg TD, Palmer JE: 1995. Hyperlipidemia, hyperlipemia, and hepatic lipidosis in American miniature
horses: 23 cases (1990-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:604-607
Moore LE, Garvey MS: 1996. The effect of hetastarch on serum colloid oncotic pressure in
hypoalbuminemic dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1o:300-303.
Mori A, Lee P, Mizutani H, et al: 2009. Serum glycated albumin as a glycemic control marker in
diabetic cats. J Vet Diagn Invest 21:112-116.
Murata H, Shimada N, Yoshioka M: 2004. Current research on acute phase proteins in veterinary
diagnosis: an 0verview. Vet J 168:28-40.
Nakamura M, Takahashi M, Ohno K, et al: 2008. C-reactive protein concentration in dogs with various
diseases. J Vet Med Sei 70:127-31.
Nazifi S, Dadras H, Hoseinian SA, et al: 20l0. Measuring acute phase proteins (haptoglobin,
ceruloplasmin, serum amyloid A, and fibrinogen) in healthy and infectious bursal disease virus-
infected chicks. Comp Clin Pathol 19:283-286.
Nicholas F, Sojka JE, Latour MA, et al: 1999. Effect of hypothyroidism on blood lipid concentrations in
horses. Am J Vet Res 60:730-733.
Nielsen L, Toft N, Edkersall PD, et al: 2007. Serum C-reactive protein concentration as an indicator of
remission status in dogs with muticentric lymphoma. J Vet Intern Med 2l:123l-6.
Nunokawa Y, Fujinaga T, Taira I, et al: l993. Evaluation of serum amyloid A protein as an acute-phase
reactive protein in horses. J Vet Med Sri 55:10l1-1016.
Orme CE, Harris RC, Marlin DJ, et al: 1997. Metabolic adaptation to fat-supplemented diet by the
thoroughbred horse. Br J Nutr 78:443-458.
Oyama MA, Sisson DD: 2o04. Cardiac troponin I concentration in dogs with cardiac disease. J Vet
Intern Med 18:831-9.
Paltrinieri S: 2o07. Early biomarkers of inflammation in dogs and cats: the acute phase proteins. Vet
Res. Communications 3l(Suppl. 1):125-129.
Paltrinieri S: 2008. The feline acute phase reaction. Vet J 177:26-35.
Paltrinieri S, Giordano A, Tranquillo V, et al: 2007. Critical assessment of the diagnostic value of feline
Qj-acid glycoprotein for feline infectious peritonitis using the likelihood ratios approach. J Vet Diagn
Invest 19:266-272.
Paltrinieri S, Metzger C, Battilani M, et al: 2007. Serum C,-acid glycoprotein concentration in non
symptomatic cats with feline coronavirus (FCoV) infection. Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery
9:271-277.
    d  n   a   d si  
diseases in field conditions. J Vet Med 53:488-493.
Parraga ME, Carlson GP, Thurmond M: 1995. Serum protein concentrations in horses with severe liver
disease: A retrospective study and review of the literature. J Vet Intern Med 9:154—161
Pazak HE, Bartges JW, Cornelius LC, et al: 1998. Characterization of serum lipoprotein profles of
healthy, adult cats and idiopathic feline hepatic lipidosis patients. J Nutr 128:2747S-2750S.
veterinary clinical chemistry. Vet Res 35:163-187.
PROTeinS, LipidS, ANd CARboHydRATeS 
207
Prosek R, Sisson DD, Oyama MA, et al: 2007. Distinguishing cardiac and noncardiac dyspnea in 48
dogs using plasma atrial natriuretic factor, B-type natriuretic factor, endothelin, and cardiac troponin I.
J Vet Intern Med 21:238-42.
Radin MJ, Sharkey LC, Holycross BJ: 2009. Adipokines: A review of biological and analytical principles
and an update in dogs, cats, and horses. Vt Clin Pathol 38:136-156.
       n   s     
Immunol Res Workshop 42-43.
Rath NC, Anthony NB, Kannan L, et al: 2009. Serum ovotransferrin as a biomarker of inflammatory
diseases in chickens. Poultry Science 88:2069-74.
Rayssiguier Y, Mazur A, Gueux E, et al: 1988. Plasma lipoproteins and fatty liver in dairy cows. Res Vet
Sri 45:389-393.
Reusch CE, Haberer B: 200l. Evaluation of fructosamine in dogs and cats with hypo- 0r
hyperproteinaemia, azotaemia, hyperlipidaemia and hyperbilirubinaemia. Vet Rec 148:370-376.
Reusch CE, Liehs MR, Hoyer M, et al: 1993. Fructosamine: A new parameter for diagnosis and
           
Rishniw M, Barr SC, Simpson KW, et al: 2004. Cloning and sequencing of the canine and feline cardiac
troponin I genes. Am J Vet Res 65:53-58.
 Roman Y, Levrier J, Ordonneau D, et al: 2o09. Location of the fibrinogen and albumin fractions in
plasma protein electrophoresis agarose gels of five taxonomically distinct bird species. Revue de
Medicine Veterinaire 160:160-165.
              
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, pp. 932-936.
Rudloff E, Kirby R: 2000. Colloid osmometry Clin Tech Small Anim Prart 15:119-125.
Sagawa MM, Nakadomo F, Honjoh T, et al: 2002. Correlation between plasma leptin concentration and
body fat contents in dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:7-10.
meat inspection. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:1898-1901.
    p s    a 'I r d t '  I 
diabetic dogs. J Vet Diagn Invest 20:634-638.
Schmidt O, Deegen E, Fuhrmann H, et al: 2ool. Effects of fat feeding and energy level on plasmz
metabolites and hormones in Shetland ponies. J Veterinar Med 48:39-49.
Schober KE, Cornand C, Kirbach B, et al: 2002. Serum cardiac troponin I and cardiac troponin T
concentrations in dogs with gastric dilatation-volvulus. J Am Vet Med Assor 22l:38l-388.
Schulman ML, Nurton JP, Guthrie AJ: 200l. Use of the Accusport semi-automated analyser to
determine blood lactate as an aid in the clinical assessment of horses with colic. J South Afr Vet Assoc
72:12-17.
Selting KA, Ogilvie GK, Lana SE, et al: 2008. Serum alpha 1-acid glycoprotein concentrations in
healthy and tumor-bearing cats. J Vet Intern Med 14:503-506.
Shaw SP, Rozanski EA, Rush JE: 2004. Cardiac troponins I and T in dogs with pericardial effusion. J
Vet Intern Med 18:322-4.
208
CHAPTER 6
Sisson D: 2004. Neuroendocrine evaluation of cardiovascular disease. Vet Clin North Am Sm An Pract
34:1105-1126.
Solter PF, Hoffman WE, Hungerford LC, et al: 199l. Haptoglobin and ceruloplasmin as determinants of
inflammation in dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:1738-1742.
Spratt DP, Mellanby RJ, Drury N: 2005. Cardiac troponin I: Evaluation of a biomarker for the diagnosis
of heart disease in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 46(3):113-114.
Stockham, SL: 1995. Interpretation of equine serum biochemical profle results. Vet Clinics N Am:
Equine Prart 1l:391-414.
Stoddart ME, Whicher JT, Harbour DA: 1988. Cats inoculated with feline infectious peritonitis virus
exhibit a biphasic acute phase plasma protein response. Vet Rec 123:622-624.
Stokol T, Tarrant JM, Scarlett JM: 200l. Overestimation of canine albumin concentration with the
bromcresol green method in heparinized plasma smples. Vet Clin Pathol 3o:17o-176.
Syring RS, Otto CM, Drobatz KJ: 200l. Hyperglycemia in dogs and cats with head trauma: 122 cases
(1997-1999). J Am Vet Med 218:11241129.
Tamamoto T, Ohno K, Ohmi A, et al: 2oo9. Time-course monitoring of serum amyloid A in a cat with
pancreatitits.et Clin Pathol 38:83-86.
concentration in cattle, horses, dogs, and cats. Am J Vet Res 53:224l-2244.
Thoresen SI, Aleksandersen M, Lonaas L, et al: 1995. Pancreatic insulin-secreting carcinoma in a dog:
Fructosamine for determining persistent hypoglycaemia. J Small Anim Pract 36:282-286.
Thoresen SI, Bredal WP: 1999. Serum fructosamine measurement: A new diagnostic approach to renal
glucosuria in dogs. Res Vet Sci 67:267-271.
Throop JL, Kerl ME, Cohn LA: 2004. Albumin in health and disease: Protein metabolism and function.
Compend Contin Edu 26:932-936.
van den Berg A, Danuser J, Frey J, et al: 2007. Evaluation of the acute phase protein haptoglobin as an
indicator of herd health in slaughter pigs. Animal Welfare 16:157-159.
van den Broek AH: 1990. Serum electrophoresis in canine parvovirus enteritis. Br Vet J 146:255-259.
van der Kolk JH, Wensing T, Kalsbeek HC, et al: l995. Lipid metabolism in horses with
hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1010-1012.
Vandenplatz ML, Moore JN, Barton MH, et al: 2005. Concentrations of serum amyloid A and
lipopolysaccharide-binding protein in horses with colic. Am J Vet Res 66(9):1509-1515.
Vannucchi, CI, Mirandola RM, Oliveira CM: 2002. Acute-phase protein profile during gestation and
diestrous: Proposal for an early pregnancy test in bitches. Animal Reprodurtion Srience 74(l-2):87-99.
Vasquez-Anon M, Bertics S, Luck M, et al: 1994. Peripartum liver triglyceride and plasma metabolites
in dairy cows. J Dairy Sci 77:1521-1528.
Velga AP, Price CA, deOliveira ST, Dos Santos AP, Campos R, Barbosa PR, Gonzales FH: 2008.
Association of canine obesity with reduced serum levels of C-reactive protein. J Vet Diagn Invest
20:224-8.
Venkatraman G, Harada K, Gomes AV, et al: 2003. Different functional properties of troponin T
mutants that cause dilated cardiomyopathy. J Biol Chem 278:41670-41676.
PROTEiNS, LiPidS, ANd CARBOHYdRATeS 
209
Vitic J, Tosic L, Stevanovic J: 1994. Comparative studies of the serum lipoproteins and lipids in
domestic swine and wild boar. Arta Veterinaria 44:49-55.
Res Vet Sri 54:80-85.
Watson TDG, Barrie J: 1993. Lipoprotein metabolism and hyperlipidaemia in the dog and cat: A
review. J Small Anim Pract 34:479-487.
Watson TDG, Gaffney D, Mooney CT, et al: 1992. Inherited hyperchylomicronaemia in the cat:
Watson TDG, Love S: 1994. Equine hyperlipidemia. Compend Contin Educ Prart Vet 16:89-98.
Watson TDG, Packard CJ, Shepherd J: 1993. Plasma lipid transport in the horse (equus caballus). Comp
Biochem Physiol 106B:27-34.
Wiedmeyer CE, DeClue AE: 2008. Continuous glucose monitoring in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med
22:2-8.
Wiedmeyer CE, Solter PF: 1996. Validation of human haptoglobin immunoturbidimetric assay for
         a n  o 
Weiser MG, Thrall MA, Fulton R, et al: 1991. Granular lymphocytosis and hyperproteinemia in dogs
with chronic ehrlichiosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:84-88.
Wess G, Reusch C: 2o0o. Assessment of five portable blood glucose meters for use in cats. Am J Vet Res
61: 1587-92.
Wess G, Reusch C: 20o0. Evaluation of five portable blood glucose meters for use in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 216:203209.
Whitney MS: 1992. Evaluation of hyperlipidemias in dogs and cats. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Animal)
7:292-300.
Xie H, Newberry L, Clark FD, et al: 2002. Changes in serum ovotransferrin levels in chickens with
experimentally induced inflammation and diseases. Avian Diseases 46:122-131.
Yilmaz Z, Senturk S: 2007. Characterization of lipid profles in dogs with parvoviral enteritis. J Small
Anim Pract 48(11):643-650.
-  d n sd s    a g r  o  
cows. Veterinarski Archiv 70:2l-30
CHAPTER
LIVER
Perry J. Bain, DVM, PhD
HEPATIC ABNORMALITIES DETECTED bY LABORATORY TESTS
Serum chemistry can be used to detect several types of hepatic abnormalities. These include injury or
 n   s   i   s   n sis
and altered portal circulation.
I. HEPATOCELLULAR LEAKAGE/NECROSIS
A. Altered permeability of hepatocyte cell membranes results in leakage of cytosolic enzymes into
extracellular fluid and, subsequently, into the blood.
B. Leakage may occur with either sublethal (reversible) hepatocellular injury or hepatocellular
necrosis.
C. The magnitude of the increase in serum enzymatic activity depends on the number of hepatocytes
affected, the severity of the injury, and the serum half-life of the enzyme.
D. Following hepatocellular injury, increased serum enzyme activity is evident within hours.
E. Hepatocellular leakage enzyme activity is a more sensitive indicator of hepatic damage than tests of
liver function.
F. Hepatocellular injury often is accompanied by cellular swelling, inflammation, and/or necrosis,
which may alter bile flow, resulting in concurrent intrahepatic cholestasis (and increases in
"cholestatic" parameters).
G. Commonly measured enzymes with increased serum activity resulting from hepatocellular leakage
include alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and sorbitol dehydrogenase
(SDH). These enzymes vary in their concentration in liver tissue and specificity for liver disease in
different species.
Il. DECREASED HEPATIC FUNCTIONAL MASS (HEPATIC INSUFFICIENCY)
A. A suffcient number of functional hepatocytes must be present for normal liver functions to occur.
Approximately 70% or more of the functional hepatocytes must be lost before alterations of hepatic
 function are detectable by serum biochemical testing.
B. Mechanisms of decreased hepatic functional mass
1. Hepatocellular injury or necrosis
(cirrhosis)
3. Hepatic atrophy (often associated with chronic portosystemic shunts)
211
212
CHAPTER 7
C. Hepatic functions that are commonly evaluated by laboratory tests include:
1. Protein synthesis (albumin, C- and β-globulins, clotting factors)
2. Uptake and excretion of bilirubin and bile acids
3. Uptake of ammonia and conversion of ammonia to urea (BUN)
4. Glucose homeostasis and glycogen storage
5. Removal o f enteric antigens and endogenous antibodies by Kupffer cells (fixed macrophages) in
the hepatic sinusoids
6. Uptake and excretion of exogenous dyes (e.g., bromosulphalein [BSP, sulfobromophthalein] and
indocyanine green [ICG]}
ll. CHoLeStASIS
A. Cholestasis is the interruption or obstruction of bile flow or excretion.
1. Intrahepatic cholestasis occurs within the bile canaliculi and bile ductules of the liver.
2. Extrahepatic cholestasis occurs outside of the liver in the gallbladder or common bile duct.
3. Cholestasis may result from physical obstruction of bile flow (e.g., inflammation, infection,
cholelithiasis, neoplasia) or from metabolic derangements (e.g., hepatotoxicity, fasting horses,
sepsis, or hereditary defects in bile secretion).
B. Cholestasis may cause induction and release of certain membrane-bound hepatic enzymes, such as
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT), increasing their serum activities.
C. Cholestasis also results in retention or reflux of bile, increasing serum concentrations of substances
that are normally excreted in bile (bilirubin, bile acids).
D. Cholestasis also may cause hepatocellular damage due to the retention of bile acids, which have a
detergent action on cellular membranes.
IV. ALTeRATION OF PORtaL bLOOD flOW
A. The blood flow of the liver is unique.
1. The hepatic artery provides oxygenated blood from the systemic circulation.
2. The portal vein provides blood flow from the intestinal tract and spleen.
3. The hepatic vein returns blood from the liver to the systemic circulation.
B. Portal blood constituents are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
1. Bile acids, amino acids, glucose, ammonia, medium-length fatty acids, and intestinal antigens are
absorbed via the portal blood.
2. These substances are largely removed from the blood by the liver before they reach the systemic
circulation.
3. Acquired or congenital portosystemic shunts bypass the liver and deliver portal blood directly
into the systemic circulation. When this occurs, systemic blood concentrations of substances that
are normally removed by hepatic processing (e.g., bile acids, ammonia) are increased.
4. Chronic portosystemic shunts may result in hepatic atrophy due to decreased concentrations of
intestinal and pancreatic hepatotrophic factors delivered to the liver.
HEPATIC LABORATORY TESTS
Alterations in serum chemistry parameters often are useful in detecting hepatic disease. These
abnormalities may include altered activities of hepatic enzymes due to hepatocellular damage or
LIVER
213
alterations in the concentrations of substances produced by hepatic synthesis. These serum
biochemical alterations may not be specifc for hepatic disease and may not indicate a specifc cause of
hepatic functional mass, or cholestasis. Increased serum bile acid concentrations may result from loss
of hepatic functional mass, portosystemic shunts, or cholestasis.
1. HEPATIC ENZYME ALTERATIONS
Alterations in serum hepatic enzyme activity provide a sensitive means to evaluate liver disease.
be broadly divided into two categories: hepatocellular leakage enzymes and induced (or cholestatic)
enzymes. Species vary in the activity of enzymes expresed in hepatic tissue, as well as in their
enzymatic responses to induction
A. Hepatocellular leakage enzymes
1. General characteristics
a. Hepatocellular leakage enzymes are soluble cytosolic enzymes that have a high activity in
hepatocytes (and often in other tissues).
b. They are released with damage to the hepatocyte membranes in association with sublethal
injury or hepatocellular necrosis.
C. The serum enzyme activity of hepatocellular leakage enzymes depends upon the number of
hepatocytes injured, the severity of the injury, and the half-life of the enzyme.
d. The magnitude of the increase in enzymatic activity does not necessarily correlate with clinical
 manifestations of hepatic insuffciency.
2. In chronic, progressive liver diseases, a low proportion of hepatocytes may be undergoing
damage or necrosis at any particular time. Therefore, activity of hepatocellular leakage enzymes
may be within the reference interval or only mildly increased, despite the presence of hepatic
insufficiency.
f. Hepatic atrophy may result in decreased serum enzyme activity due to lower numbers/mass of
hepatocytes.
g. In some cases, increased serum activity of these enzymes originates in other tissues such as
skeletal or cardiac muscle, or from erythrocytes (in vitro or intravenous hemolysis). Concurrent
measurement of creatine kinase activity a specifc indicator of muscle injury, may distinguish
 muscle injury from hepatic disease as a potential cause of increased leakage enzyme activity in
serum.
h. Commonly evaluated cytoplasmic enzymes include ALT, AST, SDH, LDH, and GDH.
2. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
a. The obsolete name for this enzyme is serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT).
b. Increased serum ALT activity occurs with sublethal hepatocellular injury or necrosis in the dog
and cat.
r. Muscle necrosis also may cause increased serum activity of ALT.
d. Liver ALT activity is very low in horses, ruminants, pigs, and birds. Increases in serum ALT
activity in these species are more likely the result of muscle injury. Therefore, ALT is often not
tested in large animal chemistry panels.
e. Mild to moderate increases in ALT activity may occur with anticonvulsants, corticosteroids
(dog), and thiacetarsemide. This is most likely due to mild hepatocellular injury rather than
induction.
f.  Trauma (e.g., automobile injuries) may cause dramatic increases in ALI activity, probably from
a combination of liver injury and muscle damage. Blood loss or shock associated with trauma also
may be associated with increased ALT activity from centrilobular necrosis secondary to ischemia.
8.  ALT has a clearance half-life of approximately 60 hours in the dog.
214
CHAPTER 7
h. Following a single toxic insult, ALI activity increases within 12 hours, peaks within one to
two days, and returns to the reference interval over two to three weeks.
3. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
a. The obsolete name for this enzyme is serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT).
b. Both cytosolic and mitochondrial isoenzymes of AST exist. More severe cellular injury is
 required for release of the mitochondrial isoenzyme.
C. AST is not liver specifc; it is found in most tissues. Significant increases in serum AST activity
may occur with liver or muscle injury or with hemolysis
d. Muscle necrosis should be excluded by assessment of creatine kinase activity before
concluding that increased AST activity is the result of liver disease.
2. Erythrocytes contain AST; thus, increased serum AST activity may occur with in vivo or in
vitro hemolysis. Covert hemolysis, which occurs when the serum is left on the clot, may result in
 increased AST activity even though visible hemolysis is not apparent.
f. AST usually has a shorter half-life in serum than ALT, with a clearance half-life of
 approximately 12 hours in the dog.
4. Sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH)
a. The liver of all animals contains high SDH activity. Increases in serum SDH activity generally
are considered liver specific in all species studied.
b. SDH is the enzyme of choice to detect hepatocellular injury in horses, sheep, goats, and cattle,
 because it is more specific for hepatic disease than AST and ALT in these species.
(1)  AST is not a liver-specific enzyme.
(2) Hepatic ALI activity is too low to serve as a marker of hepatocellular injury in these
species.
c. Serum activity of SDH has a short clearance half-life (less than 12 hours); SDHactivity may
 return to baseline values within a few days after a single hepatocellular insult.
d. SDH is labile in vitro
(1)  Serum samples for SDH assays should be frozen if not tested immediately.
(2) Serum samples for SDH testing should not be mailed to the laboratory at ambient
temperature.
5. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
a. High lactate dehydrogenase activity is found in many types of cells and should not be
 considered liver specific.
b. Increased LDH activity may result from hemolysis, muscle damage, or hepatocellular injury
(similar to AST).
6. Glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH, GLDH) (birds)
a. GDH is a cytosolic enzyme, and increases with hepatic necrosis.
b. This enzyme is considered to be liver specific in birds but has low sensitivity.
B. Induced hepatic enzymes
1. General characteristics
a. These enzymes are typically membrane-bound and are not released into the serum with
 increased membrane permeability.
b. Increased serum enzymatic activity is the result of enzyme induction, typically as a result of
cholestasis, drug, or hormonal effects.
2. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
a. In the hepatocytes and biliary epithelial cells, ALP is predominantly bound to the plasma
membrane.
b. ALP is less useful for the detection of cholestasis in large animals (cattle, horse, sheep, goats).
(1)  ALP activity has wide reference intervals in these species. Therefore, it is not a sensitive
indicator of biliary disease.
(2) GGT is the preferred indicator of cholestasis for these animals.
LIVER
215
c. Increased serum ALP activity may occur in:
(1)  Cholestatic diseases
(2) Bone lysis or remodeling (e.g., bone tumors, young, growing animals)
(3) Coricosteroid treatment or Cushing's disease (dogs)
(4) Phenobarbital treatment (likely due to hepatic injury/cholestasis)
(5)  Hepatic nodular hyperplasia (dogs)
(6)  Colic in horses
(7) Feline hepatic lipidosis
(8)Hyperthyroidism in cats
d. Isoenzymes of ALP are found in different tissues, and serum activity of these isoenzymes varies
depending on the cause.
(1) The various glycosylation forms of the enzymes derived from the two ALP genes
(intestinal and tissue nonspecifie) are commonly referred to as isoenzymes.
(2) Total serum ALP activity is typically measured in serum chemistry panels, but isoenzymes
may be quantified by electrophoresis or by selective suppression of isoenzymes.
(3) Clinically important ALP isoenzymes include the hepatic, bone, intestinal, and
 corticosteroid- induced forms. The corticosteroid isoenzyme of ALP has been identified only in
dogs.
2. ALP isoenzymes can be differentiated by their electrophoretic mobility or by chemical- or heat-
 induced suppression of enzymatic activity in vitro.
(1) Liver ALP isoenzyme (LALP)
(a) Intrahepatic or extrahepatic cholestasis causes a marked increase in ALP activity,
which is predominately the hepatic isoenzyme.
(b) Increased ALP activity is a sensitive indicator of cholestasis and precedes the
development of hyperbilirubinemia. Focal cholestatic lesions may increase ALP activity
without causing hyperbilirubinemia.
(c)  Cats have lower hepatic ALP activity than dogs. Feline ALP also has a shorter half-life
than canine ALP
(d) In cats with cholestatic disease, increases in ALP activity are usually less dramatic
 than increases in GGT activity. Feline hepatic lipidosis is an exception; ALP activity
 I  jx i e 0i sis aia
      s  e d  ()
 enzymatic activity may consist of both liver and bone isoenzymes.
(f) The hepatic ALP isoenzyme has a serum clearance half-life of approximately 72 hours
in the dog.
(2)Corticosteroid ALP isoenzyme (CALP)
(a) Endogenous or exogenous glucocoricoids may cause a marked induction of ALP
activity (up to 200x normal activity) in the dog.
(b) The initial increase in serum ALP activity following corticosteroid treatment is in the
hepatic isoenzyme.
(c)  Following corticosteroid treatment, the corticosteroid isoenzyme (an alternate
glycosylation form of intestinal ALP, produced in the liver) increases gradually, becoming
the predominant form of ALP in serum over several weeks
(d) In hyperadrenocorticism, the corticosteroid isoenzyme often is the predominant form
of ALP by the time the disease is detected.
(e) Increased serum ALP activity may persist for weeks to months after glucocorticoid
treatment is discontinued.
(f)  Levamisole inhibition or heat inactivation in vitro can be used to distinguish some of
the isoenzymes of ALP.
i) Activity of the corticosteroid and intestinal isoenzymes of ALP is largely resistant
to levamisole inhibition or heat inactivation.
216
CHAPTER 7
ii) Activity of the hepatic and bone isoenzymes of ALP is markedly decreased or
eliminated by levamisole inhibition or heat inactivation.
iii) Increased ALP activity following levamisole or heat treatment of the sample can
be considered evidence of increased corticosteroid ALP
(g)  Corticosteroid ALP activity also may be induced by drug treatment (including
anticonvulsants), some hepatic neoplasms, or chronic diseases such as diabetes mellitus.
(h) The corticosteroid ALP isoenzyme has a serum clearance half-life of approximately 72
hours in the dog.
(3) Bone ALP isoenzyme (BALP)
(a) Increased activity (up to 3x adult values) of the bone isoenzyme of ALP may be
observed in young, rapidly growing animals, animals with lytic or proliferative bone
 lesions (e.g., osteosarcoma, plasma cell myeloma), or animals with active bone resorption
(e.g., primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism).
(b) A benign familial hyperphosphatasemia has been described in Siberian Huskies. These
dogs have markedly increased ALP activity (predominantly of the bone isoenzyme) with no
other evidence of hepatic disease.
(c) High mean ALP activity has been found in Scottish Terriers (greater than l,500U/L)
without evidence of liver disease or history of corticosteroid treatment.
(d)  The bone and liver isoenzymes of ALP may be differentiated in vitro by precipitation
of the bone ALP isoenzyme with wheat germ lectin. Differentiation of these isoenzymes is
usually a research technique.
(e)  In dogs with osteosarcoma, increased serum alkaline phosphatase levels are associated
with shorter survival times.
(f) The bone ALP isoenzyme has a serum clearance half-life of approximately 72 hours in
the dog
(4) Intestinal and placental ALP isoenzyme (IALP)
(a) In the dog and cat, the intestinal isoenzyme of ALP constitutes only a small fraction
of total serum ALP activity. Although the intestine of dogs and cats contains considerable
ALP activity, this isoenzyme has a short half-life in serum (less than six minutes) and does
 not contribute significantly to serum ALP activity.
(b)  The placental isoenzyme of ALP may be increased in late-term pregnancy in animals.
 The plasma clearance half life of this isoenzyme is less than six minutes in the dog.
(c) Serum ALP may be increased in horses with colic due to increased intestinal isoenzyme
activity Increased ALP activity also may be found in the abdominal fluid of horses with colic.
3. Gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT or yGT)
a. GGT, like ALP, is predominantly associated with the brush border or microvilli of hepatocytes,
during lactation).
b. Increased GGT activity in serum is the result of enzyme induction involving hepatocytes or
biliary epithelial cells.
c. Cholestasis causes increased serum GGT activity.
d. GGT is considered more sensitive for cholestasis (compared to ALP) in cats, horses, and cattle.
2. GGT also may be increased with severe hepatic necrosis in horses and cattle, presumably due
to necrosis of biliary epithelium.
f. Serum activity of GGT may be induced by coricosteroid administration in dogs.
8. Colostrum of dogs, sheep, and cattle contains high GGT activity.
(1) Neonates may have very high serum GGT activity (up to l,0o0x adult activity).
(2) GGT may be useful as an indicator of passive transfer in these species.
(3)  The lactating mammary epithelium is the source of the increased enzymatic activity
h. GGT is the preferred indicator of biliary disease in birds
i. GGT has a serum clearance half-life of approximately three days in the dog.
LIV E R
217
Increased GGT activity may be detected in urine with renal tubular injury. Increases in the
urinary GGT:creatinine ratio can be used as an early indicator of nephrotoxicity.
II. TeSts of HepatIc UPtake, CoNjuGatIon, ANd SEcrEtIoN
A. Bilirubin (Figure 7.1)
1. Metabolism
a. Bilirubin is a pigment that is produced by the degradation of the heme portion of hemoglobin
 and myoglobin and, to a smaller extent, non-heme porphyrins.
b. Most bilirubin is produced in mononuclear phagocytes.
C.
Birds lack biliverdin reductase and do not form significant quantities of bilirubin.
d. Bilirubin is metabolized to urobilinogen by bacteria in the intestine. This can be reabsorbed
 and excreted in urine. Urine urobilinogen may be increased with increased bilirubin delivery
to the Gl tract (hemolytic disease) or decreased absent in patients with biliary obstruction or
intestinal malabsorption.
2. Types of bilirubin
a. Unconjugated bilirubin
(1) Unconjugated bilirubin is not water soluble.
(2) It is transported in the blood bound to albumin by an ionic bond.
b. Conjugated bilirubin
(1) Unconjugated bilirubin is dissociated from albumin at the hepatocyte cell membrane and
taken into the hepatocyte by plasma membrane transporters.
(2)  Conjugated bilirubin is formed in the hepatocyte by glucuronidation, which renders the
molecule water soluble.
Plasma
Hepatocyte
Macrophage
Albumin
U.Bilirubin
Albumin
U.Bijlirubin
Albumin
Conjugation
UBilirubin
UBilirubin
C.Bilirubin
 Biliverdin
Hemoglobin -
Heme
Protein
Fe
Intestine
Excretion into Bile
C.Bilirubin
FlGURE 7.l. Bilirubin metabolism. Bilirubin is produced as a breakdown product of hemoglobin. The
unconjugated bilirubin (U. Bilirubin) is transported in the blood (ionically bound to albumin) to the liver.
 Unconjugated bilirubin is taken up by hepatocytes, conjugated (C. Bilirubin), and excreted into bile.
218
CHAPTER 7
(3) Conjugated bilirubin is secreted into the bile canaliculi and flows to the intestine via the
biliary system.
c. Biliprotein (delta bilirubin)
(1) Biliprotein is conjugated bilirubin that is covalently and irreversibly bound to serum
albumin.
(2) Variable quantities of biliprotein may be formed in hyperbilirubinemic conditions.
(3)  The primary significance of biliprotein is that it has a long half-life in serum (essentially
equivalent to the Zhalf-life of albumin).
(4) High concentrations of biliprotein may account for the prolonged hyperbilirubinemia that
 may be observed following the resolution of hepatic disease.
3. Bilirubin measurement
a. Bilirubin measurements are based on the diazo reaction.
(1) Conjugated bilirubin reacts directly with this reagent to form an azo dye.
(2) Unconjugated bilirubin reacts with this reagent only after the addition of a solubilizing
reagent.
b. Direct-reading bilirubin is the bilirubin concentration without the addition of alcohol. Direct-
reading bilirubin is synonymous with conjugated bilirubin.
C. Total bilirubin is quantified following the addition of the solubilizing reagent to the reactants.
d. Indirect-reading bilirubin is the mathematical difference between total bilirubin and the direct-
reading bilirubin. Indirect-reading bilirubin is synonymous with unconjugated bilirubin.
4. Hyperbilirubinemia is an increased serum concentration of bilirubin. Hyperbilirubinemia may
cause visible discoloration of tissues or body fluids (skin, sclera, gingival, serum, etc.), a condition
called icterus or jaundice. Causes of hyperbilirubinemia include the following:
a. Increased bilirubin production (pre-hepatic hyperbilirubinemia).
(1) Increased erythrocyte breakdown with hemolytic disease or following internal hemorrhage
causes increased bilirubin production.
(2) The resulting increase in bilirubin concentration overwhelms hepatic uptake, conjugation,
and/or secretion capacities.
b. Decreased hepatic uptake or conjugation (hepatic hyperbilirubinemia).
(1) Loss of hepatic function results in decreased capacity for bilirubin uptake and conjugation.
(2) Anorexia or fasting in horses decreases bilirubin uptake by hepatocytes. Total bilirubin
(3) Sepsis may decrease bilirubin uptake.
c. Cholestasis (post-hepatic hyperbilirubinemia).
(1) Decreased secretion of bilirubin into bile.
(2) Physical obstruction of bile flow may occur intraheptically with neoplastic disease,
(3) Extrahepatic cholestasis may occur with cholangitis, cholelithiasis, cholecystitis, and
pancreatitis.
5. Bilirubinuria
a. Conjugated bilirubin passes through the glomerular flter into the urine.
b. Unconjugated bilirubin and biliprotein are albumin bound. This molecular complex is to0
large to pass through the normal glomerular filter.
C. Canine renal tubular epithelial cells have a limited ability to conjugate and excrete bilirubin
 into the urine. Healthy dogs, especially males, therefore often have trace bilirubinuria with
concentrated (greater than l.040) urine.
d. Bilirubinuria normally precedes the development of hyperbilirubinemia, especially in hepatic
or post-hepatic causes of hyperbilirubinemia
e. With marked bilirubinuria, bilirubin crystals may appear in the urine sediment.
6. Conjugated vs. unconjugated bilirubin concentrations in interpretation of hyperbilirubinemia
a. Comparison of relative concentrations of unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin can be used
to attempt to characterize the cause of hyperbilirubinemia.
LIVE R
219
b. Unconjugated bilirubin should theoretically predominate in pre-hepatic or hepatic
hyperbilirubinemia, and conjugated bilirubin should predominate in post-hepatic
hyperbilirubinemia.
c. Assessment of conjugated vs. unconjugated bilirubin can be complicated by the following
factors:
d. Unconjugated bilirubin is expected to predominate in hemolytic disease (pre-hepatic
hyperbilirubinemia). However, if the secretory function of the liver is overwhelmed, increased
concentrations of conjugated bilirubin may be observed.
2. Hyperbilirubinemia from any cause in horses and cattle typically consists predominantly of
unconjugated bilirubin.
f. Hepatocellular disease may cause increased concentrations of both unconjugated bilirubin and
 conjugated bilirubin.
(1)  The presence of unconjugated bilirubin is due to decreased bilirubin uptake and
conjugation by damaged hepatocytes.
(2)  The presence of conjugated bilirubin is due to intrahepatic cholestasis from hepatocyte
swelling
g. Post-hepatic biliary obstruction is expected to increase conjugated bilirubin concentration, but
hepatic injury secondary to cholestasis also may result in increased concentration of unconjugated
bilirubin.
conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin.
i.
 Evaluation of other laboratory parameters may provide more information about the cause of
hyperbilirubinemia than does the percentage of conjugated vs. unconjugated bilirubin.
(1)  Anemia suggests hemolytic disease, particularly with evidence of a hemolytic anemia
(spherocytes, positive Coombs' test, Heinz bodies, etc.).
(2) Increased GGT or ALP activity in conjunction with hyperbilirubinemia suggests
cholestatic disease.
B. Biliverdin (birds)
1. Birds lack biliverdin reductase and form biliverdin instead of bilirubin as the primary breakdown
product of heme.
2. Biliverdinemia is rare in birds; however, green, bile-stained urates may be observed in the feces
during liver disease.
C. Bile acids (Figure 7.2)
1. Bile acids (also known as bile salts) are synthesized in the liver from cholesterol. They are
 conjugated and secreted into bile, where they function to solubilize lipids and aid in fat digestion
in the intestine.
2. Most of the bile acids excreted in bile are resorbed in the portal circulation and recycled. This
process is termed enterohepatic circulation. Bile acids are efficiently removed from portal blood by
cellular transporters on the sinusoidal membrane of hepatocytes.
3. Bile acids may contribute to hepatocellular membrane damage in cholestasis through a detergent
action.
4. Bile acid testing
a. In dogs and cats, baseline (fasting) and postprandial serum bile acid levels are measured.
Feeding induces the release of a bolus of bile into the intestine from the gallbladder. The
measurement of a two-hour postprandial bile acid concentration increases the sensitivity of the
test, providing a more severe test of the liver's capacity for bile acid resorption.
b. Postprandial serum samples are often lipemic, which may falsely elevate bile acid
concentration because of interference with light transmission in the spectrophotometric assay
Methods used to remove lipoproteins prior to serum chemistry analysis also may remove bile
acids that are bound to the lipoproteins.
SYSTEMIC CIRCULATION
SYSTEMIC CIRCULATION
Hepatic Vein
Hepatic vein
(Portosystemic
shunt bypasses
Portosystemic
LIVER
liver)
LIVER
Shunt
(Normal)
[delivers bile acid s
directly to systemic
→▼
circulation)
Bile acids
Bile acids
Bile dnct
Portal Veim
Bile dnct
Portal Veim
INTESTINE
INTESTINE
SYSTEMICCIRCULATION
SYSTEMICCIRCULATION
17
Hepatic Vein
LIVER
bile acids reflu
Hepatic Vein
into systemic
(Reduced Functional Mass)
circulation}
LIVER
(Cholestasis)
1
Bile acids
Bile duct
Portal Vein
Cholestasis
1
INTESTINE
Portal Vein
INTESTINE
C
FIGURE 7.2.
:a. Bile acid metabolism. Bile acids are produced by hepatocytes and delivered via the bile duct to
the intestine, where they aid in lipid digestion. Most of the bile acids are subsequently absorbed from the intestine 
by the portal circulation. ln norrmal anirmals, most of the portal blood bile acids (approximately 70% to 95%) are
removed by hepatocytes and re-excreted into bile (enterohepatic recirculation). b. Bile acid metabolism
(continued). Portosystemic shunts bypass the liver and deliver bile acids directly from the portal blood to the
systemic circulation. Bile acid removal by hepatocytes from the systermic circulation is less effcient than uptake
from the portal circulation, and serum bile acid levels increase. c. Bile acid metabolism (continued). With reduced
hepatic functional mass, removal of bile acids from portal blood is less efficient, resuling in increased serum bile
acid levels. d. Bile acid metabolism (continued). In cholestatic disease, bile acids reflux into the systemic
circulation, increasing serum bile acid levels.
220
LIVE R
221
c. In horses, a single bile acid measurement is taken. Because horses lack a gallbladder, there is
ds ludisod e bnsa un enuape ou
d. Interpretation of bile acid concentrations in birds is similar to that in mammals, but
postprandial responses are more variable.
2. In ruminants, bile acids are a less sensitive indicator of hepatic disease because of wide
reference intervals.
f. Bile acids are relatively stable at room temperature.
5. Increased bile acid concentration
a. Portosystemic shunts typically cause increased bile acid concentration.
(1) Portal blood (with its high concentration of bile acids) bypasses the liver and enters the
systemic circulation. Bile acid uptake from systemic blood is less efficient than from portal
blood.
(2) Hepatic atrophy resulting from a chronic shunt produces a loss of hepatic functional mass,
resulting in decreased ability to remove bile acids from blood.
 b. In some animals with portosystemic shunts, baseline bile acid concentration may be within the
reference interval while postprandial bile acid concentration is increased.
c. In liver failure, a loss of functional hepatic mass results in increased bile acid concentration
due to decreased bile acid recycling
d. Cholestasis causes reflux of bile acids into the bloodstream, increasing bile acid concentrations.
2. Inappropriate contraction of the gallbladder may cause an elevated fasting bile acid
concentration.
6. Decreased bile acid concentration
a. Small intestinal disease (ileal malabsorption) may cause decreased bile acid resorption. This
may complicate the assessment of concurrent hepatic disease.
b. Although bile acids are synthesized by the liver, decreased bile acid concentration usually is
 not observed in hepatic failure. This may be explained by the recirculation and reutilization of bile
 acids, as well as the low reference intervals for serum bile acid values.
D. Ammonia (Figure 7.3)
1. Ammonia is produced in the gastrointestinal tract by the breakdown of amino acids and urea by
 gastrointestinal microflora.
a. Some ammonia also is produced by amino acid deamination in other body cells
 b. The ammonia produced in the gastrointestinal tract is transported by the portal circulation to
the liver.
c. In mammals, ammonia is converted to urea by the hepatic urea cycle enzymes
d. Birds have higher plasma ammonia concentrations than mammals.
2. Because ammonia is volatile, special handling is required for accurate measurement.
a. Blood samples must be collected in ammonia-free heparin
b. Plasma should be separated immediately from blood cells.
c. The sample should be chilled on ice and analyzed without delay (preferably within 15 to 30
minutes).
d. If the specimen cannot be analyzed immediately, it should be quick-frozen and analyzed within
two days.
2. The lability of the specimen and special handling requirements limit the usefulness of plasma
 ammonia measurements in most clinical settings.
3. Blood samples for baseline ammonia determination usually are collected after an eight- t0
12-hour fast.
4. The sensitivity in detecting impaired ammonia uptake and metabolism may be increased by
performing an ammonia tolerance test.
a. This test is contraindicated if baseline hyperammonemia is present because central nervous
system disease may occur.
222
CHAPTER 7
SYSTEMIC CIRCULATION
NH
(BUN)
Hepatic Vein
KIDNEY
LIVER
Urea
NH3
Urine
Portal Vein
Portosystemic
Shunt
INTESTINE
NH3
well as armino acid metabolism in cells) and transported to the liver by the portal circulation. Most of the ammonia
is converted to urea in the liver. The urea enters the systemic circulation (blood urea nitrogen, BUN) and is
excreted in urine. With portosystemic shunting of blood, armrmonia bypasses the liver and enters the systermic
circulation, resulting in hyperarmmonemia (dashed arrow).
b. In dogs, 100 mg/kg of ammonium chloride solution (20% w/y, maximum dose 3 g) is given
orally or by stomach tube.
c. The plasma ammonia concentration is measured initially (baseline) and 30 minutes after
ammonium chloride administration.
d. In animals with adequate hepatic function, post-challenge ammonia concentrations should
 be equal to the baseline value or increased up to two-fold. Animals with hepatic insufficiency
have ammonia concentrations that are increased three- to l0-fold above the baseline ammonia
concentration.
 5. Hyperammonemia (increased plasma ammonia concentration)
a. Hepatic insufficiency may result in hyperammonemia due to decreased liver uptake and
conversion of ammonia to urea.
(1) Decreased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) concentration also may be present due to the
decreased conversion of ammonia to urea.
(2) Loss of 70% of hepatic functional mass may be required before baseline hyperammonemia
is observed. Ammonia tolerance testing may detect hepatic disease before this degree of loss of
function occurs.
b. Portosystemic venous shunting may cause hyperammonemia as portal blood bypasses the liver
and enters the systemic circulation. Hepatic atrophy due to the shunt may further contribute to
hyperammonemia.
LIVER
223
(1)  Animals with congenital portosystemic venous shunts often have baseline ammonia values
that are three- to 10-fold above the reference interval.
(2) An animal with a portosystemic shunt occasionally will have a baseline ammonia value
within the reference interval. In such cases, an ammonia tolerance test may be required to
demonstrate hyperammonemia.
C.
Ammonium biurate crystals may be observed in the urine of animals with hyperammonemia.
d. Hyperammonemia may develop in ruminants fed excessive urea or ammoniated feed additives
as a non-protein nitrogen source. Urea is broken down to ammonia by ruminal microflora, and the
ammonia is absorbed into the systemic circulation
2. Hyperammonemia due to congenital deficiencies of urea cycle enzymes has been reported in
the dog, but is rare.
E. Hepatic photosensitivity
1. Phylloerythrin is a porphyrin that is produced as a breakdown product of chlorophyll by the
gastrointestinal microflora of herbivores. It is absorbed via the portal circulation, where it is
normally removed by hepatocytes and excreted into bile.
 2. In hepatic insufficiency, phylloerythrin enters the systemic circulation and accumulates in the
skin.
3. Cutaneous phylloerythrin reacts with sunlight, resulting in free radical formation with
subsequent inflammation and necrosis.
4. Affected animals develop dermatitis, usually affecting unhaired and/or unpigmented areas of the
skin most severely.
F. Dye clearance tests
 paoi ae in s sa ae ( a ao pe (a) s 1
blood by the liver and excreted into bile.
2. The clearance rate of these dyes following intravenous injection is used as a test of liver
function and bile flow.
3. Technical difficulties, limited dye availability, and expense have largely relegated the use of these
tests to research studies. These tests have been largely replaced by bile acid testing in clinical
diagnostic testing.
Il. TESTS AFFECTED BY ALTERATIONS IN HEPATIC SYNTHESIS AND HOIMEOSTASIS
The liver is responsible for the synthesis and homeostasis of a wide variety of serum constituents. Loss
of hepatic functional mass may cause decreased synthesis and a decline in the concentration of certain
analytes. Hepatic homeostasis of certain serum constituents also may be altered with hepatic failure.
The values of these analytes may fluctuate widely in disease. Because the liver has a large reserve
functional mass has been lost.
A. Glucose (Chapter 6)
1. Abnormalities in glucose homeostasis may occur with reduced hepatic functional mass (70% or
greater loss of function)
2. Reduced hepatic glycogen stores and decreased insulin clearance may cause fasting
hypoglycemia.
3. Prolonged postprandial hyperglycemia may occur in hepatic insufficiency due to decreased
hepatic uptake of glucose from portal blood (hepatic insufficiency and/or portosystemic shunting).
B. Albumin and globulin concentrations and A/G ratio (Chapter 6)
1. Albumin has a relatively long serum half-life (approximately seven to 10 days); therefore,
normoalbuminemia is present during acute liver disease.
224
CHAPTER 7
2. Hypoalbuminemia may accompany chronic liver failure or atrophy
a. Hypoalbuminemia is not a specific indicator of hepatic insuffciency
b. Hypoalbuminemia also may occur with starvation, cachexia, malabsorption, inflammation,
 hemorrhage, proteinuria of glomerular disease, protein-losing enteropathy, severe exudative skin
disease, burns, intestinal parasitism, high-protein effusions, or inflammation.
these changes usually have a mild effect on total globulin levels.
4. In chronic liver disease, the hypoalbuminemia is often accompanied by hyperglobulinemia
(increases in β- and globulins), resulting in a decreased A/G ratio.
C. Hemostasis (Chapter 4)
1. The vitamin-K-dependent clotting factors (ll, Vll, IX, and X) and fibrinogen are produced by the
liver.
2. Decreased activity of these factors may occur by loss of functional hepatic mass or by
interference with their synthetic pathway (vitamin K antagonists or deficiency).
Thus, factor deficiencies may be apparent in acute hepatic disease.
4. If clotting factor activity is reduced to less than 30% of baseline activity, clotting tests
(prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time) will be prolonged.
BIOCHEMICAL PROFILES OF HEPATIC DISEASES
Different categories of liver diseases tend to display characteristic patterns of biochemical test
abnormalities. Although it is often impossible to provide a definitive diagnosis of a specifc liver
disease based only on serum chemistry profle abnormalities, it may be possible to categorize the
general type of liver disease or to exclude some causes of disease.
1. MULTIFOCAL HEPATIC NECROSIS
A. Clinical features and characteristics
1. Microscopic foci of necrosis are dispersed throughout the liver.
2. This pattern of hepatic necrosis usually is associated with infectious diseases.
B. Typical laboratory findings
1. Hepatocellular leakage enzymes have increased serum activity.
2. Analytes affected by alterations in hepatic function or cholestasis may remain within reference
intervals or may be increased.
II. CENTRILOBULAR HEPATIC LESIONS CAUSED BY HYPOXIA
A. Clinical features and characteristics
arterial blood supply and oxygenated blood.
2. Evidence of cardiovascular disease or anemia is present, but clinical signs of hepatic disease
usually are absent
3. High-protein ascites may occur, especially in dogs.
B. Typical laboratory findings
1. The serum activities of hepatocellular leakage enzymes are mildly to moderately increased.
LIVER
225
2. Test results that are affected by cholestasis usually are within the reference interval because bile
canaliculi are located at the periphery of the hepatic lobule and are unaffected by the centrilobular
lesion.
3. Tests evaluating hepatic function and portal blood flow are usually within reference intervals.
4. Hyperbilirubinemia may be present if tissue hypoxia is the result of hemolytic anemia.
IMl. ACUTE SUBMASSIVE OR MASSIVE HEPATIC NECROSIS
A. Clinical features and characteristics
1. Sublethal injury or necrosis damages large numbers of hepatocytes.
2. This pattern of disease is typical of a toxic insult to the liver.
B. Typical laboratory findings
1. The serum activity of hepatocellular leakage enzymes is markedly increased due to the large
number of hepatocytes affected.
2. Concurrent cholestasis and increases in indicators of cholestatic disease may or may not be
present.
3. Hepatic function is often impaired. Albumin concentration usually remains within the reference
 interval (due to its long half-life), but abnormalities in hemostasis may occur.
4. Tests evaluating portal blood flow are within reference intervals
IV. LARGE FOCAl HEPATIC LeSIONS
A. Clinical features and characteristics
1. These lesions include abscesses, infarcts, or neoplasms that involve only a small portion of the
total hepatic mass.
2. Clinical signs of liver disease usually are absent
B. Typical laboratory findings
1. In acute stages of disease, the serum activity of hepatocellular leakage enzymes may be
 inereased. Mild to moderate increases in enzyme activity are typical because a small portion of the
total hepatic mass is involved.
2. With chronic hepatic lesions, serum enzyme activity may be within the reference interval.
 3. Other laboratory tests usually are within the reference interval.
4. Hepatic abscesses in ruminants may have polyclonal gammopathy as the only laboratory
abnormality.
V. Hepatic LipidoSIs
A. Clinical features and characteristics:
1. This syndrome may occur with diabetes mellitus, acute pancreatitis (cats), hepatotoxicity,
inflammatory bowel disease, hyperthyroidism, starvation, or anorexia (particularly in obese cats)
2. Triglycerides accumulate in hepatocytes more rapidly than they can be secreted as lipoproteins
damage. Lipid vacuolation of hepatocytes is visible microscopically in liver biopsies or cytologic
fine-needle aspirates.
4. Grossly, the liver is diffusely enlarged and pale
B. Typical laboratory findings
1. The serum activity of liver leakage enzymes is increased due to altered hepatocellular membrane
permeability.
226
CHAPTER 7
2. Concentrations of bilirubin and bile acids as well as the activities of ALP and (sometimes) GGT
are increased, as intrahepatic cholestasis develops with hepatocellular swelling, causing
compression of bile canaliculi.
3. In cats with hepatic lipidosis, ALP activity typically increases to a greater magnitude than does
GGT activity, which may remain within reference intervals.
4. Hyperammonemia may occur.
5. Albumin concentration is usually unaffected.
6. Cats with hepatic lipidosis may have prolonged coagulation tests (PT and PTT), but a
propensity toward hemorrhage has not been observed clinically.
VI. CORTICOSTEROID HEPATOPATHY
A. Clinical features and characteristics
1. This syndrome occurs in dogs only, and is due to either glucocorticoid treatment or
hyperadrenocorcism.
2. Diffuse, indistinct vacuolar change and swelling of hepatocytes results from glycogen
accumulation.
B. Typical laboratory fndings
1. The serum activity of hepatocellular leakage enzymes is increased.
2. ALP activity is usually increased dramatically.
a. The corticosteroid ALP isoenzyme is usually involved. This isoenzyme resists levamisole
inhibition and heat inactivation.
b. The hepatic ALP isoenzyme may predominate with recent corticosteroid treatment.
3. Cholestasis may occur from hepatocellular swelling and compression of bile canaliculi.
4. Albumin concentration, ammonia concentration, bile acid concentration, and hemostasis are
typically unaffected.
Vll. CHoLaNgItIS, CHoLaNGIoHEpatItIS, ANd EXTraHEPatIC bIlIaRY DISEASe
A. Clinical features and characteristics
1. Lesions may consist of extrahepatic obstructions with litle hepatic involvement or intrahepatic
disease affecting the biliary tract.
2. With complete biliary obstruction, acholic feces (pale feces without bile pigments) may be
observed.
3. Intermittent or episodic clinical signs may include anorexia, lethargy, pyrexia, vomiting, weight
loss, hepatomegaly, and icterus.
B. Typical laboratory findings
1. Bile acid concentration, bilirubin concentration, ALP activity, and GGT activity (tests affected by
 cholestasis) are increased.
2. Serum activity of hepatocellular leakage enzymes is mildly to moderately increased.
3. Because bile acids are needed for efficient solubilization of dietary lipids, complete biliary
obstruction results in malassimilation of fat-soluble vitamin K, which may lead to hemostatic
abnormalities.
4. Plasma ammonia concentration is within the reference interval.
Vlll. chronic, Progressive Liver disease
A. Clinical features and characteristics
LIVE R
227
1. Hepatic lesions may develop from chronic inflammation, toxicosis, or accumulation of metals
(e.g., copper, iron), producing progressive, subtle damage to the liver parenchyma.
 2. In end-stage liver disease (cirrhosis), normal hepatic architecture is replaced by fibrosis, nodular
regeneration of hepatocytes, and bile duct hyperplasia, resulting in disruption of normal portal
circulation and biliary drainage.
B. Typical laboratory findings
1. The serum activity of hepatocellular leakage enzymes (ALT, AST, SDH) typically is increased.
However, serum enzymatic activity may steadily decline as the disease progresses and the number
of affected hepatocytes decreases.
2. Indicators of cholestasis (bilirubin, ALP, GGT, bile acids) usually are increased in concentration
or activity.
3. Acquired portosystemic venous shunts may develop due to restriction of portal blood flow and
subsequent development of collateral circulatory pathways. As a result, increased concentrations of
bile acids and ammonia may be present.
4. Hypoalbuminemia, fasting hypoglycemia, and abnormal hemostasis may be observed if 70% or
greater loss of hepatic functional mass occurs
5. Polyclonal gammopathy is observed commonly because fewer Kupffer cells are present, resulting
in decreased clearance of antibodies and/or removal of antigens from portal blood.
IX. coNGEnItal portoSySteMIc ShUNtS
A. Clinical features and characteristics
1. Portosystemic vascular shunts may be extrahepatic or intrahepatic.
2. Reduced delivery of intestinal and pancreatic hepatotrophic factors to the liver causes hepatic
atrophy.
3. Affected animals may display signs of hepatic insuffciency such as weakness from
hypoglycemia, edema from severe hypoalbuminemia, and various neurologic abnormalities from
hyperammonemia and accumulation of other neurotoxins (hepatic encephalopathy)
4. Hepatic microvascular dysplasia (microscopic portosystemic shunting) may occur as a separate
disease or in combination with macroscopic shunts.
5. Dogs with hepatic microvascular dysplasia tend to have less severe disease than those with
macroscopic shunts.
B. Typical laboratory findings
1. Baseline plasma ammonia and serum bile acid concentrations usually are increased.
a.  In some animals, baseline bile acid concentrations are within the reference interval.
b. Postprandial bile acid measurements may be required to demonstrate an abnormality in
hepatic function.
2. Markers of cholestasis and hepatocellular leakage usually are within reference intervals.
3. Depending on the degree of hepatic atrophy, reduced hepatic synthesis may result in
hypoalbuminemia or decreased BUN concentration.
4. Animals with portosystemic shunts often have microcytic anemia
5. Animals with acquired portosystemic shunts may have a similar presentation, or may also have
increased hepatic enzymes associated with the primary disease causing the shunt
X. PRIIMARY OR METASTATIC HEPATIC NEOPLASlA
A. Clinical features and laboratory findings are variable
228
CHAPTER 7
Table 7.1.
Cytosolic
Induced
alzynes
enzymes
(AIT, AST,
(ALP GGT)
Disorder
SDH)
Bilirubin
Bile acids
Albumin
Multifocal hepatic necrosis
↑a
N
N
N
N
 Hypoxia/cardiac disease
个
N
N
N
N
Acute massive necrosis
个
N to ↑
N to ↑
N to ↑
N
Large focal lesions
N to ↑
N to ↑
N
N
N
Feline hepatic lipidosis
个
↑
个
个
N
Corticosteroid hepatopathy
↑
个
个
N
Cholangitis/biliary obstruction
N to ↑
个
个
个
Nto √
Chronic, progressive liver
N to ↑
个
个
个
N to ↓
disease
Congenital portosystemic shunt
N
N
N to ↑
个
↑ 0 N
 Neoplasia
N to ↑
N to ↑
N to ↑
N to ↑
↑ 0 N
ALP = alkaline phosphatase
ALT = alanine aminotransferase
AST = aspartate aminotransferase
GGT = gamma glutamyl transferase
SDH = sorbitol dehydrogenase.
N = normal (within the reference interval), ↑ = increased, ↓ = decreased.
If hemolytic disease is the cause of the tissue hypoxia, hyperbilirubinemia will be present.
^ALP usually is increased to a greater magnitude than GGT in this condition.
B. Laboratory tests of cholestasis and hepatocellular leakage are typically altered, but the magnitude of
the increases do not necessarily correlate with the size or degree of invasiveness of the neoplasm.
C. Laboratory findings in some neoplastic conditions may resemble those of chronic, progressive liver
disease or large, focal, hepatic lesions (see above) (Table 7.1).
REFERENCES
Anwer MS, Meyer DJ: 1995. Bile acids in the diagnosis, pathology, and therapy of hepatobiliary
diseases. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 25:503-517.
 Bayly WM, Brobst DF, Elfers RS, et al: 1986. Serum and urinary biochemistry and enzyme changes in
ponies with acute renal failure. Cornell Vet 6:306-316.
Britti D, Massimini G, Peli A, et al: 2005. Evaluation of serum enzyme activities as predictors of
passive transfer status in lambs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:951-955.
 Bunch SE: 1993. Hepatotoxicity associated with pharmacologic agents in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North
Am Small Animal Pract 23:659-670.
Center SA, Baldwin BH, Dillingham S, et al: 1986. Diagnostic value of serum gamma-glutamyl
transferase and alkaline phosphatase activities in hepatobiliary disease in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc
188:507-510.
LIVE R
229
Center SA, Crawford MA, Guida L, et al: 1993. A retrospective study of 77 cats with severe hepatic
lipidosis: 1975-1990. J Vet Intern Med 7:349-359.
Center SA: 1995. Pathophysiology and Laboratory Diagnosis of Hepatobiliary Disorders. In: Ettinger SJ,
Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine: Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 4th ed. WB
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 1261-1312.
       s       
40:106-114.
Christiansen JS, Hottinger HA, Allen L, et al: 2000. Hepatic microvascular dysplasia in dogs: a
retrospective study of 24 cases (1987-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:385-389.
Craig AM, Pearson EG, Rowe K: 1992.Serum bile acid concentrations in clinically normal cattle:
Comparison by type, age, and stage of lactation. Am J Vet Res 53:1784-1786.
Dial SM: 1995. Clinicopathologic evaluation of the liver. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
25:25/273
Garzotto CK, Berg J, Hoffmann WE, et al: 2000. Prognostic significance of serum alkaline phosphatase
activity in canine appendicular osteosarcoma. J Vet Intern Med 14:587-592
dogs after phenobarbital administration. J Vet Intern Med 14:277-281.
Guglick MA, MacAllister CG, Ely RW, et al: 1995. Hepatic disease associated with administration of
tetanus antitoxin in eight horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1737-1740.
Harr KE: 2002. Clinical chemistry of companion avian species: a review. Vet Clin Pathol 3l:140-151.
Hoffmann WE, Baker G, Rieser S, Dorner JL: 1987. Alterations in selected serum biochemical
constituents in equids after induced hepatic disease. Am J Vet Res 48:1343-1347
Hoffman WE, Solter PF: 2008. Diagnostic Enzymology in Domestic Animals. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW,
Bruss ML (eds.): Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 6th ed. Academic Press, San Diego, pp.
351-378.
Horney BS, Honor DJ, MacKenzie A, et al: 1993. Stability of sorbitol dehydrogenase activity in bovine
and equine sera. Vet Clin Pathol 22:5-9.
Horney BS, Farmer AJ, Honor DJ, et al: 1994. Agarose gel electrophoresis of alkaline phosphatase
isoenzymes in the serum of hyperthyroid cats. Vet Clin Pathol 23:98-102.
Lawler DF, Keltner DG, Hoffman WE, et al: 1996. Benign familial hyperphosphatasemia in Siberian
huskies. Am J Vet Res 57:612-617.
Lumeij JT, Westerhof I: 1987. Blood chemistry for the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in birds. A
review. Vet Quarterly 9:255-261.
Lumeij, JT: 1994. Hepatology In: Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR (eds): Avian Medicine:
Principles and Application. Wingers Publishing, Inc., Lake Worth, FL, pp. 523-537.
isoenzymes in canine serum. Wet Clin Pathol 20:5l-55.
   o    n o an  s d  e  
Pract 23:609-623.
McGorum BC, Murphy D, Love S, et al: 1999. Clinicopathological features of equine primary hepatic
disease: A review of 50 cases. Vet Rer 145:134-139.
230
CHAPTER 7
Muller PB, Taboada J, Hosgood G, et al: 2000. Effects of long-term phenobarbital treatment on the
liver in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 14:165-171.
Nestor DD, Holan KM, Johnson CA, et al: 2006. Serum alkaline phosphatase activity in Scottish
Terriers versus dogs of other breeds. J Am Vet Med Assor 228:222-224.
Rothuizen J, van den Ingh T: 1988. Covalently protein-bound bilirubin conjugates in cholestatic
disease of dogs. Am J Vet Res 49:702-704.
Rutgers HC, Batt RM, Vaillant C, et al: 1995. Subcellular pathologic features of glucocorticoid-induced
hepatopathy in dogs. Am J Vet Res 56:898-907.
Sanecki RK, Hoffmann WE, Gelberg HB, et al: 1987. Subcellular location of corticosteroid-induced
alkaline phosphatase in canine hepatocytes. Vet Pathol 24:296-301.
Saulez MN, Cebra CK, Tornquist SJ: 2004. The diagnostic and prognostic value of alkaline phosphatase
activity in serum and peritoneal fluid from horses with acute colic. J Vet Intern Med 18:564-567.
Solter PF, Hoffmann WE: 1999. Solubilization of liver alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme during
cholestasis in dogs. Am J Vet Res 60:10l0-1015.
Solter PF, Hoffmann WE, Hungerford LL, et al: 1993. Assessment of corticosteroid-induced alkaline
phosphatase isoenzyme as a screening test for hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
203:534-538.
Sterczer A, Gaal T, Perge E, Rothuizen J: 200l. Chronic hepatitis in the dog—A review. Vet Quarterly
23 :148-152.
Swenson CL, Graves TK: 1997. Absence of liver specificity for canine alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Vet ClinPathol26:26-8.
Tennant BC, Center SA: 2008. Hepatic Function. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds.): Clinical
Webster CRL: 2004. History, clinical signs, and physical findings in hepatobiliary disease. In: Ettinger
SJ (ed): Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medirine. 6th ed. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, pp.
1422-1435.
West HJ: 1996. Clinical and pathological studies in horses with hepatic disease. Equine Vet J
28:146-156.
West HJ: 1997. Clinical and pathological studies in cattle with hepatic disease: Vet Res Commun
21:169-185.
CHAPteR 
8
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
EXOCRINE PANCREAS
 Laboratory evaluation of the exocrine pancreas is directed toward two categories of disease: inflammation
 and necrosis, and exocrine insufficiency.
LABORATORY DETECTION OF PANCREATITIS
Pancreatitis entails the destruction of pancreatic tissue by activated digestive enzymes. The clinical spectrum of
pancreatitis includes mild subclinical disease, severe necrotizing inflammation that can be life threatening, and
clinical disease that is episodic over months to years. Acute and chronic pancreatitis are histopathological
categories which typically cannot be distinguished by physical examination findings or laboratory test results.
Both acute and chronic disease can be mild or severe. In domestic species, pancreatitis occurs primarily in the
requires the integration of clinical presentation, laboratory abnormalities, and imaging (ultrasonography and/or
radiology). A definitive diagnosis requires histological examination of pancreatic tissue. Histologic evidence of
suppurative inflammation, necrosis, and edema are diagnostic for acute pancreatitis. Evidence of permanent 
 pancreatic structural damage, especially fibrosis, and mononuclear lymphocytic) inflammation are
characteristics of chronic disease."Chronic active pancreatitis" can be used to describe the presence of
histologic changes characteristic of both acute and chronic pancreatitis.
 Routine biochemical profles lack highly sensitive and specifc tests for pancreatic disease and
therefore cannot be used for definitive diagnosis of pancreatitis. Nevertheless, a complete blood count,
biochemical profle (including lipase and amylase measurement in dogs), and urinalysis in addition to
 e  sd   s n  a a r n iin s
diagnosis. Pancreatitis is frequently associated with disease of other body systems. General laboratory
testing facilitates awareness of dysfunction or illness of other organs.
1. SERUM ENZYME ACTIVITY MEASUREIMENT IN GENERAL BIOCHEIMICAL PROFILES
A. Enzymes or zymogens (inactive precursors of enzymes) produced and stored in acinar cells may
leak into plasma during pancreatic cellular injury, resulting in increased serum activity. Later in the
course of disease, decreased serum enzyme activity may occur from depletion of stored enzymes or
disturbed enzyme synthesis. Amylase and lipase are enzymes that are nonexclusively produced by the
231
232
CHAPTER 8
exocrine pancreas. Measurement of their activity in serum can be helpful in determining the presence
of pancreatitis in dogs; their measurement is of no utility in cats.
B. Serum amylase activity
1. Characteristics
a. Only C-amylase is present in animals. It is secreted in the active form, and it hydrolyzes
 complex carbohydrates at α-l,4-linkages to form maltose and glucose.
b. Serum amylase activity is expressed in units per liter (U/L).
r. Pancreas, liver, and small intestine are the main sources of serum amylase activity
d. Of these sources, the duodenal mucosa is the most likely origin of serum amylase activity in
health. Because pancreatectomy does not result in decreased serum amylase activity, most
2. Salivary amylase is not present in domestic animals except the pig.
f. Amylase is filtered by the glomerulus and resorbed and inactivated by renal tubular
epithelium; very little amylase activity is detected in the urine.
. Kupffer cells in the liver also resorb and inactivate small quantities of amylase.
h. In dogs, serum amylase activity may remain within the reference interval in some cases of
acute pancreatitis. More false-negative test results occur with serum amylase than with serum
lipase.
i. Studies have shown that corticosteroid administration may decrease serum amylase activity.
 j.Lipeimia in the patient's serum sample may inhibit amylase activity. This may be overcome by
sample dilution or serum clearing techniques.
2. Interpretation of hyperamylasemia (Table 8.1)
a. Hyperamylasemia is often present in dogs with pancreatitis; it is rarely observed in cats. Birds
with pancreatitis also may have hyperamylasemia
TABLE 8.1
CAUSES OFHYPERAMYLASEMIA AND
HYPERLIPASEMIA
Hyp eramylase mia
Pancreatitis
Renal disease
 Dise ases resulting in production/decreased
clearance of macroamylase
Diabe tes mellitus
Gastrointestinal disease
 Neoplasia
Hepatobiliary disease
Surgical manipulation of the pancreas
Hyperlipasemia
Pancreatitis
 Renal disease
Peritonitis
Gastritis/enteritis
Hepatic disease 
Bowel obstruction
Visceral manipulation during surgery
 Neoplasia (may be profound)
Corticosteroids
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
233
(1) Degenerating pancreatic acinar cells or obstructed pancreatic ducts cause leakage of
amylase directly into venules or indirectly into the blood via lymphatics.
(2) The higher the amylase activity (equal to or greater than three- to four-fold increase), the
more likely the presence of pancreatic disease. Values 7 to l0 times the reference interval
have been observed with pancreatitis.
(3) Amylase activity peaks at 12 to 48 hours and returns to the reference interval within 8 t0
14 days after a single episode of pancreatitis in dogs.
(4) Ranges of sensitivity and specificity of serum amylase activity for pancreatitis in dogs are
reportedly 62% to 78% and 57% to 77%, respectively.
b. Hyperamylasemia has poor specificity for pancreatitis. Nonpancreatic diseases that also can
be associated with hyperamylasemia include renal disease, diabetes mellitus, gastrointestinal
disease, neoplasia (e.g., lymphosarcoma and hemangiosarcoma), and hepatobiliary disease.
(1) Serum amylase measurement includes macroamylase, a complex of amylase bound to
immunoglobulin.
(a) Renal filtration of these complexes is hindered by their size.
(b) Macroamylase, which can account for 5% to 62% of total amylase activity, is found
in higher concentration in the serum of dogs with renal disease and/or a decreased
 glomerular fltration rate and consequently contributes to the hyperamylasemia seen in
renal disease.
to moderately increased activity.
(3) Because diseases other than pancreatitis may cause hyperamylasemia, both serum
amylase and lipase activities should be measured in dogs to better substantiate a suspicion of
pancreatitis. Increases and decreases in serum amylase activity tend to parallel those of lipase
 in pancreatic disease.
C. Lipase
1. Characteristics
a. Lipase hydrolyzes triglycerides.
b. Serum lipase activity is expressed in units per liter (U/L).
C. Lipase activity in serum originates from multiple sources including the panereas and
 stomach. The common function of lipases precludes their differentiation by assays determining
 serum lipase activity.
(1) Serum lipase activity in pancreatectomized dogs has been shown to be 50% of its level
prior to surgery.
(2) Serum lipase activity in dogs with exocrine panereatic insuffciency and healthy dogs has
been shown to not be significantly different.
d. Lipase is cleared from the plasma and inactivated by the kidneys.
2. Hemolysis directly inhibits lipase activity.
2. Interpretation of hyperlipasemia (Table 8.1)
a. In dogs, a three-fold or greater increase in serum lipase activity suggests acute pancreatitis.
(1) In dogs with pancreatitis, lipase activity increases within 24 hours and peaks (at a higher
level of activity than amylase) two to five days after onset.
(2) Sensitivity and specificity of serum lipase activity for canine pancreatitis are not high
ranges are 60% to 75% and 50% to 75%, respectively
b. Decreased clearance of plasma lipase in renal disease can result in a two- to three-fold
increase in serum lipase activity.
C. Peritonitis, gastritis, enteritis, some hepatic disorders, bowel obstruction, visceral
manipulation during laparotomy, and neoplasia also may increase serum lipase activity
(1) Lipase activity may be elevated two- to three-fold above the reference interval.
(2) The source of increased lipase activity is unknown.
234
CHAPTER8
d. Corticosteroid administration may increase serum lipase activity up to five times the upper
end of the reference interval in the absence of histologic evidence of pancreatitis. The source of
 increased lipase activity associated with corticosteroid use has not been determined.
2. Specific tumors have been associated with hyperlipasemia.
 a ( a nn  xa m i esa p o  (
observed in dogs with pancreatic and hepatic carcinomas.
(2) Bile duct carcinoma and gastrointestinal lymphosarcoma have also been associated with
increased serum lipase activity.
Il. LABoRAToRY TeSTS SPECIfIC FoR PANCREATIC DISEASE
A. Species-specific pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI)
 pnsa si in sed auxa un  ao paap asd as po snsa e st rd 1
μg/L.
2. PLI has been shown to be the most sensitive and specific laboratory test currently available to
veterinary practitioners for diagnosis of pancreatitis in both dogs and cats.
3. Assays have been developed and validated for both the dog and cat.
a. Commercial assays for species-specific pancreatic lipase based on PLI technology (Spec cPLTM
and Spec fPLIM) are currently available through the Gastrointestinal Laboratory at Texas A & M
and IDEXX Reference Laboratories.
(1) Sensitivity and specificity of canine PLI for pancreatitis are reportedly 8l% and 96%
respectively.
(2) Sensitivity and specificity of feline PLI for pancreatitis are reportedly 67% and 91%
respectively (when measured by radioimmunoassay). These parameters of fPLI increase with
severity of disease.
(@) fPLI has a sensitivity of 54% in cats with mild or low-grade/chronic pancreatitis.
This level of sensitivity is higher than any other noninvasive test for pancreatitis
(including serum amylase and lipase activity, feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity,
radiography, abdominal ultrasound, and computed tomography).
(b) One study found sensitivity and specificity of fPLI to be 100% in cases of moderate
to severe pancreatitis.
 ae ose st iloe gdn xxiai an 'asd d a nog isn aais-iad, y q
has 95% correlation with PLI measured through reference laboratories.
(1) Test results are considered either "normal" or "abnormal."
(2) Measurement of PLI through a reference laboratory is recommended for dogs with
abnormal test results for the sake of comparison during the course of treatment.
(3) A similar test kit is currently not available for cats.
4. Glomerular fltration rate, gastritis, and oral prednisone have been shown to not affect cPLI results.
5. In cats with experimentally induced pancreatitis, fPLI was shown to remain elevated longer than
feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity (fTLI).
6. fPLI measurement could be of great importance for cats with other diseases.
a. Pancreatitis in cats is frequently associated with other conditions (e.g., hepatic lipidosis
diabetes mellitus, cholangitis, cholangiohepatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, interstitial
nephritis, and vitamin-K-responsive coagulopathy)
b. Routine biochemical profles may reveal abnormalities related to disease of other organs but
 do not disclose evidence of pancreatitis. Identification of pancreatitis in cats with disease
elsewhere is potentially clinically relevant.
c. A recent study has shown that a significant number of cats with diabetes mellitus have
elevated fPLI values. Measurement of fPLI in diabetic cats is recommended, especially when the
diabetic condition has been difficult to control.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
235
B. Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI)
1. TLI is a species-specific assay that detects trypsinogen and trypsin in serum.
2. Trypsinogen and trypsin have been shown to originate almost exclusively from the exocrine
pancreas in dogs. Though studies have not been performed, the origin of these proteins in cats is
believed to be only the pancreas. TLI, therefore, is highly specific for pancreatic disease. TLI
measurement is an indirect test of pancreatic function.
trypsin.
4. Sensitivity and specificity of canine TLI are approximately 35% and 65%, respectively
    e sd  r  n as  s  
respectively.
 6. Low sensitivity of TLI excludes its use as a definitive test for pancreatitis for both dogs and
cats.
a. The short half-life of TLI likely decreases its sensitivity. TLI may return to the reference
interval within several hours of onset of pancreatitis. Utility of TLI is highest when measured as
soon as clinical signs of disease are recognized.
b. In chronic pancreatitis, the concentration of enzymes in serum may be inadequate for
detection.
7. TLI may be increased with renal insuffciency.
8. Increased TLI also has been reported in malnourished dogs without histologic evidence of
pancreatitis.
 9. In summary, serum TLI can be useful in the diagnosis of pancreatitis if renal disease is not
present. The magnitude of increased TLI does not always correlate with the severity of pancreatitis.
10. TLI measurement is currently only available at reference laboratories.
C. Trypsinogen activation peptide (TAP)
1. TAP is produced after cleavage of trypsinogen by enterokinase within the small intestine. This
peptide is predominantly found within the intestinal lumen, but it also is increased in plasma and
the abdominal cavity if trypsinogen is aberrantly activated within an inflamed pancreas. The
kidneys ultimately clear TAP from circulation
2. Marked elevations in serum TAP occur with severe pancreatitis and severe renal disease. If renal
disease is excluded, markedly increased TAP could be considered a negative prognostic indicator;
intensive therapy would be warranted.
3. TAP fails to increase in mild pancreatitis, limiting its usefulness as the sole marker of
pancreatitis in dogs.
4. Limited availability of testing and inadequate scientifc evaluation of the use of serum and urine
TAP as tests for pancreatitis make their measurement as parts of a diagnostic strategy for
pancreatitis in dogs and cats impracticable.
Ill. SUPPLEMENTARY LABORATORY FINDINGS IN PANCREATIC INFLAMMATION AND
NECROSIS (CASE 14)
A. The complete blood count
1. Mild polycythemia or a mild to moderate anemia can be present. Internal fluid shifts and fluid
loss via vomiting may cause a relative polycythemia. Anemia observed with pancreatitis is usually
nonregenerative as a result of inflammation or chronicity of disease.
2. The leukogram can vary widely.
a. Mild leukocytosis attributable to mild neutrophilia, marked leukocytosis with a left shift, and
leukopenia with a degenerative left shift have all been observed with pancreatitis.
b. Leukocytosis is most commonly seen with acute necrotizing pancreatitis or pancreatic
abscessation.
236
CHAPTER 8
c. Neutrophils may exhibit toxic changes (Chapter 2).
d. Lymphopenia, eosinopenia, and monocytosis can be aspects of a corticosteroid or "stress"
leukogram which results from increased endogenous cortisol production induced by disease.
3. Thrombocytopenia observed with pancreatitis may be attributable to disseminated intravascular
 i       
B. Serum biochemical abnormalities
1. Fasting hyperlipidemia
a. Hypertriglyceridemia (hyperlipemia)
(1) Lipoprotein lipase, a plasma lipemia-clearing enzyme produced by the pancreas, may be
inactivated in pancreatic necrosis, resulting in a transient lipemia.
(2) Diabetes mellitus as a sequela to pancreatitis may cause hyperlipemia.
b. Hypercholesterolemia
 a  )   ( )  
observed.
3. Prerenal and renal azotemia may result from a decreased glomerular fltration rate due to
dehydration.
4. Increased ALT and AST activities may occur from hepatic ischemia or the toxic effects of
products absorbed by portal blood.
5. Increased ALP activity and hyperbilirubinemia may result from cholestasis secondary to
hepatocellular fatty change or inflammation causing compression of bile canaliculi or the common
bile duct.
6. Hyperglycemia may occur secondary to the following:
subsequently may promote mobilization of glycogen stores.
b. Catecholamine and cortisol release from the adrenal medulla and cortex, respectively, may
promote glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis resulting in transient hyperglycemia.
c. Transient or persistent diabetes mellitus may occur from damage to insulin-producing beta
cells within pancreatic islets.
7. Increased C-reactive protein
a. C-reactive protein (CRP), a positive acute phase protein produced in response to
inflammation, infection, and tissue destruction (including necrosis caused by trauma), is
commonly increased in cases of acute pancreatitis.
b. In inflammatory conditions, CRP may be elevated before leukocytosis and/or a left shift is
detected.
c. The utility of CRP as a predictor of severity of pancreatitis or as an indicator of response t0
treatment has not been critically evaluated.
8. Electrolytes vary in concentration, though they are commonly below the reference interval.
a. Hypocalcemia and hypokalemia are the most common electrolyte abnormalities.
b. The mechanism of hypocalcemia is unclear, but saponification of fat or loss of albumin, and
consequently albumin-bound calcium, into an effusion may be responsible for this abnormality.
c. Prognosis worsens with hypocalcemia, especially when the ionized calcium is less than
1.0 mmol/L. Ionized hypocalcemia associated with pancreatitis is usually observed with severe
disease.
C. Urinalysis
1. Glomerular damage via excessive filtration of pancreatic enzymes may result in proteinuria.
 2. Persistent glycosuria may indicate concurrent diabetes mellitus.
D. Peritoneal fluid evaluation
erythrocytes, and neutrophils (nonseptic exudate).
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
237
2. Increased amylase and lipase activities in peritoneal effusion fluid may exceed activities of these
enzymes in serum.
E. Studies have consistently shown that pancreatitis in cats, especially chronic disease, is frequently
Sd  s  sia nin n i a sid   
include hepatobiliary disease, renal disease, inflammatory bowel disease, and diabetes mellitus.
IV. DIAGNoSTIC STEPS FOR CANINE AND FELiNE PANCREATItIS
A. Dogs
1. Have suspicion in a dog presented for vomiting, cranial abdominal pain, or fever that is a
predisposed breed (e.g., Miniature Schnauzer) or that has a recent history of a diet change, dietary
indiscretion, or ingestion of a fatty meal.
2. Perform standard laboratory testing (complete blood count, biochemical profle including
amylase and lipase, and urinalysis)
3. Measure canine PLI via serum submission to a reference laboratory or perform an in-hospital
SNAP? cPLIM test. PLI offers the highest sensitivity and specificity of any noninvasive test for
pancreatitis
4. Consider TLI measurement. TLI has reasonable specificity but lacks adequate sensitivity to be a
primary test for pancreatitis.
5. Ultrasonographic evaluation may aid diagnosis.
pancreatitis. In cases of pancreatitis, peritoneal amylase activity is greater than that of serum.
7. Though histologic evaluation of pancreatic tissue can provide a definitive diagnosis, there is
increased anesthetic risk in animals with pancreatitis.
B. Cats
 n s o n   i d  o  a i
anorexia, dehydration, and weight loss for which there is no known cause
 2. Test for feline leukemia virus and feline immunodefciency virus if the cat is unvaccinated or
its status is unknown.
3. Perform standard laboratory testing (complete blood count, biochemical profle, and
urinalysis). Though it is possible in cats with pancreatitis to have all results of these standard tests
to be within reference intervals, performance of the tests aids elucidation of the presence of other
diseases and gives an impression of the patient's general condition.
4. Measure feline PLI by a reference laboratory. fPLI is the most sensitive and specific noninvasive
test available for diagnosing feline pancreatitis.
5. Consider testing for hyperthyroidism in cats older than six years.
 6. Abdominal radiography and/or ultrasonography may be helpful, though test sensitivities are
inadequate for definitive diagnosis.
suspected.
8. Hepatic function and gastrointestinal screening tests (e.g., bile acids or urine sulfated bile acids
and cobalamin/folate measurements) are helpful in ascertaining the existence of abnormalities in
other organs.
9. Cobalamin measurement is recommended for cats in which pancreatitis is suspected given the
commonality of coexistent intestinal disease with pancreatitis and improved overall response to0
therapy when hypocobalaminemia is recognized and managed.
the same risk in cats as it does in dogs that have pancreatitis.
that potentially have been exposed.
238
CHAPTER 8
12. Measurement of serum amylase and lipase activities and computed tomography are of no utility
in the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis.
13. Studies have demonstrated in cats an association of pancreatitis, inflammatory bowel disease
and biliary tract disease ("triaditis" is a designation for the concurrence of all three). Bear in mind
that a cat with one of these disorders is at risk for having or developing one or both of the
remaining conditions.
LABORATORY DETECTION OF MALASSIMIlATION ATtRIbUTABLE tO MALDIGESTION
(EXOCRINE PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY)
Malassimilation of nutrients from the gastrointestinal lumen is secondary to defective digestion or
Malabsorption typically results from small intestinal disease. EPl occurs when at least 90% of the
maldigestion followed by malassimilation of nutrients. Iypical clinical signs of EPl are weight loss
steatorrhea, diarrhea, and polyphagia; these signs are indistinguishable from those observed with
disorders of malabsorption. A minority of cats with EPl may only exhibit weight loss.
I. EPI IN DOGS AND CATS
A. The pathogenesis of EPl in dogs is unclear, though immune-mediated destruction of pancreatic
acini is suspected.
B. EPI in dogs is most commonly recognized in young dogs and is an inherited autosomal recessive
condition in the German Shepherd, Rough-coated Collie, and other breeds.
C. EPI also can be seen in older animals secondary to pancreatic neoplasia, chronic pancreatitis, and
immune-mediated disease.
D. Rate of development of EPI secondary to pancreatic destruction via inflammation depends on the
E. EPI in cats is caused most frequently by chronic pancreatitis
Il. DIAGNOSIS OF EPI
aud eue pue suis eu anedoo o sisai siin pue saop qoq ui ii jo sisoue
function test results.
A. Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI)
1. To date, measurement of serum TLI concentration is the noninvasive test of choice for both
canine and feline EPI
2. Because serum TLI is dependent upon pancreatic mass, a reduction in its mass, as occurs in EPI
via pancreatic atrophy, leads to reduced serum TLI concentration (Case 15).
3. Though TLI is considered a sensitive test, false-negative test results for EPl may occur.
a. Coexisting pancreatitis may increase the amount of TLI released into plasma. TLI may then
 be within or above the reference interval though EPI is present.
(1) The overall incidence then of EPl is likely much greater than realized in animals that
also have chronic pancreatitis.
(2) Other pancreatic function tests, e.g., measurement of fecal proteolytic activity (see
below), may be used in cases for which there is suspicion of EPI but TLI results are within
the reference interval.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
239
(3) Diagnoses of coincident EPI and diabetes mellitus increase suspicion of underlying
chronic pancreatitis.
b. Renal failure also may result in a false-negative TLI test result.
(1)  Filtered trypsinogen is catabolized by tubular epithelial cells.
(2) Reduced renal filtration prolongs the serum circulating half-life of TLl. Consequently,
TLI concentration may be within the reference interval even if EPI is present.
4. TLI assays require animals to be fasted for l2 hours. Oral supplementation of pancreatic
enzymes does not affect serum TLI concentrations.
5. Though both canine TLI and PLI have been shown to each have high sensitivity in the diagnosis
of EPI, canine TLI measurement has greater specificity than canine PLI for EPI. A small degree of
overlap observed in PLI measurements in dogs with EPI and healthy dogs substantiates the "gold
standard" status of TLI testing for EPI.
6. Persistent TLI measurements in healthy dogs between the cut-off and lower end of the reference
not have diarrhea and could be subclinical for years or for life.
B.Fecal proteolytic activity
1. Fecal proteases are primarily of pancreatic origin and include trypsin, chymotrypsin, and
carboxypeptidases A and B.
a. Proenzymes are secreted by the pancreas and are activated to functional enzymes in the
duodenum.
b. Irypsinogen is activated to trypsin by enterokinase produced by the duodenal mucosa.
Irypsin subsequently activates the other proteases.
2. Measurement of fecal proteolytic activity (via azocasein hydrolysis test, radial enzyme diffusion
assay, X-ray flm digestion, or gelatin-tube test) can be helpful in the diagnosis of EPI but is
cumbersome.
a. Fecal samples on at least three consecutive days should be collected and then stored and
shipped frozen overnight for evaluation at a reference laboratory.
b. Fluctuations in fecal proteolytic activity can lead to a false-positive diagnosis of EPI.
c. Fecal proteolytic testing at reference laboratories is limited.
3. Availability of reliable species-specifc TLI measurement minimizes the utility of fecal proteolytic
activity measurement in the diagnosis of EPl in dogs and cats
4. In species for which a TLI assay has not been developed, measurement of fecal proteolytic
activity can be helpful, primarily in excluding EPI as a cause for chronic diarrhea.
5. In cases of protein-losing enteropathy (PLE), C proteinase inhibitor (αl-PI), a serum protein, is
lost into the intestinal lumen. A study has demonstrated that increased fecal cl-Pl concentration can
result in decreased fecal proteolytic activity, and consequently, in false-positive diagnoses of EPI.
abnormalities in these parameters are frequently observed in dogs and cats with EPl and lack of their
diagnostic for EPI.
E. The bentiromide (N-benzoyl-L-tyrosyl-p-aminobenzoic acid [BT-PABA]) absorption test historically
was used for detection of EPl. This test largely has been replaced by species-specifie TLI.
LABORaTORY DETECTION OF MalaSSiMILaTION ATTRIbUTABLE tO MALABSORPTION
Malabsorption occurs with bacterial overgowth, interference with venous, lymphatic drainage
Iymphangiectasia), intestinallesions characterized by decreased absorptive surface area (e.g, villous
240
CHAPTER 8
atrophy or loss), death of epithelial cells, diffuse inflammatory disease (e.g., lymphoplasmacytic
eosinophilic, and granulomatous enteritides), and diffuse intestinal neoplasia (chiefly intestinal
lymphoma). Most common clinical signs of small intestinal malabsorptive disease in dogs and cats
(diarrhea, weight loss, and steatorrhea) are similar to those associated with maldigestion. Diarrhea may
not always be seen in the horse or cat with small intestinal malabsorptive disease due to the lower
intestinal tract's absorptive capacities. Diseases associated with vitamin deficiencies attributable to
malabsorption, such as secondary hyperparathyroidism and bleeding diathesis via vitamin D and vitamin
K deficiencies, respectively, have been documented in veterinary species.
Definitive diagnosis of most causes of malabsorption requires histologic evaluation of affected tissue
biopsied via endoscopy or laparotomy. Many tests, however, have been developed and used to screen for
defective mucosal absorption. Currently, the most common laboratory tests related to malabsorption are
serum cobalamin (vitamin Bz2) and folate, which are micronutrients absorbed at specific sites in the
intestinal tract. Serum concentrations of cobalamin and folate reflect a balance between dietary intake,
bacterial utilization and production, absorption, and body losses. Fecal smear analyses for nutrients,
various absorption tests (including plasma turbidity test, glucose absorption test, D-xylose absorption test,
and fecal fat quantitation) were historically used to detect malabsorption but are beleaguered with
inadequate sensitivity and/or specificity, complicated testing protocols, and limited availability of reference
laboratory evaluation. These latter tests, the details of which were outlined in the previous edition, are
rarely used in the veterinary practice setting. Instances in which absorption tests might be useful include
cats with idiopathic weight loss without diarrhea, when trying to determine the significance of mild
infiltrates of inflammatory cells observed in canine intestinal biopsies, and in the rare case of
 disaccharidase deficiency in young animals.
Clinical investigation of diarrhea in general should include fecal parasitology Testing for giardiasis,
cryptosporidiosis, and clostridial enterotoxicosis should be considered. Microbiological culture also can
aid diagnosis. A complete blood count, biochemical profile, urinalysis, TLI measurement, and possible
liver function testing are recommended in chronic unresponsive diarrheas.
1. SMALL INTESTINAL BACTERIAL OVERGROWTH (SIBO)
A. SIBO is an over-proliferation of bacteria in the duodenum and jejunum most commonly recognized
 in dogs and humans that can result in malabsorption by multiple and complex mechanisms.
B. SIBO can be primary (idiopathic, also referred to as antibiotic-responsive diarrhea when other
disease processes have been excluded) or associated with a number of conditions, including exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency, inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal stagnation or deranged motility, partial
or complete intestinal obstruction, lymphoma, lymphangiectasia, immunodeficiencies (resulting in
     n      n
of the ileocecocolic valve.
C. Idiopathic SIBO predominantly affects young animals; German Shepherd dogs are overrepresented.
currently does not exist.
1. For some veterinary internists and investigators, culture and quantitation of intestinal bacteria
are considered definitive tests for diagnosing SIBO.
2. Quantitation of intestinal bacteria is difficult, expensive, and available only at some large
institutions.
3. Less invasive screening tests (e.g., fasting serum cobalamin and folate measurements and serum
unconjugated cholic acid concentration; see below) or observation for a response to therapy,
however, are the primary means used in a practice setting to obtain supportive evidence of SIBO.
E.Serum cobalamin (vitamin B2,Table 8.2)
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
241
TABLE 8.2
TYPICAL LABORAIORY CHANGES IN FOLATE CONCENTRATION, COBALAMIN
CONCENTRATION, AND TRYPSIN-LIKE IMMUNOREACTIVITY IN VARIOUS
MALASSIMILATION DISORDERS.
Trypsin-like
immunoreactivity
 Disorder
Folate
Cobalamin
(TLI)
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
↑or aN
个
↑
Bacterial overgrowth
个
个
N
Proximal small intestinal disease
个
N
N
Distal small intestinal disease
N
个
N
Diffuse small inte stinal dise ase
√
N
N = normal (within the reference interval)
↑ = increased
↓= decreased
1. Normal absorption
a. Cobalamin is readily available in canine diets; dietary deficiency is unlikely
b. Cobalamin is liberated from dietary protein in the stomach by acid and pepsin.
C.
 The free vitamin is bound to haptocorrin, a nonspecific cobalamin-binding protein.
d. Pancreatic enzymes degrade haptocorrin. Cobalamin then binds to intrinsic factor secreted by
the pancreas in cats and the stomach and pancreas in dogs.
e. Cobalamin is absorbed in the ileum where cubilin, a specifc receptor for the vitamin-
intrinsic factor complex, is present on enterocytes.
f.1
 Because cobalamin defciency indirectly inhibits nucleic acid synthesis and thus can affect
rapidly dividing cell populations, marked hypocobalaminemia can result in intestinal crypt
atrophy and malabsorption.
2. Alterations of cobalamin concentration in disease (Case 15)
a. Hypocobalaminemia occurs in the following:
(1) Severe small intestinal disease (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease) reduces cobalamin
absorption (intestinal disease limited to the ileum is uncommon).
(2) SIBO results in the binding of cobalamin and the prevention of its absorption.
(3) With exocrine pancreatic insufficieney, the lack of pancreatic enzymes results in a failure
to liberate cobalamin from haptocorrin, decreased intrinsic factor production, and secondary
SIBO.
(4) Surgical removal of the ileum precludes cobalamin absorption.
(5) Inherited absorptive defects prevent the uptake of cobalamin (e.g., cobalamin deficiency
in Giant Schnauzers).
(6) Hypocobalaminemia is fairly common in cats with gastrointestinal disease.
b. Hypercobalaminemia occurs with vitamin supplementation.
c. Cobalamin testing, like serum folate, is not considered a sensitive test for intestinal disease.
F Serum folate (Table 8.2)
1. Normal absorption
a. Folate is readily available in the diet of dogs; dietary deficiency is unlikely.
b. Specific carriers necessary for absorption of folate are present only in the proximal small
intestine.
c. Deconjugation of dietary folate to the monoglutamate form is required before it is absorbed.
242
CHAPTER 8
2. Alteration of folate concentration in disease (Case 15)
a. Decreased serum folate concentration occurs in the following:
(1) Diseases of the proximal small intestine
(2) Administration of certain drugs (e.g, phenytoin, sulfasalazine)
(3) Decreased serum concentration attributable to malabsorption indicates severe disease and
depletion of body stores.
b. Increased serum folate concentrations occur in the following:
(1) Bacterial overgrowth in which bacteria synthesize folate
(2) EPI
(a) Increased folate with EPI suggests SIBO.
(b) Because folate absorption is enhanced by reductions in intraluminal pH, impaired
pancreatic bicarbonate secretion that can occur with EPl may result in increased folate
absorption.
(3) Decreased folate utilization and subsequent increased serum folate concentration can
occur secondary to severe hypocobalaminemia. Cobalamin is required for conversion of
methylfolate to tetrahydrofolate, the active form necessary for DNA synthesis. Increased
serum folate has been observed in cats with severe hypocobalaminemia.
(4) Irish setters with gluten-sensitive enteropathy reportedly can have increased or decreased
serum folate concentration.
G. Utility of serum folate and cobalamin measurement are improved when they are determined
concurrently.
1. Serum folate concentration is commonly increased with EPl and bacterial overgrowth, whereas
serum cobalamin concentration is decreased. Bacterial overgrowth results in increased folate
production and absorption in the proximal intestine and binding or increased utilization of
cobalamin and the prevention of its absorption in the distal small intestine.
2. Serum cobalamin and folate measurement, however, are not considered sensitive tests for SIBO;
one or both tests are frequently normal, even though bacterial overgrowth exists.
3. Serum folate and cobalamin concentrations are both decreased in severe, diffuse small intestinal
disease and sometimes in EPI.
H. Serum unconjugated cholic acid (SUCA; also referred to as serum total unconjugated bile acid, or
TUBA) is another indirect test for SIBO.
1. Intestinal bacteria deconjugate bile acids, resulting in increased intestinal mucosal absorption via
passive diffusion and subsequent increased serum concentration of unconjugated cholic acid.
2. Total bile acid concentration is unchanged.
3. SUCA testing currently requires a l2-hour fasted blood sample.
4. Conflicting findings of studies necessitate further investigation to determine the utility of SUCA
testing
II. LYMPHANGIECTASIA
A. Lymphangiectasia is obstruction and dysfunction of the intestinal lymphatic system resulting in
protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) and malabsorption.
B. Potential causes include inflammatory or neoplastic infiltration, fibrosis, inadequate or obstructed
flow of the thoracic duct, congestive heart failure, pericarditis, or congenital lymphatic malformation.
Inflammatory disease is lymphangiectasia's most common cause.
D. Clinical pathologic changes that can be observed include panhypoproteinemia, lymphopenia,
hypocholesterolemia, and hypocalcemia.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
243
E. Lymphopenia with lymphangiectasia is primarily attributable to loss of lymphocytes in lymphatic
fluid, though endogenously produced corticosteroids in response to the stress of illness can also lead to
lymphopenia (as well as eosinopenia and mature neutrophilia)
LABORATORY DETECTION OF OTHER DIGESTIVE DISORDErS
1. MEGAESOPHAGUS
A. Megaesophagus is generalized dilation and inadequate peristalsis of the esophagus. Although it can
 be congenital, it most commonly is an acquired dysfunction. This disease is uncommon in dogs and
rare in cats.
B. Definitive diagnosis of megaesophagus is typically made by radiography or fluoroscopic studies.
C. Studies suggest that megaesophagus results from an afferent neural pathway abnormality
D. Acquired disease is most commonly idiopathic, although megaesophagus can be observed with a
number of conditions. When possible, evaluation for primary disease is exhorted for the sake of
bringing to light what may be potentially treatable.
E. Broad categories of conditions that can be associated with megaesophagus include neuromuscular
disease (e.g., myasthenia gravis, brainstem injury, or neoplasia), endocrinopathies (e.g..
hypothyroidism, hypoadrenocorticism), inflammatory and immune-mediated disease (e.g.,
polymyositis, systemic lupus erythematosis), toxins (e.g., lead, organophosphates), and infection (e.g-
Clostridium botulinum)
1. Myasthenia gravis
a. Myasthenia gravis is a congenital or acquired neuromuscular disorder in which there is a
reduced number of acetylcholine receptor (AChR) ion channels on the postsynaptic sarcolemmal
 membrane. Acquired disease results from the deposition of autoantibodies on the subunits of the
AChR.
b. This disorder results in variable degrees of muscular weakness; regurgitation secondary to
megaesophagus can be its only presenting clinical sign (focal myasthenia gravis).
C. Golden Retrievers and German Shepherds are the most commonly affected breeds; however,
the disease can occur in any dog.
d. Myasthenia gravis is the second most common cause of acquired megaesophagus in dogs.
e. Measurement of AChR antibody titers, a definitive test for myasthenia gravis, is
recommended in all adult dogs with megaesophagus.
f. Dogs diagnosed with myasthenia gravis also should be tested for hypothyroidism; 20% of
 dogs with myasthenia gravis are also hypothyroid.
2. Endocrinopathies are uncommon causes of megaesophagus in dogs.
a. Hypothyroidism
(1)  Few dogs with hypothyroidism develop megaesophagus.
(2) Ideal laboratory evaluation for hypothyroidism includes measurements of total serum
thyroxine (TT4), free serum thyroxine (fT4) by equilibrium dialysis, and thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH).
(a) Mistaken diagnosis of hypothyroidism is commonly made by evaluation of only TT4
(b) Consequences of megaesophagus, primarily pneumonia, predispose a “euthyroid
fT4 measurement evinces euthyroidism in these cases.
(3) Megaesophagus in dogs with hypothyroidism rarely resolves with adequate thyroid
hormone supplementation.
b. Hypoadrenocorticism
244
CHAPTER 8
(1) Hypoadrenocorticism can be infrequently associated with megaesophagus. Muscle
weakness may result from inadequate cortisol and/or the effects of electrolyte abnormalities
on membrane potential and neuromuscular function.
(2) Adrenocorticotropic stimulation testing (ACTH stimulation testing) can establish the
absence of adequate cortisol production.
(3)  Although 90% of dogs with hypoadrenocorticism have hyponatremia and/or
hyperkalemia, this combination is not pathognomonic for hypoadrenocorticism.
(4) Megaesophagus secondary to hypoadrenocorticism typically resolves with adequate
adrenal hormone supplementation.
F. Additional routine laboratory testing for animals with megaesophagus
1. A complete blood count may reveal a leukocytosis characterized by a neutrophilia and possibly a
left shift if aspiration pneumonia is present.
 2. A biochemical profle including sodium and potassium measurement, aspartate transferase
(AST), and creatine kinase (CK) aid in evaluating for hypoadrenocorticism and muscular
inflammatory conditions.
Il. PROTEIN-LOSING ENTEROPATHY (PLE)
A. A certain quantity of plasma proteins enters the gastrointestinal tract each day in healthy animals.
These proteins are digested into constituent amino acids, which are almost completely reabsorbed and
resynthesized into protein by various cells of the body.
B. Excessive intestinal protein loss may be associated with a number of processes involving mucosal
ulceration, inflammation, infltration, congestion, bleeding, and abnormal intestinal lymphatic
drainage.
1. Inflammatory bowel disease (lymphoplasmacytic enteritis), alimentary lymphoma.
lymphangiectasia, and chronic parasitism (e.g., giardiasis) are among the most common causes of
PLE in adult dogs.
histoplasmosis, and pythiosis (most commonly seen in the Gulf Coast area) also are causes of PLE.
3. PLE in cats is uncommon; intestinal lymphoma and severe inflammatory bowel disease are the
most common pathologies associated with PLE in cats.
C. Hypoproteinemia may occur with excessive enteric protein loss but is nonspecific.
1. Panhypoproteinemia associated only with clinical signs of enteric disease occurs with severe
late-stage enteric protein loss that has exceeded increased compensatory synthesis of plasma protein
(Case 16, Chapter 6)
2. Associated clinical signs (e.g., diarrhea and weight loss in dogs) of enteric disease are usually
present with PLE.
3. Other possible causes of hypoproteinemia (renal disease, liver disease, malnutrition,
hemorrhage, etc.) must be excluded.
a. Protein-losing nephropathy causes decreased serum albumin and an increased urine
protein:creatinine ratio; globulin concentration remains unchanged.
b. Liver insufficiency/failure results in decreased serum albumin and increased postprandial bile
acids concentration.
D. Fecal C-proteinase inhibitor (α,-Pl) immunoassay
1. &,-Pl, a plasma glycoprotein with a molecular weight similar to that of albumin, is present in
plasma, lymph, and the intercellular space. It is not present in the lumen of the gastrointestinal
tract above trace background concentrations.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
245
2. C,-Pl may reach the intestinal lumen if there is transmucosal loss of plasma, blood, lymph, or
intercellular fluid as a result of gastrointestinal disease. Synthesis of c,-Pl by enterocytes in dogs
with intestinal disease has not been critically evaluated
3. C,-PI is not degraded in the intestinal lumen.
4. In contrast to identification of panhypoproteinemia, fecal α,-Pl is a better marker for early
detection of PLE since it has been shown to be elevated in cases of increased intestinal protein loss
prior to the development of hypoproteinemia.
5. Elevated fecal α,-PI signals the need for intestinal biopsy to determine a specific cause
for PLE.
6. Assays for adult dogs and cats are currently available at the Gastrointestinal Laboratory at Texas
A & M University, College of Veterinary Medicine, College Station, TX 77843; (979) 862-2861
(www.cvm.tamu.edu/gilab/).
E. Quantitation of radiolabeled protein loss into the intestinal tract
in the dog.
2. Proper handling of radioactive material and the need for fecal collection for three days limit the
usefulness of this methodology.
F Hypocalcemia
1. Hypocalcemia in dogs with PLE is not uncommon and is typically associated with
hypoalbuminemia. Two studies have shown that after correction for decreased serum albumin
concentration, total calcium concentration was within the reference interval for the vast majority of
dogs.
2. Rare cases of ionized hypocalcemia associated with decreased serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and
increased parathyroid hormone concentrations have been reported in dogs with PLE.
a. These fndings suggest that PLE can result in compromised vitamin D absorption and
secondary hyperparathyroidism.
b. Studies suggest that lymphangiectasia may be more commonly associated with ionized
hypocalcemia than other causes of PLE.
IMl. EQUINE HYPERAMMONEMlA
A. Hyperammonemia and subsequent encephalopathy in horses can occur with liver dysfunction.
congenital enzyme deficiencies or abnormal transport in the urea cycle, and gastrointestinal disease
(colie).
B. Proposed mechanisms for the development of hyperammonemia in horses with colic without
hepatic disease are increased absorption of ammonia across an inflamed intestinal mucosa, marked
overproduction of ammonia by urease-producing bacteria within the intestine, or both
 1. Utimately, the urea cycle within hepatocytes is overwhelmed by the amount of ammonia
delivered by enterohepatic circulation.
2. Urease-producing bacteria include Gram-negative bacilli (e.g., Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Proteus,
 and Pseudomonas spp.) and Gram-positive bacilli (namely subtypes of Clostridium spp.).
C. Definitive diagnosis of hyperammonemia secondary to gastrointestinal disease requires detection of
increased blood ammonia levels and exclusion of hepatic dysfunction, abnormal portal circulation, or
urea/ammonia intoxication.
1. The severe self-destructive behavior typically associated with hyperammonemic encephalopathy
can necessitate euthanasia prior to diagnosis.
246
CHAPTER 8
2. A recent report of a horse with peracute colitis demonstrated that an antemortem presumptive
diagnosis of hyperammonemia could be confirmed by measurement of ammonia in cerebrospinal
and intraocular (aqueous humor) fluids collected postmortem
IV. CYtoloGY
A. Cytology can aid in the diagnosis of inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic disorders associated
with large bowel diarrhea via evaluation of feces (primarily the stool “surface") or rectal scrapings.
1. Intact neutrophils in Wright-stained fecal smears indicate inflammation of the lower small
intestine and/or colon.
2. Pathogenic organisms may be found in cytologic preparations of rectal scrapings (e.g.,
Mycobacterium paratuberculosis, Histoplasma capsulatum, Prototheca zopfi)
3. Although Campylobacter sp. are classically described as “gull-shaped" organisms, they are not
readily differentiated cytologically from nonpathogenic spirochetes. If campylobacteriosis is
suspected, fecal culture is recommended for confrmation.
4. The presence of safety-pin-shaped Gram-positive bacilli (Clostridium sp. spores) may be
supportive of but not definitive for diagnosis of clostridial enterotoxicosis.
B. An increased nucleated cell count and/or protein concentration in abdominal effusions are found in
a variety of conditions associated with equine colic (Chapter I2).
REFERENCES
Banks PA: 1998. Acute and Chronic Pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Scharschmidt BF, Sleisenger MH
(eds): Sleisenger and Fordtrans Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
pp.809-862.
Batt RM: 1982. Role of serum folate and vitamin Bi2 concentrations in the differentiation of small
intestinal abnormalities in the dog. Res Vet Sri 32:17-22.
Batt RM: 1983. Bacterial overgrowth associated with a naturally occurring enteropathy in the German
shepherd dog. Research Vet Sri 35:42-46.
Batt RM: 1986. New approaches to malabsorption in dogs. Compend Contin Educ Prart Vet 8:783-794.
Batt RM: 1993. Exocrine pancreatic insuffciency Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 23:595-608.
Brenner K, Harkin KR, Andrews GA, et al: 2009. Juvenile pancreatic atrophy in greyhounds: 12 cases
(1995-2000).J Vet Intern Med 23:67-71.
Brobst DF: 1997. Pancreatic Function. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds): Cliniral Biochemistry
of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. San Diego, Academic Press, pp. 353-366.
Brown CM: 1992. The diagnostic value of the d-xylose absorption test in horses with unexplained
chronic weight loss. Br Vet J 148:41-44.
Desrochers AM, Dallap BL, Wilkins PA: 2003. Clostridium sordelli infection as a suspected cause of
transient hyperammonemia in an adult horse. J Vet Intern Med 17:238-241.
Dutta SK, Russell RM, Iber FL: 1979. Influence of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency on the intraluminal
pH of the proximal small intestine. Am J Digestive Disease 24:529-534.
Diehl KJ, Lappin MR, Jones RL, et al: 1993. Monoclonal gammopathy in a dog with plasmacytic
gastroenterocolitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 20l:1233-1236.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
247
Doneley RJ: 200l. Acute pancreatitis in parrots. Aust Vet J 79:409-411.
 d  s  s    a     ' 
Infect Immun 65:2313-2320
Edwards DF, Bauer MS, Walker MA, et al: 1990. Pancreatic masses in seven dogs following acute
pancreatitis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:189-198.
Edwards DF, Russell RG: 1987. Probable vitamin-K-deficient bleeding in two cats with malabsorption
syndrome secondary to lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis. J Vet Intern Med 1:97-101.
Ferreri JA, Hardam E, Kimmel SE, et al: 2003. Clinical differentiation of acute necrotizing from chronic
nonsuppurative pancreatitis in cats: 63 cases (1996-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:469-474.
Forcada Y, German AJ, Noble PJM, et al: 2008. Determination of serum fPLI concentrations in cats
with diabetes mellitus. J Feline Med Surg 10:480-487.
Foreman MA, Marks SL, DeCook HEV, et al: 2004. Evaluation of serum feline pancreatic lipase
immunoreactivity and helical computed tomography versus conventional testing for the diagnosis of
feline pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 18:807-815.
Fossum TW: 1989. Protein-losing enteropathy. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 4;219-225
Gerhardt A, Steiner JM, Williams DA, et al: 200l. Comparison of the sensitivity of different diagnostic
tests for pancreatitis in cats. J Vet Intern Med 15:329-333
German AJ, Day MJ, Ruaux CG, et al: 2003. Comparison of direct and indirect tests for small intestinal
bacterial overgrowth and antibiotic-responsive diarrhea in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 17:33-43.
German AJ, Hall EJ, Day MJ: 2003. Chronic intestinal inflammation and intestinal disease in dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 17:8-20.
Gilliam LL, Holbrook TC, Dechant JE, et al: 2007. Postmortem diagnosis of idiopathic
hyperammonemia in a horse. Vet Clin Pathol 36:196-199.
intestinal disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:91-95.
Hall E, Simpson K: 200o. Diseases of the Small Intestine. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine: Disease of the Cat and Dog, 5th ed. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
1182-1237.
Hall JA, Macy DW: 1988. Acute canine pancreatitis. Compend Contin Edur Prart Vet 10:403-416.
Hill PG: 200l. Fecal fat: Time to give it up. Ann Clin Biochem 38:164-167.
Hoffman WE: 2008. Diagnostic Enzymology of Domestic Animals. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML
(eds): Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 6th ed. Elsevier, Boston, pp. 351-378.
Holm JL, Rozanski EL, Freeman LM, et al: 2004. C-reactive protein concentrations in acute
pancreatitis. J Vet Em Crit Care 14:183-186.
Bruss ML (eds): Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 6th ed. Elsevier, Boston, pp. 4l3-458.
Hornbuckle WE, Tennant BC: 1997. Gastrointestinal Function. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML
(eds): Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 367-406.
                
system.Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 8:203-232.
248
CHAPTER 8
Hurley PR, Cook A, Jehanli A, et al: 1988. Development of radioimmunoassay for free tetra-l-aspartyl-
l-aspartyl-1-lysine trypsinogen activation peptides (TAP). J Immunol Methods 11l:195-203.
Jacobs RM: 1988. Renal disposition of amylase, lipase, and lysosome in the dog. Vet Pathol 25:443-449.
Jacobs RM: 1989. The origins of canine serum amylase and lipase. Vet Pathol 26:525-527.
Jacobs RM, Norris AM, Lumsden JH, et al: 1989. Laboratory diagnosis of malassimilation. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 19:951-977.
Jergens AE, Moore FM, Haynes JS, et al: 1992. Idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease in dogs and cats
84 cases (1987-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1603-1608.
Johnston KL: 1999. Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
29:523-550.
Khouri MR, Huang G, Shiau YF: 1989. Sudan stain of fecal fat: New insight into an old test.
Gastroenterology 96:421-427.
Kimmel SE, Waddell LS, Michel KE: 2000. Hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia associated with protein
losing enteropathy in Yorkshire Terriers: Five cases (1992-1998). J Am Vet Med Assor 217:703-706.
Kimmel SE, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ: 200l. Incidence and prognostic value of low plasma ionized
calcium concentration in cats with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases (1996-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc
219:1105-1109.
Ludlow CL, Davenport DJ: 2000. Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth. In: Bonagura JD (ed): Current
Veterinary Therapy Xll. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 637-641.
MacAllister CG, Mosier D, Qualls CW, et al: 1990. Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis in two horses. J
Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1995-1998.
Macy DW: 1989. Feline Pancreatitis. In: Kirk RW (ed): Current Veterinary Therapy X: Small Animal
Prartice. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 893-896.
Vet Intern Med 14:346 (ACVIM abstract #75)
Mansfeld CS, Jones BR: 2000. Plasma and urinary trypsinogen activation peptide in healthy dogs, dogs
with pancreatitis and dogs with other systemic diseases. Aust Vet J 78:416-422.
Mansfield CS, Jones BR: 2001. Review of feline pancreatitis part two: Clinical signs, diagnosis and
treatment. J Feline Med Surg 3:125-132.
Marks SL. 2003. Editorial: Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in dogs—Less common than you
think? J Vet Intern Med 17:5-7.
 Matz ME, Guilford WG: 2003. Laboratory procedures for the diagnosis of gastrointestinal diseases of
dogs and cats. N Z Vet J 51:292-301.
Melgarejo T, Williams DA, Asem EK: 1998. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for canine alpha
1-protease inhibitor. Am J Vet Res 59: 59:127-30 and 524 (erratum).
Melgarejo I, Williams DA, O'Connell NC, et al: 2000. Serum unconjugated bile acids as a test for
intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Digest Dis Sci 45:407-414.
Mellanby RJ, Mellor PJ, Roulois A, et al: 2o05. Hypocalcaemia associated with low serum vitamin D
metabolite concentrations in two dogs with protein-losing enteropathies. J Small Anim Pract
46:345-351.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
249
sop u Xdons s-ud po e p ss ud jo o tai  
Gastroenterology 66:960-972.
Murphy KF, German AJ, Ruaux CG, et al: 2003. Fecal α, proteinase inhibitor concentration in dogs
with chronic gastrointestinal disease. Vet Clin Pathol 32:67-72.
Nakamura M, Takahashi M, Ohno K, et al: 2008. C-reactive protein concentration in dogs with various
diseases. J Vet Med Sci 70:127-131.
Nix BE, Leib MS, Zajac A, et al: 1993. The effect of dose and concentration on d-xylose absorption in
healthy, immature dogs. Vt Clin Pathol 22:10-16.
Olchowy TWJ, Linnabary RD, Andrews FM, Longshore RC: 1993. Lactose intolerance in a calf. J Vet
Intern Med 7:12-15.
Oran DL: 2006. Pancreatitis in cats: Diagnosis and management of a challenging disease. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 42:1-9.
23:185-192.
 Papasouliotis K, Sparkes AH, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, et al: 1998. Use of the breath hydrogen test to assess
the effect of age on orocecal transit time and carbohydrate assimilation in cats. Am J Vet Res
59:1299-1302.
Quigley KA, Jackson ML, Haines DM: 200l. Hyperlipasemia in 6 dogs with pancreatic or hepatic
neoplasia: Evidence for tumor lipase production. Vet Clin Pathol 30:1l4-120.
Reed N, Gunn-Moore D, Simpson K: 2007. Cobalamin, folate, and inorganic phosphate abnormalities
in ill cats. J Feline Med Surg 9:278-288.
 Rinderknect H: 1986. Activation of pancreatic zymogens: normal activation, premature intrapancreatic
activation, protective mechanisms against inappropriate activation. Dis Sri 3l:314-321
Roberts MC: 1985. Malabsorption syndromes in the horse. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
7:S637-S646.
Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA: 2003. Protein-losing enteropathy in dogs is associated with
decreased fecal proteolytic activity. Vt Clin Pathol 33:20-22.
Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA: 2005. Early biochemical and clinical responses to cobalamin
supplementation in cats with signs of gastrointestinal disease and severe hypocobalaminemia. J Vet Intern
Med 19:155-160.
Rucker RB, Morris JG, Fascetti AJ: 2008. Vitamins. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds): Clinical
Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 6th ed. Elsevier, Boston, pp. 695-730.
Russell RM, Dhar GJ, Dutta SK, et al: 1979. Influence of intraluminal pH on folate absorption: Studies
in control subjects and in patients with pancreatic insufficiency. J Lab Clin Med 93:428-436
Rutgers HC, Batt RM, Kelly DF: 1988. Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis associated with bacterial
overgrowth in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1739-1742.
Sharkey LC, DeWitt S, Stockman C: 2006. Neurologic signs and hyperammonemia in a horse with
colic.Vet Clin Pathol 35:254-258.
Sherding RG: 2003, Diseases of the Large Intestine. In: Tams TR (ed): Handbook of Small Animal
Gastroenterology, 2nd ed. Elsevier Science, St. Louis, pp. 25l-285.
Simpson KW: 2003. Diseases of the Pancreas. In: Tams TR (ed): Handbook of Small Animal
Gastroenterology, 2nd ed. Elsevier Science, St. Louis, pp. 353-369
250
CHAPTER 8
Simpson JW, Doxey DL: 1988. Evaluation of faecal analysis as an aid to the detection of exocrine
pancreatic insuffciency. Br Vet J 144:174-178.
  s  s         s
B2) in cats with gastrointestinal disease. J Vet Intern Med 15:26-32.
Sorensen SH, Proud FJ, Adam A, et al: 1993. A novel HPLC method for the simultaneous
quantification of monosaccharides and disaccharides used in tests of intestinal function and
permeability. Clinica Chimica Acta 22l:1l5-125.
Steiner JM: 2010. Is it pancreatitis? Veterinary Medicine, www.veterinarymedicine.dvm360.com, 2006,
visited 10 Mar 2010.
(cPLI) concentrations in dogs with spontaneous pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 15:274.
Steiner JM, Finco DR, Gumminger SR, et al: 2ool. Serum canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
(cPLI) in dogs with experimentally induced chronic renal failure (abstract). J Vet Intern Med 15:311.
Steiner JM, Lees GE, Willard MD, et al: 2003. Serum canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (cPLI)
concentration is not altered by oral prednisone (abstract). J Vet Intern Med 17:444.
Steiner JM, Rutz GM, Williams DA.: 2006. Serum lipase activities and pancreatic lipase
immunoreactivity concentrations in dogs with exocrine pancreatic insuffciency. Am J Vet Res 67:84-77.
Steiner JM, Williams DA: 2ooo. Serum feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity in cats with exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency. J Vet Intern Med 14: 627-629.
Steiner JM, Williams DA: 1997. Feline exocrine pancreatic disorders: Insufficiency, neoplasia and
uncommon conditions. Compend Contin Eaur Vet 19:836-848.
Steiner JM, Williams DA: 2ooo. Serum feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity in cats with exocrine
pancreatic insufficieney. J Vet Intern Med 14:627-629.
Steiner JM, Williams DA: 1999. Feline exocrine pancreatic disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 29:551-575.
Strombeck DR, Harrold D: l982. Evaluation of 60-minute blood p-aminobenzoic acid concentration in
pancreatic function testing of dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180:419-421.
as a marker for canine pancreatitis. J Vet Intern Med 15:273 (ACVIM abstract #8).
Swift NC, Marks SL, MacLachlan NJ, et al: 2000. Evaluation of serum feline trypsin-like
            
816818(comment).
Tams TR: 2003.Diseases of the Esophagus. In: Tams TR (ed): Handbook of Small Animal
Iexas A & M Website: 2010. http://www.cvm.tamu.edu/gilab/research/Pancreatitis.shtml, visited 10
March 2010.
cases (1992-2007). J Feline Med Surg 11:935-940.
Iriolo A, Lappin MR: 2003. Acute Medical Diseases of the Small Intestine. In: Tams TR (ed): Handbook
of Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd ed. Elsevier Science, St. Louis, pp.195-210.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
251
Ugarte CE: 2003. The role of diet in feline inflammatory bowel disease. PhD dissertation, Massey
University, Palmerston North.
Washabau RJ, Strombeck DR, Buffington CA, et al: 1986. Evaluation of intestinal carbohydrate
malabsorption in the dog by pulmonary hydrogen gas excretion. Am J Vet Res 40:120l-1206.
Washabau RJ, Strombeck DR, Buffington CA, et al: 1986. Use of pulmonary hydrogen gas excretion to
Watson PJ: 2003. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency as an end stage of pancreatitis in four dogs. J Small
Anim Pract 44:306-312.
Westermarck E: 1980. The hereditary nature of canine pancreatic degenerative atrophy in German
shepherd dogs. Arta Vet Scand 21:389-394.
Westermarck E, Pamilo P, Wiberg M: 1989. Pancreatic degenerative atrophy in the collie breed: A
hereditary disease. J Vet Med Assoc 36:549-554.
Weiss DJ, Gagne JM, Armstrong PJ: 1996. Relationship between inflammatory hepatic disease and
inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, and nephritis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1ll4-1l16.
Wiberg ME, Nurmi A-K, Westermarck E: 1999. Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity measurement for
the diagnosis of subclinical exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 13:426-432.
Wiberg ME, Westermarck E. 2002. Subclinical exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 220:1183-1187.
Williams DA: 1996. The Pancreas. In: Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, Guilford WE, Center SA
(eds): Strombecks Small Animal Gastroenterology, 3rd ed. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 38l-410.
Williams DA, Guilford WG: l996. Procedures for the Evaluation of Pancreatic and Gastrointestinal
Tract Diseases. In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ (eds): Stromberk's
Williams DA, Batt RM, McLean L: 1987. Bacterial overgrowth in the duodenum of dogs with exocrine
pancreatic insuffciency. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:201-206.
Williams DA, Minnich F: 1990. Canine exocrine pancreatic insuffciency—A survey of 640 cases
diagnosed by assay of serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity. J Vet Intern Med 4:123.
Williams DA, Reed SD: 1990. Comparison of methods for assay of fecal proteolytic activity. Vet Clin
Pathol 19:20-24.
Williams DA, Reed SD, Perry L: 1990. Fecal proteolytic activity in clinically normal cats and in a cat
with exocrine pancreatic insuffciency. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:210-212.
Xenoulis PG, Steiner JM: 2008. Current concepts in feline pancreatitis. Top Companion Anim Med
23:185-192.
Zoran DL: 2006. Pancreatitis in cats: Diagnosis and management of a challenging disease. J Am Animal
Hosp Assoc 42:1-9.
CHAPTER
URINARY SYSTEM
Niraj K. Tripathi, BVScAH, MVSc, PhD; Christopher R. Gregory, DVM,
PhD; and Kenneth S. Latimer, DVM, PhD
URINALYSIS
Examination of urine is a very useful procedure to evaluate renal function in animals. Urinalysis not
only assesses renal function but also may reflect a variety of systemic disease processes (e.g.,
inflammation, hemorrhage, and intravascular hemolysis). Because birds have a cloaca that pools
both urinary and intestinal wastes, urinalysis is not as useful in birds as it is in mammals.
1. Methods of collectION
A. Voided specimens
1. Contamination of urine from the lower urinary tract and reproductive tract may occur in
mammals. Common contaminants include bacteria, leukocytes, spermatozoa, and epithelial cells.
2. Midstream ("clean catch") collection of urine may reduce contamination. This is the preferred
method of urine collection in large animals.
3. Birds lack a urinary bladder. Urine is discharged through the cloaca, a common opening for the
urinary, digestive, and reproductive tracts of birds.
a. Contamination of avian urine is common and usually obscures evaluation of its physical,
chemical, and microscopic characteristics.
b. Urine contains a solid component of urates, a pasty white to yellow substance. Urates may
impede detailed microscopic examination of avian urine. Several drops of sodium hydroxide may
be added to a wet mount of avian urine to dissolve urates; however, this basic solution also may
dissolve casts.
c. Excited or stressed birds often are polyuric, enabling collection of the liquid component of
urine.
B. Catheterized specimens
1. Care must be taken to clean the urethral orifice and surrounding area to reduce contamination
 of the urine specimens and prevent the introduction of pathogens into the urinary tract.
2. Traumatic catheterization may dislodge transitional epithelial cells from the urethra and cause
iatrogenic hemorrhage.
3. Ureteral catheterization has been reported in pigeons but is not commonly used in clinical
practice.
253
254
CHAPTER 9
C. Cystocentesis specimens
1. Cystocentesis is the preferred method of urine collection in small mammals such as dogs and
cats
 2. Potential problems include iatrogenic hemorrhage or unanticipated enterocentesis with
subsequent contamination of the urine specimen.
Il. PROPER SAMPLE HANDLING
A. The urine specimen should be collected prior to medical therapy or contrast radiography, if possible
 B. Collection vessels should be clean, detergent and reagent free, and sterile if microbiological culture
is indicated.
C. Ideally, the urinalysis should be performed within 30 minutes of specimen collection.
 i si j s hh n d  ou i n  a s a  
2. The urine specimen should be re-warmed to room temperature before analysis.
a. Precipitates that form at lower temperatures will redissolve.
b. Inhibition of enzymatic activities by low temperatures will be avoided.
D. Avian urine
1. The liquid component of “urine" should be collected from an impervious surface as soon as
possible after excretion.
Ill. PHYSICAL CHARACTeRISTICS
A. Color
1. Normal mammalian urine is yellow to amber. The depth of color is related to urine volume and
concentration. Urochrome and urobilin are responsible for the normal color of urine.
2. Abnormal urine color can obscure some dipstick test results. Causes of abnormal urine color
include the following:
a. Blood (hematuria) is red; the urine appears cloudy and usually clears following centrifugation
b. Bilirubin appears dark yellow to bro wn.
C. Hemoglobin and myoglobin are red to red-brown.
d. Porphyrins are colorless but produce pink fluorescence in acid urine when exposed to
ultraviolet light.
2. Certain drugs and metabolic diseases may alter the color of urine (e.g., brown-black urine after
Oxyglobin? administration).
3. Avian urine
a. Urates
(1)  Yellow-green urates indicate hemolysis or liver disease (biliverdinuria).
(2) Idiopathic red-brown urates have been described in hand-fed chicks receiving an animal
protein-based diet.
b. Diet (e.g., blue-purple urine from fruit), medications, and mixing of urine with feces can
change the color of avian urine.
c. Lead toxicosis may result in tan to brown discoloration of urine and urates ("chocolate milk"
appearance)
B. Transparency (clarity, turbidity)
1. Normal urine generally is clear when freshly voided, but may become cloudy on standing or
refrigeration from precipitation of salts.
2. Fresh normal horse urine is cloudy because of calcium carbonate crystals and mucus (Cases 3
17).
URINARy SvSteM
255
3. Cloudy, opaque, or flocculent urine may be seen in some birds, particularly in the orders
Struthioniformes (ratites) and Anseriformes (ducks, geese).
4. The cause of cloudy or turbid urine should always be identifed microscopically. Causes of
cloudiness and turbidity include crystals, cells, mucus, bacteria, casts, and spermatozoa (see
Sediment Examination later in this chapter). Many of these causes are not pathologic.
C. Odor
retained urine or old urine specimens.
2. An acetone odor suggests ketosis.
3. Excretion of certain drugs may give characteristic odors to the urine.
D. Volume
1. Control of urine volume
a. Urine enters the proximal tubule at approximately the same osmolality as plasma
b. Obligatory reabsorption of water, independent of body needs, occurs in the proximal tubules.
By osmotic action, water follows sodium, glucose, and other solutes that are actively reabsorbed
Urine is iso-osmotic compared to plasma upon entering the loop of Henle.
c. The osmolality of the urine increases in the descending loop of Henle, which is highly
permeable to water but rather impermeable to solute.
d. The ascending loop of Henle is permeable to solute but rather impermeable to water. The
ascending loop also is the site of active chloride transport. Urine entering the distal tubule is
hypo-osmotic compared to plasma
e. Water reabsorption in the distal and collecting tubules is in excess of solute. It is under the
control of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and requires a hypertonic medulla. The major control of
urine volume occurs at this level
f.  Maintenance of medullary hypertonicity is a function of the countercurrent multiplier system
of the loop of Henle and vasa recta.
2. Methods of measurement
a. The measurement of the total urine volume that is voided during a 24-hour period is the most
 impractical in most clinical settings.
 b. Estimation of volume may be inferred from urine specifc gravity or osmolality. Volume and
specific gravity or osmolality are inversely related in health and in most diseases. Exceptions
include the following:
(1) Diabetes mellitus. Polyuria and high specifc gravity coexist because of glucosuria.
Glucose increases urine specific gravity at the rate of 0.o04 units/g/dL of urine glucose.
concentrating ability.
3. Causes of abnormal urine volume are listed in Table 9.1.
E. Solute concentration
1. Methods of measurement
a. Osmolality (Chapter 5)
(1) Measurement of osmolality depends on particle numbers in solution.
(2) Depression of freezing point and lowering of vapor pressure are the methods of
measurement.
b. Specific gravity
(1) Specific gravity depends on particle number, size, and weight. Specific gravity is the ratio
of the refractive index of urine compared to water.
(2) Specific gravity is easily determined by refractometry and is a valid reflection of
osmolality.
256
CHAPTER 9
TABLE 9.1
CAUSES OF ABNORMAL URINE VOLUME.
Polyuria
Oliguria
Acute renal disease
Acute renal disease
Chronic renal disease
Dehydration
Diabetes mellitus
Shock
 Diets with high moisture content (especially birds)
Terminal chronic renal disease
Hepatic failure
Urinary tract obstruction
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypercalce mia
Hyperparathyroidism (cats)
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hypokalemia
 Hyponatremia
Hypovitaminosis A, hypervitaminosis D, (birds)
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Pituitary diabetes insipidus
Postobstructive diure sis
Primary renal glucosuria
Psychogenic polydipsia
Pyelonephritis
Pyome tra
Stress, excitement (especially birds)
Human reagent (dipstick) pads are unreliable in measuring urine specifie gravity in animals.
(4) Important considerations in refractometry include the following:
(a) Measurement of refractive index is temperature-dependent. Most hand-held
refractometers are temperature-compensated to give accurate readings between l6°℃ and
38°C (60°F to 100°F).
(b) Veterinary models of the instrument provide more accurate value of specific gravity in
concentrated feline urine specimens.
(c) Quality control consists of calibrating the instrument by measuring the specific
 gravity of water (1.000) and a 5%wv sodium chloride solution (1.022). Controls with
known low and high specific gravities also should be used.
2. Interpretation (also see urine concentration tests)
a. Knowledge of the hydration status of the animal is necessary to interpret the urine specific
gravity.
b. Urine specific gravity can range from 1.00l to 1.065 in most healthy animals and up to 1.080
in the cat. This range includes values associated with renal abnormalities. Urine specifc gravity
 ranges from 1.005 to 1.020 in birds.
C. Adequate renal concentrating ability is presumed to exist if the specific gravity of a random
urine specimen is: greater than 1.030 in dogs, greater than 1.035 in cats, greater than 1.020 birds,
  t  i      t   
of increased BUN concentration and renal azotemia.
d. Renal failure exists if urine is inadequately concentrated and the animal is azotemic. Renal
failure defined in this manner may be primary renal disease or secondary to other diseases (Table
9.1). Depending on the cause, renal failure may be reversible or irreversible
URINARY SYSTEM
257
2. Isosthenuria ("fixed" specific gravity) is the constant maintenance of urine osmolality in the
range of the glomerular filtrate (specific gravity = 1.008 to 1.012). In isosthenuria, the kidney is
neither concentrating nor diluting the urine
f. Hyposthenuria is defined as a urine specifc gravity less than 1l.008.
(1) In hyposthenuria, the kidney retains some water-balance function whereby solute is being
reabsorbed in excess of water (Case 13).
(2) The ability to concentrate urine and preferentially reabsorb solute is lost in polyuric renal
disease.
Most neonates, except calves, do not have efficient urine concentrating mechanisms.
h.1
 Relative increases of analytes, such as protein and bilirubin, are present in concentrated urine.
i.1
 Erythrocytes may lyse in hypotonic urine (specific gravity less than 1.006); erythrocyte ghosts
 may be observed in the urine sediment.
1-
Glucose and protein may falsely elevate the specific gravity of urine.
k. Urine osmolality occasionally is measured in birds and should be at least 450mOsmol/kg
following 24 hours of water deprivation. Maximum values may range from 500 to
IV. CheMlCAl CharaCterIStIcS
Various chemical substances (e.g., protein, glucose, ketones, bilirubin, occult blood, and urobilinogen)
 are measured semiquantitatively in the urine by reagent strips, which have color coded pads with
specific reagents for each test. The change of color in these pads indicates the presence or absence of
these analytes in the urine and provides a rough estimation of their quantity (semiquantitative). Most
e ane se nn sdis isan ads inq suq ion pauisap ae sdis julean ai au
available. Test results are usually interpreted by visual inspection, but some laboratories with high
 throughput use automated instruments to interpret the reagent strip test results.
A. Protein
1. Physiology
a. The size, shape, and charge of protein molecules influence their ability to pass the glomerular
flter.
b. Low-molecular-weight globulins (MW = 15,000 to 20,000 Da) are freely filtered by the
glomerulus, but their small quantity in urine reflects their low concentration in plasma. A small
quantity of albumin (MW = 66,000 Da) also is filtered from plasma. Most of these filtered proteins
subsequently are reabsorbed by the renal tubules.
c. The small quantity of protein that normally remains in the urine is not detectable by clinical
screening tests.
d. Tamm-Horsfall protein and IgA are secreted by the tubules in clinically undetectable amounts.
2. Increased urine protein may cause formation of persistent foam, particularly if the urine is
shaken.
(1) Shaking the urine specimen may destroy certain elements in the sediment such as casts.
(2) Normal urine also will foam but the foam is not persistent.
(3) Analytes that impart color to the urine may also color the foam. Bilirubin will stain the
 foam greenish-yellow to brown, while hemoglobin and myoglobin will stain foam red to red-
brown.
2.Methods of measurement
a. Semiquantitation of urine protein is commonly done using reagent strip (dipstick) tests.
(1) This test is based on the “protein error of pH dye indicators." The reagent pad is buffered
at a pH of 3. An increase in anions, in this instance negatively-charged proteins, causes a pH
indicator dye to shift color from yellow to green to blue
258
CHAPTER9
(2) The reagent strip method is most sensitive for albumin. It will not reliably detect globulins
or Bence-Jones paraprotein of plasma cell myeloma (Chapter 3).
(3) The intensity of the green to blue color is proportional to the protein concentration.
(4) Reagent strips yield negative, trace, and 1 to 4+ reactions. The test results are
semiquantitative; exact protein concentrations vary but are usually in the 30 to 2,000mg/dL
range.
(5) If urine pH is alkaline, the reagent pad may change color in the absence of proteinuria.
b. Acid precipitation tests (sulfosalicylic acid, nitric acid, trichloroacetic acid) also provide
semiquantitative detection of urine protein.
(1)  Acid precipitation detects albumin and non-albumin proteins.
(2) This test differentiates bona fide proteinuria from a false positive dipstick protein reading
from alkaline urine.
c. Bence-Jones protein is derived from immunoglobulin light chains and is dissolved in urine
 at room temperature. When the urine is heated, Bence-Jones protein precipitates at 40°C t0
60°C and redissolves at 85°C to 100°C. As the urine is cooled to 40°C-60°C, Bence-Jones
protein reprecipitates and then redissolves again as the urine specimen reaches room
temperature. However, this temperature-associated precipitation test is not very sensitive in
detecting Bence-Jones proteinuria. Immunoelectrophoresis is a more sensitive and specific
method of detection.
d. The magnitude of proteinuria should be measured accurately and precisely by quantitative
tests to evaluate protein loss. The quantity of protein lost should be evaluated with regard to
urine volume or specific gravity Detection of trace protein loss in a dilute urine (i.e., high
urine volume) may be more significant than trace protein loss in concentrated urine (low urine
volume). The amount of protein being lost in the urine may be quantifed by the following:
(1) Measuring the total amount of protein in a 24-hour collection of urine. This task is
difficult in animals. Normal protein excretion is less than 200mg/day.
(2) Calculating the ratio of urine protein to urine creatinine (UP/UC)
(a) Simultaneous urine protein and urine creatinine determinations are made on a single
sample of urine.
(h) This test gives similar information to the 24-hour urine protein determination from a
single collection, but may not be equally reliable because it reflects renal function over a
relatively short duration compared to a 24-hour collection
(c)  Creatinine excretion is approximately constant and usually is measured by the Jaffe
reaction. A reagent strip (Multistix PRO,TM Bayer, Elkhart, IN, USA) has been developed to
detect urine protein, urine creatinine, and urine-protein-to-urine-creatinine ratio (UP/UC
ratio). Urine protein and manually calculated UP/UC ratio from the reagent strip results
have shown good correlation with quantitative methods in dogs but poor correlation in
cats. Widespread use of these reagent strips in clinical practice has not yet occurred.
(d) A reagent strip (CLINITEK? Microalbumin, Bayer, Elkhart, IN, USA) also has been
developed to detect microalbuminuria (small quantities of albumin in the urine) in
humans; however, test results did not correlate well with quantitative measurement of
albumin in dogs.
3. Interpretation of a positive test result (proteinuria)
a. The reagent strip is only a screening test. The UP/UC ratio gives a more quantitative estimate
of proteinuria.
b. False-positive reagent strip test results may occur in highly alkaline urine (pH greater than
Reagent strips are not very useful in detecting proteinuria in ruminants because their urine is
 usually alkaline. Alkaline pH causes the indicator pad to change color despite the presence or
the reagent strip buffer.
URINARY SYSTEM
259
c. An occult blood test and urine sediment examination are necessary to distinguish nonrenal
from renal proteinuria and to interpret the UP/UC ratio. In the absence of prerenal proteinuria,
hemorrhage, and inflammation, the following are true:
(1) UP/UC ratio below 0.5 is considered normal.
(2) UP/UC ratio of 0.5 to l.0 is questionable for renal proteinuria.
(3) UP/UC ratio greater than 1.0 indicates renal proteinuria.
d. Causes of urogenital proteinuria
(1) Hemorrhage into the urinary tract (Cases 8, 20, 22, 25, 27)
- rd sa g u r  'aao si isn p a au a ()
powered field of view (HPF) usually are observed in the urine sediment.
(b) High urine protein dipstick values occur due to plasma-derived albumin.
(c)  Trauma, inflammation, and neoplasia are common causes of hemorrhage or hematuria.
(2) Inflammation within the urinary tract (Cases 4, 8, 20)
(a) Leukocytes (greater than 5 per HPF) are observed in the urine sediment.
(b) Precise location of the inflammation is diffcult to discern by examination of urine
alone. However, the presence of cellular casts composed of leukocytes suggests that
 tubular involvement is present.
(c)  Bacteria or other pathogens may be present.
(d) Plasma-derived protein concentration seldom exceeds a 2+ reaction, unless the
inflammation also is accompanied by hemorrhage.
(3) Renal disease (Cases 13, 18, 19)
(a)Absence of occult blood and significant cellular sediment are typical findings.
(b)
Casts may or may not be present.
(c)  Primary glomerular disease may cause intense proteinuria (Case 19)
i) Regent strip reactions usually are 3 to 4+.
ii) UP/UC ratio is often greater than 3 and usually greater than 5.
iii) The major protein component is albumin.
iv)Primary diseases in the dog are amyloidosis and glomerulonephritis. Dogs
with amyloidosis usually have higher UP/UC ratios (greater than 18) than with
glomerulonephritis (5 to 15).
(d) Primary tubular disease causes mild to moderate proteinuria.
i)  Reagent strip reactions are less than 2+.
ii) UP/UC ratio is less than 3.
ii) The major protein components are low-molecular-weight globulins.
(f)  Absence of proteinuria does not exclude significant renal disease, especially
nonglomerular disease.
(4) Prerenal proteinuria
(a) Certain extrarenal factors may cause a transitory, mild proteinuria via increased
glomerular permeability (e.g., fever, cardiac disease, central nervous system disease, shock,
muscular exertion).
(b) Proteinuria, derived from colostral proteins, occurs in foals, calves, kids, and lambs
under 40 hours of age.
(c)  High concentrations of low-molecular-weight proteins in the blood may pass through
the glomerulus and overwhelm the resorptive capacity of the tubules, causing an overflow
proteinuria (e.g., Bence-Jones protein, hemoglobin dimers, myoglobin) (Cases 3, 17).
(5)Trace amounts of protein usually are present in avian urine.
B. Glucose
1. Physiology
a. Glucose is freely fltered by the glomerulus
260
CHAPTER9
b. Glucose is completely resorbed in the proximal renal tubules, provided that the cells' transport
maximum is not exceeded. If blood glucose values exceed the transport maximum, glucosuria will
occur. In the following animals, glucosuria can be expected when serum glucose concentrations
exceed these levels:
(1) Above 100 mg/dL in the cow
(2) Above 180 mg/dL in the dog
(3)Above 280 mg/dL in the cat
(4) Above 600 mg/dL in birds
2. Methods of measurement
a. Reagent strips employ the glucose oxidase method, which is specific for glucose.
 Positive values occur when urine glucose is above 100 mg/dL. Reagent strips provide more
sensitive detection of glucose than reduction tests, but may be inhibited by ascorbic acid,
test values may occur in the presence of oxidizing agents such as hydrogen peroxide or chlorine
bleach.
b. The copper reduction tablet method semiquantitates glucose, but it also reacts with other
reducing substances (e.g., lactose, galactose, pentose, ascorbic acid, conjugated gluconates,
salicylates), resulting in false-positive test results. Exposure of these tablets to moisture can lead
to a false-negative test result.
3. Interpretation of a positive test result (glucosuria)
a. Hyperglycemia (Chapter 6, Table 6.2) of sufficient magnitude to exceed the tubular transport
capacity is the most common cause of glucosuria (Cases 14, 15, 22, 23). Iransient hyperglycemia
is relatively common in cats and birds with excitement (catecholamine effect) or severe stress
(endogenous corticosteroid release)
b. Normoglycemia (with decreased tubular reabsorption of glucose) is a less common cause of
glucosuria:
n  d  ( t rn s i  ()
are associated with defective renal tubular absorption.
(2) High dosages of gentamycin or amoxicillin may cause renal tubular damage with
glucosuria.
(3) Other types of tubular disease rarely have glucosuria. Thus, the presence of glucosuria is
not a reliable measurement of tubular disease
(4) Collection of blood and urine from a cat or bird that was previously excited or stressed
 may reveal normoglycemia with glucosuria. Blood glucose concentration can return to the
reference interval, but glucose will persist in urine that is stored in the bladder of cats or the
cloaca of birds.
C. Ketones
1. Physiology
a. Ketones are freely filtered by the glomerulus.
b. Under normal circumstances, ketones are completely resorbed by the proximal tubules.
2. Methods of measurement
a. Reagent strip and tablet methods use the nitroprusside reaction.
b. The above methods detect acetone and acetoacetic acid, but do not detect β-hydroxybutyrate
(the major intermediate in ketosis).
c. False-negative reactions occur when the urine specimen is not fresh or with prolonged
exposure of the reagent pad to moisture.
3. Interpretation of a positive test result (ketonuria) (Cases 15, 34)
a. Ketonuria precedes detectable ketonemia (Chapter 6).
(1) Following glomerular fltration, ketones are incompletely reabsorbed by the renal tubular
epithelial cells, resulting in ketonuria.
URINARy SySteM
261
(2) Routine biochemical profles do not specifically detect ketones. Their presence in serum
is suggested indirectly by titration acidosis and an increased anion gap. Lactic acidosis can
produce similar laboratory abnormalities (chapters 5 and 6).
b. Ketonuria is not an indicator of renal disease
c. Ketonuria indicates excessive fat degradation and/or deficiency in carbohydrate metabolism
(negative energy balance) and may occur in the following conditions:
(1) Ketosis of cattle
(2)  Pregnancy disease of ewes
(3)  Diabetes mellitus
(4)Starvation (particularly young animals)
(5) Low-carbohydrate, high-fat diets
D. Bilirubin (Chapter 7)
1. Physiology
a. Conjugated bilirubin can readily pass through the glomerulus and into the filtrate.
 Unconjugated bilirubin is bound to serum albumin and cannot pass through the glomerulus. The
renal threshold for bilirubin appears to be lower in the dog (particularly males) than in other
species.
b. Conjugated bilirubin is not reabsorbed by the renal tubules.
C. In the dog, some conjugated bilirubin may be formed by tubular epithelial cells from absorbed
hemoglobin.
2. Methods of measurement
a. Reagent strips use the diazotization method. Discoloration of the urine may obscure color
changes in the reagent pad and interfere with reading the test result.
b. The tablet method uses a similar chemical procedure but is more sensitive in detecting bilirubin.
c. The diazotization method is more reactive with conjugated bilirubin and rather insensitive to
unconjugated bilirubin.
d. Bilirubin may be oxidized to biliverdin or hydrolyzed to free bilirubin upon exposure to light.
Excessive delay in urinalysis may result in a false negative test result.
3. Interpretation of a positive test result (bilirubinuria) (Cases 2, 3, 4, 13, 14)
a. Bilirubinuria indicates obstruction to bile flow and regurgitation of conjugated bilirubin into
the blood.
b. Bilirubinuria can be detected prior to bilirubinemia because of the low renal threshold.
c. Increased tubular cell formation of bilirubin in hemoglobinuria and increased hepatic
conjugation of bilirubin in intravascular hemolysis may produce bilirubinuria.
d. Trace bilirubinuria may be detected in concentrated urine of dogs because of a low renal
threshold for conjugated bilirubin.
e.
 Any degree of bilirubinuria is significant in cats.
f. 1
 Biliverdin is the main component of heme catabolism in birds, although some species (e.g.
ducks) can produce a minimal quantity of bilirubin. Urine biliverdin does not react with the
reagent pad or tablet methods. Therefore, any reactivity for bilirubin in birds is unexpected, but
rarely may indicate hepatic or hemolytic disease.
E. Occult blood test
1. Physiology
a. Hemoglobin must exceed the binding capacity of plasma haptoglobin and split into dimers
before it can pass through the glomerular flter. Subsequently, the hemoglobin dimers must exceed
the absorptive capacity of the tubules before hemoglobinuria occurs.
b. Myoglobin is small enough (MW = 17,800 Da) to readily pass the glomerular filter. Because
 myoglobin is only one-fourth the size of hemoglobin (MW = 68,800 Da), it is cleared from the
plasma rapidly.
262
CHAPTER 9
2. Methods of measurement. The commonly used reagent strip and tablet methods are based on
 the peroxidase-like properies of hemoglobin and myoglobin with the subsequent oxidation of
ortho-toluidine to a blue-colored derivative.
3. The occult blood test is much more sensitive for hemoglobin than are the urine protein tests.
  an    si  ()     i rn si
of hemoglobin.
4. Causes of a positive occult blood test and their differentiation
a. Hematuria (Cases 8, 20, 22, 25, 27) is differentiated by the following:
(1) Red, cloudy urine that usually clears with centrifugation
(2) Erythrocytes in the urine sediment. A reagent in the dipstick pad will lyse intact RBCs for
subsequent hemoglobin detection. In addition, some of the erythrocytes in the urine will lyse
and release hemoglobin.
(3)  Absence of clinical or laboratory evidence of hemolytic anemia or muscle disease
b. Hemoglobinuria (Case 3) is differentiated by the following:
(1) Red to brown urine that does not clear on centrifugation
(2)  Absence of erythrocytes in the urine sediment. Erythrocytes suspended in urine with a
very low specific gravity (less than 1.006) or in aged urine may lyse and mask pre-existing
hematuria.
(3) Concomitant red discoloration of the plasma (hemoglobinemia). Free hemoglobin will
discolor plasma before it saturates serum haptoglobin or causes hemoglobinuria.
(4) Evidence of anemia, particularly an intravascular hemolytic type
(5)  Absence of clinical or laboratory evidence of muscle disease
(6)  Addition of saturated ammonium sulfate solution will remove the color by precipitation of
hemoglobin. Ammonium sulfate solution will not precipitate myoglobin and the urine remains
discolored. Spectrophotometric analysis is a better technique to differentiate hemoglobinuria
from myoglobinuria.
C. Myoglobinuria (Case 17) is characterized by the following:
(1) Red to brown urine that does not clear on centrifugation
(2)  Absence of erythrocytes in the urine sediment
(3) Clear, normally colored plasma. Myoglobin does not bind significantly to serum proteins
and is excreted in the urine before reaching concentrations that discolor plasma.
(4)  Absence of clinical or laboratory evidence of an anemia
(5) Clinical or laboratory evidence of muscle disease (Chapter 10)
d. Oxidizing agents in urine may give a false positive test result for blood.
F. Urobilinogen (Chapter 7)
1. Physiology
 a. Urobilinogen is formed in the intestine by bacterial action on conjugated bilirubin.
 b. Urobilinogen is absorbed from the intestine into portal blood, where it is recycled through the
liver and excreted in bile. A small amount of urobilinogen passes through the glomerular filter
and into the urine.
2. Methods of measurement
a. Urobilinogen generates a cherry-red color in Ehrlich's reagent (Ehrlichs diazo reaction is the
 formation of a red color from the action of diazo-benzenesulfonic acid and ammonia upon certain
aromatic substances, such as urobilinogen, that are found in the urine). This analytical method is
semiquantitative.
3. Interpretation of findings
a. The presence of urobilinogen in urine indicates a patent bile duct.
b. Absence of urobilinogen may indicate complete bile duct obstruction. However, because of the
instability of urobilinogen and diurnal variation in the excretion of this substance, many normal
animals lack detectable urobilinogen in their urine. In aged urine, urobilinogen is rapidly oxidized
to urobilin, resulting in a false negative test result.
URINARY SYSTEM
263
c. Increased concentrations of urobilinogen may occur in hermolytic diseases and with reduced
functional hepatic mass. In the latter condition, bile flow persists, but lower concentrations of
absorbed urobilinogen are removed from the portal blood by the hepatocytes.
d. The correlation between urine urobilinogen concentration and hepatobiliary disease is poor in
animals.
G. Hydrogen ion concentration (pH)
1. Methods of measurement
a. A variety of reagent strips impregnated with chemical indicators are available for the
determination of pH. Determination of urine pH with a pH meter is more accurate, but is
 expensive and less practical in a clinical setting.
b. A fresh sample is necessary; urine becomes alkaline on standing because CO, is lost and
bacteria convert urea into ammonia.
2. Interpretation
a. Urine pH is the result of renal regulation of blood bicarbonate and Ht concentrations; however,
urine pH should not be used alone to evaluate acid-base status.
b. Dietary effects on urine pH in mammals
(1) An acidic pH (below 7.0) occurs with high-protein, meat-based diets (meat and milk in
carnivores and nursing animals) and complete anorexia in both carnivores and herbivores.
(2) An alkaline pH (above 7.0) occurs with vegetable diets in herbivores and may occur with
vegetable-based diets in carnivores.
C. Urinary tract infections with certain types of bacteria yield a higher pH than expected because
bacteria degrade urea to ammonia (Case 34).
d. Urine pH determines the types of casts, crystals, and uroliths that may form in urine.
e. Therapy may affect urine pH, and urine pH subsequently may affct drug efficiency in
combating urinary tract infection.
f.The pH of avian urine ranges from 6.0 to 8.0. Diet affects the pH of avian urine as it does in
other animals.
g. Renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
(1) RIA encompasses disorders that affect the kidneys' ability to do the following:
(a) Secrete hydrogen ions (Type I, distal RTA)
(b) Retain bicarbonate ions ( Iype Il, proximal RTA)
(c) Secrete H+ and K+ in the collecting ducts (Iype IV RTA) secondary to aldosterone
deficiency or resistance
(2) In type I RTA, urine pH is above 6.0.
(3) In type II and type IV RIA, urine pH is below 6.0.
h. Metabolic alkalosis with aciduria (paradoxical aciduria) is discussed in Chapter 5.
into the pH pad. A false low pH test result will occur
H. Nitrite
1. This test has been used to screen for certain bacteria.
2. The reaction is based on the principal that nitrate (normally found in urine) is reduced to nitrite
by nitrate-reducing bacteria.
3. This reagent strip test for use in humans has not proven to be reliable with animal urine
specimens because false negative test results often occur.
1. Leukocyte esterase activity
1. This test has been used in humans to detect leukocytes in the urine, indicating that
inflammation or infection is present.
2. This reagent strip test is unreliable with urine from animals, sediment examination is required
to detect pyuria.
264
CHAPTER9
J.Enzymes
1. Enzymatic activity in urine may detect renal tubular damage, provided that the following are
true:
a. Similar plasma enzymes are large enough to be restricted from the glomerular fltrate.
Therefore, these enzymes are not normally present in the urine.
b. The enzyme in question has a high activity within or on the surface of renal tubular epithelial
cells.
c. Enzymatic activity can be measured reliably in the urine.
2. Iwenty-four-hour urine activity and enzyme activity: urine creatinine ratios of gamma
glutamyltransferase (GGT), N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAG), alkaline phosphatase, and
B-glucuronidase have been used to detect renal tubular damage. Although Rules Based Medicine
(Austin, TX, USA) has developed a new research biomarker panel for early detection of renal
toxicity in humans and rats, these biomarkers have not yet been tested in domestic animals or used
in a clinical setting.
K. Canine bladder tumor antigen test (V-BTA1M, Alidex, Inc., Redmond, WA, 98052 USA)
1. The V-BTATM assay is a latex agglutination screening test to detect transitional cell carcinoma
antigens in canine urine.
2. False-positive test results may be observed in urine samples with 4+ proteinuria, 4+ glucosuria,
and greater than 30 to 40 RBC and/or WBC/HPF:
V. SEDIMENT EXAMINATION (FIGURE 9.1)
A. Principles
1. Negative or normal reagent strip test results do not always mean that the urine sediment will be
normal. A complete urinalysis should always include microscopic examination of the sediment
2. Proper technique is necessary for accurate sediment evaluation.
a. Low centrifuge speeds are necessary to prevent destruction of some constituents, especially
casts.
b. If necessary, the urine supernatant may be re-evaluated with the urine dipstick or with
semiquantitative methods after centrifugation.
c. The supernatant is decanted and the sediment is resuspended in the remaining urine by gentle
thorough mixing. The volume of urine used for sediment resuspension should be consistent.
The quantity of sediment is related to the volume and concentration of urine being centrifuged.
Therefore, a standard volume of urine should be centrifuged for sediment evaluation. Abnormal
findings should be evaluated with regard to urine specific gravity.
d. A drop of resuspended urine sediment is placed on a glass slide and coverslipped for
microscopic examination.
3. To examine unstained sediment microscopically, maximum contrast is needed and may be
obtained by dimming the microscope light, closing the iris diaphragm, and/or lowering the
condenser. Stains are available for use with urine sediment that may enhance contrast for detection
and identification of inflammatory cells, bacteria, and neoplastic cells. The urine sediment is
examined at both low- (10x) and high- (40 to 45x) powered fields (HPF) of view.
4. The method used to collect the urine specimen influences the type and amount of sediment
present. Voided (free catch) specimens may be more cellular, have bacterial contamination, and
have discharges from the reproductive tract. Catheterized specimens may have increased
extraneous contamination and are more specific for changes in the urinary tract.
B. Epithelial cells (Figure 9.1)
1. Epithelial cells can originate from the kidneys, ureters, bladder, urethra, and reproductive tract.
+
O
O。
FIGURE 9.l. Urinary sediment. A. squamous epithelial cells, B. transitional epithelial cells, C. erythrocytes and
leukocytes, D. fat droplets, E. Candida sp. yeasts, F Capillaria plica ovum; continued.
265
FIGURE 9.1.
 continued. G. Dioctophyma renale ova, H. bacteria and leukocytes, 1. fungal hypha, J. mucus thread,
K hyaline cast, L granular cast and spermatozoa; continued.
266
M
FIGURE 9.1. continued. M. cellular cast with hemoglobin staining, N. waxy cast, O. ammonium biurate, P
 bilirubin with hyaline cast, spermatozoa, and leukocytes, Q. calcium carbonate, R. calcium oxalate monohydrate
(ethylene glycol toxicosis); continued.
267
FIGURE 9.l. continued. S. calcium oxalate dihydrate, I. cystine crystals, U. sulfonarmide crystals, V triple
phosphate, W. tyrosine, X. uric acid; continued.
268
URINAR Y SYSTEM
269
FIGURE 9.l. continued. Y transitional cell carcinoma (wet mount), Z. transitional cell carcinoma (Wright's
stain).
2. Squamous epithelial cells are large with irregular, angular margins and small nuclei. Bacteria
 may be observed on their surfaces. They desquamate from the urethra and vagina or prepuce and
indicate contamination.
3. Transitional epithelial cells are variably sized, oval, spindle, or caudate (tailed). They originate
from the proximal urethra, urinary bladder, ureter, and renal pelvis. They may occur in groups,
especially in catheterized samples, but are of little diagnostic importance unless neoplastic (e.g.
transitional cell carcinoma).
            n a  t
the renal tubules. Renal epithelial cells usually are degenerative; they may be difficult to identify
and differentiate from leukocytes.
C. Erythrocytes (Cases 8, 20, 22, 25, 27, 34) (Figure 9.1)
1. Erythrocytes are round to biconcave, slightly refractile, lack internal structure, and may have a
light green tint in unstained wet mounts.
2. More than 5 RBCs/HPF indicates hemorrhage (hematuria), which may be traumatic or
inflammatory in nature (see Occult Blood Test earlier in this chapter).
3. Erythrocytes often appear shrunken or crenated in concentrated urine (high specific gravity).
4. Erythrocytes may lyse or become ballooned ghost cells in dilute urine (specific gravity less than
1.006). They also will deteriorate in aged and allkaline urine.
5. Structures that may be mistaken for erythrocytes include fat droplets and yeasts.
a. Fat droplets are variably sized, highly refractile, less dense, and float immediately beneath the
coverslip (out of the plane of focus of the cells)
b. Yeasts are oval, often exhibit budding, and are more variable in size than RBCs.
D. Leukocytes (Cases 4, 8, 20, 34) (Figure 9.1)
 1. Leukocytes, usually neutrophils, appear round and granular. They are larger than erythrocytes
 and smaller than epithelial cells. Leukocytes decompose in old urine and may lyse in hypotonic or
alkaline urine.
2. More than 5 leukocytes/HPF indicates urogenital tract inflammation (pyuria) that may or may
not be septic.
3. Leukocytes frequently are associated with bacteriuria, but significant bacteriuria may occur
without pyuria. Intracellular bacteria are difficult to detect without examining a stained sediment
preparation
4. Glitter cells are leukocytes that have highly refractile intracytoplasmic granules that appear t0
shimmer.
270
CHAPTER 9
E. Casts (cylinduria) (Cases 17, 34) (Figure 9.1)
1. General features of casts
a. Casts are elongated structures comprised of a matrix of Tamm-Horsfall protein, a high
molecular-weight mucoprotein that is produced by the distal tubular epithelial cells.
b. Casts are formed in distal tubules where urine is more acidic; they may dissolve in alkaline
urine.
C. Structures present in the tubule at the time of cast formation may be embedded in the cast.
d. Although casts indicate some tubular change, they do not correlate with the severity of change.
Casts can be observed in the urine of apparently healthy individuals.
2. Casts tend to be discharged into urine intermittently. They may or may not be observed in a
single urinalysis.
f. The absence of casts does not exclude renal disease.
8. Casts are classified according to their major component.
2. Types of casts
a. Hyaline casts are colorless, homogenous, semi-transparent, and difficult to detect, even with
reduced light. They are comprised mostly of Tamm-Horsfall protein.
b. Granular casts are the most common type of cast observed. They are comprised of
mucoprotein, plasma proteins, degenerated cells, and, occasionally, tubular debris.
c. Cellular casts
(1) Epithelial cell casts contain cells that have desquamated from the renal tubules.
(2) WBC casts occur in renal inflammation.
(3) RBC casts occur in renal hemorrhage and inflammation.
d. Waxy casts are wide structures without granular contents that usually have sharply broken or
square ends and notched edges. They evolve from degenerating cellular and granular casts. Waxy
casts are formed in the large collecting tubules and indicate chronic tubular lesions, severe urine
stasis, and a poor clinical prognosis.
observed most commonly in cats.
f. Pseudocasts are aggregates of amorphous crystals, debris (fber, glass particles), bacteria, or
other structures that are not embedded in a protein matrix. They mimic true casts.
F. Mucus (Case 17) (Figure 9.1)
1. Mucus appears as narrow, twisted, ribbon-like, homogenous threads and indicates urethral
irritation or genital secretions
2. Mucus is a normal finding in equine urine.
G. Fat (Figure 9.l) is recognized as variably-sized, highly refractile droplets. Because they are less
dense than water, fat droplets float underneath the coverslip of urine sediment preparations and are in
a different focal plane than cells and casts.
1. Fat droplets may be stained directly with Sudan Ill. Because new methylene blue stain is a
water-based dye solution, fat appears as highly refractile, unstained droplets in these preparations
 sinp s sds a un as nd ou pn ae a sip e 
common in feline urine due to the high lipid content of renal tubular epithelial cells.
H. Bacteria (Cases 20, 34) (Figure 9.1)
1. Identifying features
a. Bacilli (rods) may occur singly or in chains. They are readily identified in unstained wet
mounts of urine sediment and are usually accompanied by leukocytes.
b. Cocci (round bacteria) are more diffcult to identify in unstained preparations, unless present
in chains, because they resemble small crystals or debris.
c. Brownian motion of small particles should not be misidentified as cocci or motile bacteria.
URINARY SYSTEM
271
d. Romanowsky- or Gram-stained preparations of urine sediment are superior to wet mounts for
detecting bacteria, especially cocci. Stained preparations should be used to confrm questionable
bacteriuria
2. Significance of bacteriuria
a. Greater than 30,000 bacterial rods/mL usually must be present before microscopic detection of
bacterial cells is possible in wet mounts of urine sediment. In contrast, even greater numbers of
cocci must be present for microscopic detection of these organisms.
b. Urine is normally sterile only from the kidney to the mid-urethra; therefore, bacteria observed
in voided samples may represent contamination by normal flora of the lower urogenital tract.
s
c. Quantitative and qualitative urine cultures are necessary to detect clinically significant
bacteriuria. Obviously, the collection vessel must be sterile if microbiological culture is to be
performed.
 d. In most instances, bacteriuria in birds cannot be distinguished from fecal contamination.
I. Sperm may be observed in voided urine from males and from recently inseminated females.
(Dirofilaria immitis) are observed infrequently in urine specimens (Figure 9.1).
K. Fungi. Segmented hyphae or budding yeasts may be found. Yeasts usually are contaminants in stale
urine specimens. Fungi have rarely been observed with disseminated Aspergillus terreus infection in
German Shepherd dogs.
These organisms are variably sized with a thick cell wall and internal compartmentalization resulting
from binary fission.
M. Crystalluria (Figure 9.1)
1. Crystalline precipitation of solutes depends upon pH, temperature of the urine, and degree of
solubility and concentration of the crystalloid.
2. Crystalluria indicates saturation of urine with a crystalloid material but is not always indicative
of urolithiasis.
3. Crystals are identified by their shape, color, and solubility in acid or alkaline solutions.
4. Crystals found in uroliths include, but are not limited to, magnesium ammonium phosphate
(triple phosphate, struvite), calcium oxalate, calcium phosphate, urate, cystine, silica, and calcium
carbonate.
5. Crystals found in urine sediment include the following:
a. Ammonium biurate (ammonium urate), which can occur with portosystemic venous shunts or
other hepatic diseases where hyperammonemia exists (Case 13). Ammonium biurate crystals are
yellow to brown spheres with irregular pointed projections ("thornapple" crystals). These crystals
 occasionally lack the characteristic projections (smooth form).
b. Amorphous urates or phosphates are ill-defined aggregates of crystals that may form
pseudocasts. Urates are common in birds.
c. Bilirubin crystals are yellow to amber and resemble a stack of twigs or "antler" configurations.
 They are common in canine urine but abnormal in the urine of other species.
considered a normal finding in equine urine.
e. Calcium oxalates
(1) Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals are common in ethylene glycol toxicosis (Case 18)
,  n i, d       
appearance).
272
CHAPTER9
(2) Calcium oxalate dihydrate crystals are found in urine of healthy individuals and
occasionally in ethylene glycol toxicosis. They are octahedrons or envelope-shaped crystals,
but may occasionally form cubes
(3) Ethylene glycol toxicosis may occur without oxalate crystalluria.
(a) A colorimetric commercial kit (Ethylene Glycol Test Kit, Allelic Biosystems,
Kearneysville, WV 25430) is available to detect ethylene glycol in blood within 12 hours
of ingestion before crystalluria is evident.
(b)  A positive test result is the development of a reddish-violet color that is more intense
than the control specimen (greater than 50μg/mL).
f. Cholesterol crystals are associated with cell membrane degradation and with some renal
diseases. The crystals are parallelograms with a notched corner.
g. Cystine crystals are hexagonal and usually result from altered protein metabolism (e.g.,
 congenital cystinuria of dogs).
h. Drugs
(1) Sulfonamide crystals are drug induced. These crystals may form in acid urine of animals
that are dehydrated or have restricted access to water. Sulfonamide crystals may vary in
morphology. They usually are spherical with radiating spokes and sometimes ragged margins.
 n   n   a     
The lignin test can confirm the presence of sulfonamides. This test is performed by placing a
drop of urine sediment on newspaper and adding a drop or two of 25% hydrochloric acid. If
sulfa drugs are present, a bright yellow-orange color is produced.
(2)  Ampicillin crystals form long, needle-like arrays.
i. Triple phosphate (magnesium ammonium phosphate, struvite) crystals are three- to six-sided
"coffin lids." They occasionally exhibit a "fern leaf' morphology, especially if they are dissolving.
j. Tyrosine crystals, which may be associated with liver disease in the dog, are colorless to yellow
needles arranged like sheaves of wheat.
k. Uric acid crystals are usually parallelograms with rounded corners, but can be pleomorphic in
 a p e s s ssn no 's 'sp n, n '
urine from Dalmatian dogs. They are considered a normal finding in this animal.
RENAL ABNORMALITIES DETECTED BY LABORATORY TESTS
1. DEfiNITIONS
A. Renal disease
1. Renal disease is defined as the occurrence of morphologic renal lesions of any size or severity or
any biochemical abnormalities related to renal function.
2. Because of the extensive reserve capacity of the kidney, significant renal disease may be present
 in the absence of clinical signs or laboratory abnormalities.
3. In some instances, signs of renal disease, such as proteinuria and casts, may not be accompanied
by clinical evidence of loss of renal function.
4. The various parts of the nephron are so interrelated that disease in the glomerulus often results
in tubular disease and vice versa.
B. Renal failure
1. Renal failure is present when clinical signs or laboratory abnormalities are observed that are
caused by reduced renal function.
2. Failure of renal function occurs only after substantial loss of nephrons.
a. Quantitation of renal function is based on the intact nephron hypothesis, which states that
decline in renal function is the result of a decreased number of functioning nephrons rather than
decreased function of individual nephrons.
URINARY SYSTEM
273
b. Renal functions that can be measured include the following:
(1) Excretion of nitrogenous wastes (e.g., BUN, creatinine)
(2) Acid-base balance (TCO2, blood gases)
(3) Regulation of body water and solute content of urine (e.g., urine specific gravity,
osmolality)
(4)  Degradation of certain compounds (e.g., plasma amylase and lipase)
(5) Erythropoietin secretion
c. Only one function may be lost; however, multiple functions usually are lost concurrently
C. Azotemia
1. Azotemia is an excess of urea or other non-protein nitrogenous compounds in the blood.
2. Causes of azotemia may be pre-renal, renal, or postrenal (see Blood Urea Nitrogen later in this
chapter).
D. Uremia
1. Uremia is a complex of clinical signs observed in renal failure. Uremia also may be observed in
pre-and post-renal azotemia. If clinical signs of disease are absent, an animal with azotemia is not
uremic.
2. Clinical signs associated with uremia include anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, gastrointestinal
hemorrhage, ulcerative stomatitis, weakness, lethargy, muscle tremors, convulsions, and terminal
coma. Bruxism occurs in cattle.
Il. EVALUATION OF RENAL FUNCTION
A. Urine concentration tests
1. Rationale
a. Dehydration increases plasma osmolality, which stimulates the release of antidiuretic hormone
(ADH) by the pituitary gland. ADH acts on the collecting tubular epithelial cells, causing
resorption of water and concentration of the urine (increased urine specific gravity).
b. Clinical indications for using the urine concentration test include the following:
(1) Polydipsia and polyuria in animals lacking azotemia, clinical evidence of dehydration, and
biochemical evidence of disease
(2) Repeated random urine samples from a nonazotemic animal in which the urine
persistently has a low or isosthenuric specific gravity (1.008 to 1.030 in the dog, 1.008 t0
1.035 in the cat, and 1.008 to 1.025 in the horse and cow).
c. The urine concentration test is contraindicated in the following conditions:
(1)  Azotemia or uremia. A diagnosis of renal disease is already established if azotemia
accompanies dilute urine (postrenal azotemia is still a diagnostic consideration). Prerenal
azotemia is associated with concentrated urine
(2) Dehydration. Maximal stimulation of ADH release is already in effect; further water
deprivation is unnecessary.
(3) Severe debilitation.
(4) Evidence of other metabolic diseases that can cause polyuria and polydipsia. (Table 9.1)
2. Types of concentration tests
a. Abrupt water deprivation test
(1)  The animal is weighed, abruptly deprived of water, and urine specific gravity is monitored.
The test is stopped if adequate concentrating ability (i.e., specifc gravity greater than 1.030
in the dog, greater than 1.035 in the cat, greater than 1.020 in bird, and greater than 1.025 in
 the cow and horse) is demonstrated. The test also is terminated if undesirable clinical signs
develop or if 5% of body weight is lost (which indicates that adequate stimulus for ADH
release and subsequent urine concentration has occurred).
274
CHAPTER9
(2) In cattle, three to four days of water restriction are required for maximum concentration of
urine because of the large reservoir of water in the rumen.
b. Gradual water deprivation test
(1)  This test is suggested to be of value when polyuria is associated with medullary washout
of solute. In this situation, medullary hypertonicity must be re-established before the renal
tubules can respond to ADH and the abrupt water deprivation test.
(2) While monitoring body weight, the animal is progressively deprived of water until it is
completely withheld; the guidelines of the abrupt water deprivation test are then followed.
C. ADH concentration test
(1) This test may be used when water deprivation poses a risk to the patient. This
concentration test has been used primarily in the dog and evaluates renal response to
exogenous ADH. The ADH concentration test also may be used after the water deprivation test
to diagnose pituitary-associated diabetes insipidus.
(2)  An exogenous source of ADH is given to stimulate water reabsorption and urine
concentration.
(3) Renal concentrating ability appears to be more effective after water deprivation than after
injection of ADH.
3. Interpretation of concentration test results
a. A urine specific gravity greater than 1.030 in the dog, greater than 1.035 in the cat, greater
than 1.020 in the bird, and greater than 1.025 in the horse and cow indicates adequate
concentration of urine
 b. Causes of an abnormal concentration test include the following:
(1) Renal disease (Cases 3, 10, 15, 17, 18, 19, 24)
(a) Approximately two-thirds of the nephrons are nonfunctional before abnormal
concentrating ability of the kidney can be demonstrated
(b) Impaired concentrating ability usually precedes increases in blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) or serum creatinine concentration
(c) In the cat and in the early stages of primary glomerular disease in any species,
azotemia may occur simultaneously with or precede concentration abnormalities.
(2) Pituitary diabetes insipidus
(a) Pituitary disease causes a lack of ADH secretion. The renal tubules are normal but are
not stimulated to reabsorb water
(b) The specific gravity is usually in the 1.00l to 1.007 range because the kidney can still
reabsorb solute.
(c) Affected animals respond to exogenous ADH by concentrating the urine.
(3)  Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
(@)The renal tubules are refractory to ADH stimulation via water deprivation or exogenous
administration of ADH. This may be a primary tubular defect or a secondary effect of certain
biochemical abnormalities (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, hypercalcemia, endotoxemia) (Case 8).
(b) Other renal function tests are normal.
(4)  Diseases that cause polyuria and medullary washout
(a)  There is no response to the abrupt water deprivation test because the medulla is
hypotonic from the loss of solute.
(b)  The gradual water deprivation test is indicated. Urine concentration will occur after
medullary hypertonicity is re-established.
B. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
1. Basic concepts of metabolism
a. Small quantities of urea are ingested and absorbed from the large intestine.
b. The majority of urea in plasma is synthesized by the liver. Specifically, the hepatic urea cycle
URiNARy SySteM
275
c. Urea is not found in feces because it is either absorbed or converted to ammonia by urease-
containing bacteria.
d. Once urea enters the vascular system, it passively diffuses throughout the total body water
 compartment. Approximately 9O minutes are required for equilibrium to be established.
2. BUN and serum urea nitrogen are the same concentration because of equilibration within the
total body water compartment. Erythrocytes, plasma, and serum have the same concentration of
urea.
2. Urea excretion
a. The kidney is the most important route of urea excretion.
(1) Urea concentration in the glomerular filtrate is the same as that of the blood. Filtration
of urea is a simple process that does not require expenditure of energy. Increased BUN
concentration is the result of diminished glomerular filtration.
(2) Urea passively diffuses with water from the tubular lumen back into the blood.
(a) The amount of urea absorbed is inversely related to the rate of urine flow through the
tubules.
(b)At the highest urine flow rate, approximately 40% of the fltered urea is reabsorbed.
If urine flow is decreased (e.g., dehydration, obstruction), more urea is reabsorbed (up to
70%) and the blood urea concentration increases.
(c) Urea, in the presence of ADH, diffuses from the collecting tubules into the
interstitium, where it comprises part of the medullary concentration gradient.
b. Saliva, gastrointestinal tract, and sweat are other routes of urea excretion. Excretion of urea by
 these routes increases when the BUN concentration increases.
(1) Excretion of urea by the gastrointestinal route is futile in simple-stomached animals
because almost all urea is degraded by urease-containing bacteria to ammonia. The
ammonia is reabsorbed by the intestine and used to resynthesize urea in the liver.
(2) In ruminants, urea that is excreted into the rumen (or ingested in the diet) is degraded by
 the microflora to ammonia. The ammonia subsequently is then used to synthesize amino acids
for protein production.
(3) Urea excretion in ruminants is governed by nitrogen intake. Animals that are on a
nitrogen-deficient diet or that have severe anorexia excrete almost all blood urea via the GI
tract and very little via the kidneys. Therefore, BUN can be within the reference interval in
some ruminants with severe renal disease.
3.Methods of measurement
a. Reagent strips that employ urease may be used to estimate BUN concentration, but this
method of analysis is inaccurate.
 b. Chromatographic strip tests are based on ammonia release, which produces a color change.
 These strip tests allow semiquantitation of BUN concentration.
r. Colorimetric methods are preferred and are quantitative.
4. Interpretation of increased BUN concentration
a. Prerenal azotemia (Cases 9, 14, 27)
(1) Increased protein catabolism secondary to small bowel hemorrhage, necrosis, starvation,
prolonged exercise, infection, fever, and corticosteroids (endogenous production or exogenous
administration) may cause mild increases in BUN via increased hepatic synthesis of urea.
 Creatinine concentration is not increased.
(2) High-protein diets may cause mild increases in BUN concentration in non-fasting, healthy
animals. However, high-protein diets may precipitate a more signifcant elevation in BUN
concentration in animals with occult renal disease. Creatinine concentration generally is not
 increased unless occult renal disease is present.
(3) Decreased renal perfusion reduces the glomerular fltration rate (GFR) and causes
azotemia. This mechanism occurs with shock, dehydration, and cardiovascular disease. The
kidney is stimulated to concentrate the urine. Because the tubular flow rate of urine is lower
276
CHAPTER9
and urea reabsorption is greater, marked elevation in BUN concentration may be observed,
particularly in cattle. Creatinine concentration also is increased.
(4) In most species, prerenal azotemia occurs more frequently than renal azotemia.
(5) Diseases causing pre- or postrenal azotemia may secondarily affect the kidneys and
eventually cause renal azotemia.
(6) Urine specifc gravity is high because most situations causing or associated with prerenal
azotemia also stimulate ADH secretion. Functional kidneys respond by concentrating the
urine. An exception is hypoadrenocorticism
(7) The urine osmolality to plasma osmolality ratio is high, while urine sodium concentration
is low (less than 10 mEq/L).
b. Renal azotemia (Cases 3, 10, 15, 17, 18, 19, 24)
(1) Renal azotemia occurs when approximately three-fourths of the nephrons are
nonfunctional. GFR is decreased significantly with insuffcient excretion of urea and
creatinine.
(a) Therefore, BUN is not a sensitive indicator of renal disease until the renal functional
mass has been reduced to the point of azotemia.
(b) Once renal azotemia is present, the BUN concentration approximately doubles
each time the remaining functional renal mass is halved. Modest increases in BUN
concentration are highly significant at this stage of disease.
(2) Azotemia usually follows concentrating abnormalities in the normal progression of renal
failure.
(a) Although the animal is azotemic due to the decreased GFR, and maximal stimulus for
urine concentration is present, the kidneys are still unable to concentrate the urine.
i)  Cats are an exception to this rule; some concentrating ability of the feline kidney
 may persist after azotemia has developed.
ii)  Animals with primary glomerular disorders may develop azotemia before
concentrating abnormalities are evident because tubular disease follows glomerular
dysfunction in the usual course of renal disease.
(b) Urine urea/plasma urea and urine creatinine/plasma creatinine ratios are decreased
(c)  BUN concentration is moderately increased in renal failure in the horse because of
intestinal excretion of urea. Very high BUN concentrations suggest prerenal complications.
(d) BUN concentration does not increase proportionally to creatinine concentration in the
ruminant because of excretion of urea via the rumen
(e) Single BUN determinations are not reliable prognostic indicators. Evaluation of serial
BUN concentrations provides better monitoring of disease progression and more accurate
clinical prognosis.
(3)  Pre-renal and renal azotemia often coexist.
c. Postrenal azotemia (obstruction or postrenal leakage) (Case 20)
    n    no s r (s
and/or radiologic or ultrasound examinations usually are sufficient to diagnose postrenal
azotemia
(2) The urine specific gravity is variable; concentration abnormalities may or may not occur.
(3) BUN concentration should return to the reference interval several days after relief of the
urinary tract obstruction or repair of a rupture involving the ureter, bladder, or urethra.
d. Interpretation of BUN in birds
(1) Determination of BUN concentration is used as a sensitive indicator of dehydration in
birds.
(2) The small amount of urea in avian blood precludes its use as a measure of renal function;
however, there is a correlation between renal failure and BUN concentration in the pigeon.
uric acid concentration (hyperuricemia) is the best indicator of potential renal disease in birds
URINARY SYSTEM
277
5. Causes of decreased BUN concentration
a. Low BUN values may be seen in hepatic insufficiency (decreased functional mass) (Cases 12,
13), low protein diets, and following the administration of anabolic steroids
b. Possible mechanisms resulting in a decreased BUN concentration include decreased production
of urea via decreased hepatic urea cycle function or reduced protein catabolism and availability of
ammonia for urea synthesis
c. Young animals may have low BUN values from increased fluid intake, increased urine output,
and a high anabolic state of rapid growth
C. Serum creatinine
1. Basic concepts of metabolism
a. Small quantities of creatinine may be absorbed when diets contain muscle. Intra-individual
 variations in serum creatinine concentrations are partially due to diet (i.e., amount of meat
consumed).
 b. Most creatinine originates endogenously from nonenzymatic conversion of creatine that stores
energy in muscle as phosphocreatine.
c. A rather constant amount of creatine is converted to creatinine daily; creatinine is not
reutilized.
d. The creatine pool is influenced by muscle mass and disease.
(1) Decreased serum creatinine concentration may accompany muscle disease and generalized
wasting
(2) Increased serum creatinine concentration may result from conditioning (training) or
rhabdomyolysis.
(3) Most of the individual variation of creatinine values in healthy animals results from
differences in muscle mass.
(4) Males typically have higher creatinine values than females.
.
Creatinine is distributed throughout the body water but diffuses slower than urea.
Approximately four hours are required for equilibration of creatinine concentration (vs. one
and a half hours for urea). In the case of ruptured urinary bladder, abdominal fluid creatinine
concentrations are much higher than serum creatinine concentrations. This disparity in creatinine
concentration persists longer than that of urea. Thus, differences in abdominal fluid and plasma
creatinine concentrations are more useful diagnostically than urea concentrations.
2. Creatinine excretion
a. Renal excretion
(1) Creatinine is freely filtered by the glomerulus. Tubular reabsorption does not occur.
(2) A small amount of creatinine is secreted by the proximal tubules of male dogs.
(3) Serum creatinine is a more accurate measurement of GFR than BUN because of the lack of
tubular reabsorption and minimal tubular secretion.
b. Gastrointestinal
(l) A small amount of creatinine is excreted by this route.
(2) Excreted creatinine is primarily degraded by enteric organisms, but minor recycling
 probably occurs.
3. Interpretation of increased serum creatinine concentration
a. Creatinine concentration is not significantly affected by diet or catabolic factors but it is
affected by muscle mass.
b.A reduced GFR affects creatinine in a similar manner to BUN (Case 14)
c. Creatinine determination provides information similar to that of BUN in renal disease as well
as postrenal obstruction or leakage (Cases 10, 18, 19, 20, 22).
d. Creatinine, like BUN, has relatively poor sensitivity in the diagnosis of renal disease in the
dog and cat. Three-fourths of renal function must be lost before abnormalities in creatinine
concentration can be discerned.
278
CHAPTER9
e. Creatinine concentration is a more sensitive indicator of renal disease than BUN concentration
in the cow and horse. In these species, the potential for gastrointestinal excretion of creatinine is
limited in contrast to urea (Case 3).
f. Diuresis and dialysis have less effect on lowering serum creatinine concentration than on
lowering BUN concentration. Urine flow rate has less effect on creatinine concentration than on
 BUN concentration because creatinine diffuses more slowly between fluid compartments than
 BUN. Therefore, diuresis and dialysis promote greater excretion of urea than creatinine.
g. Noncreatinine chromagens may result in false-high test values in serum with most clinical
assays. Ketones are the most significant of these interfering compounds
h. Urine creatinine/serum creatinine ratios have been advocated to distinguish pre-renal azotemia
 from renal azotemia, but are of questionable diagnostic value.
i.Serum BUN/creatinine ratio
(1)  This ratio has been suggested to be of value in the differential diagnosis of azotemia
because of differences in tubular reabsorption and diffusion rates and because of the effects of
diet and protein metabolism on the two compounds.
(2) Clinical experience has shown that there are too many variables for the serum BUN/
creatinine ratio to be of use as a diagnostic parameter in veterinary medicine, particularly in
dogs.
j. Creatinine concentration is considered to be very insensitive and a poor diagnostic test in
birds. However, elevated creatinine concentrations have been reported in renal disease, egg-related
coelomitis, and sepsis.
D. Uric acid
1. Uric acid is the major component of nitrogen catabolism in birds
2. Hyperuricemia is a good indicator of renal disease in birds.
a. Some avian species can compensate for renal damage before elevations in serum uric acid
concentration are observed. This limits the sensitivity of uric acid determination in some birds
b. Hyperuricemia may occur during ovulation and after eating, limiting the test specificity in
detecting renal disease
3. Normouricemia does not exclude renal disease.
4. Juvenile birds have lower uric acid concentrations than adults. Birds consuming a diet of grain
have lower concentrations of uric acid than carnivorous species.
E. Measurement of GFR. The ideal substance for measuring GFR should be exclusively cleared by
glomerular filtration and neither reabsorbed nor secreted by the renal tubules. It also should not be
subject to metabolism or excretion by extrarenal routes. All tests of GFR are affected by decreased
renal perfusion.
1. Endogenous creatinine clearance
a. The volume of urine formed during a known period of time is measured. Concurrent urine and
serum creatinine concentrations are determined at the beginning and end of the time period. The
endogenous creatinine clearance is calculated as follo ws:
(1) Creatinine clearance = [urine creatinine (mg/dL) x urine volume (mL/min)
+ serum creatinine (mg/dL)] + body weight (kg).
(2) The results are expressed as mL/min/kg.
b. Endogenous creatinine clearance is used as a measure of glomerular filtration rate because
blood creatinine concentrations are rather constant. Most creatinine is filtered by the glomerulus;
tubular reabsorption does not occur.
c. Inaccurate estimation of the GFR is related to tubular secretion of creatinine, extra-renal
excretion of creatinine, and measurement of noncreatinine chromagens.
2. Exogenous creatinine and isohexol clearance
a. These compounds are administered to the patient and clearance is measured as outlined above
URINARY SYSTEM
279
3. Inulin clearance for measuring GFR and p-aminohippuric acid clearance for measuring renal
plasma flow, respectively, are more accurate tests but are available only at large research centers.
F. Urine electrolyte clearance ratios (fractional clearances)
1. Fractional clearance or excretion (FE) expresses the proportion of a substance that is excreted in
the urine compared with that fltered through the glomerulus. Glomerular concentration is
equivalent to serum concentration of the analyte. Dietary intake and intestinal absorption of the
material affect interpretation of resultant values.
2. Electrolyte clearance may be quantified by comparison to the clearance of endogenous creatinine
(% creatinine clearance).
a. This procedure simultaneously measures the electrolyte and creatinine concentrations in single
urine and serum samples ("spot" measurements), allowing determination of electrolyte clearance
without knowledge of urine flow rate or volume.
b. The formula to calculate electrolyte clearance is
FE = (urine electrolyte/serum electrolyte) ÷ (urine creatinine/serum creatinine) x100.
3. Fractional dearance of sodium (FEva) is most commonly used
a. FEn, is increased (greater than l%) in tubular failure of any kind; however, clearance values can be
within the reference interval or decreased in acute glomerular disease.
b. FENa is decreased (less than 1%) in prerenal azotemia. It may be greater than 1% in animals
with prerenal azotemia that are receiving diuretics and in animals with renal azotemia.
4. Fractional dlearance of potassium (FEk)
a. Clinical use of FEs is controversial; values do not correlate well with 24-hour urine potassium
concentration.
b. Hypokalemia with a FEr of less than 6% is considered by some to represent nonrenal loss,
while a FEs of greater than 6% is due to renal loss
C. The clinical usefulness of evaluating potassium disorders by comparison of urine and serum
potassium concentrations, with and without aldosterone activity (transtubular potassium
 gradient), is uncertain.
5. Fractional dlearance of phosphorus (FEp) also is increased in renal failure, provided that oliguria
or anuria are not present.
6. Fractional excretion of bicarbonate (FEHcos ) is useful in human medicine for the classification
of renal tubular acidosis. The FEhcos is less than 5% to 10% in Type I RTA, greater than 15% in
Type II RIA, and 5% to 15% in Iype IV RIA.
7. Variability in intake and nonurinary excretion of electrolytes results in variability of the
 clearance ratios in healthy animals. These factors have limited the usefulness of electrolyte
fractional excretion to detect renal disease. Also, some laboratory instruments cannot quantitate
urinary electrolytes.
G. Miscellaneous alterations occurring in renal disease
1. Progressive nonregenerative anemia occurs in chronic renal disease (Case 15)
a. The mechanism of the anemia is multifactorial.
 b. The major factor is reduced erythropoietin secretion because of decreased functional renal
parenchyma
C. Hemorrhage, decreased erythrocyte lifespan, and bone marrow suppression by uremic toxins
are contributing factors.
2. Hyperphosphatemia is associated with decreased GFR (Cases 15, 17, 18, 19, 20).
a. Hyperphosphatemia is less significant in the cow because the kidney is not the major excretory
route for phosphorus.
b. Hypophosphatemia may be observed in horses with decreased GFR.
3. Hyperkalemia occurs when oliguria or anuria is associated with acidosis in renal failure (Case
20).
280
CHAPTER 9
4. Hypermagnesemia occurs in monogastric animals.
5. Polyuric renal failure can cause hypokalemia, especially in the cat and cow, but not in the
horse.
6. Metabolic (titration) acidosis frequently is associated with renal failure in the dog and cat. The
anion gap is increased due to uremic acids (Cases 15, 18).
7. Cows have a normal acid-base status or metabolic alkalosis because of rumen atony and HCl
sequestration. However, the anion gap will be high due to salts of uremic acids. Paradoxical
aciduria may occur when alkalosis, hypochloridemia, and hyponatremia coexist (Case 23).
 8. Hypercalcemia is common in horses with renal disease because the kidney is the major
excretory route of calcium
9. Hypocalcemia is usually observed in cattle with renal disease (Case 22), whereas
normocalcemia or slight hypocalcemia are the rule in dogs and cats (Cases 18, 19). Hypercalcemia
occasionally occurs in dogs with renal disease.
10. Hyponatremia and hypochloridemia may occur with renal disease, particularly in the horse and
cow (Cases 22, 23). The FEv. is increased due to tubular failure and sodium is lost into the urine.
11. In primary glomerular disease, severe proteinuria results in hypoproteinemia from
hypoalbuminemia (low A/G ratio). The tetrad of proteinuria (albuminuria), hypoproteinemia
(hypoalbuminemia), edema, and hypercholesterclemia (hyperlipidemia) is referred to as “"nephrotic
syndrome"(Case 19).
12. Some of the highest plasma fibrinogen concentrations are observed in bovine renal failure.
Fibrinogen values determined by heat precipitation may exceed 1,800mg/dL (Case 22).
13. Hyperamylasemia and hyperlipasemia may be associated with renal failure in the dog because
these enzymes are degraded and excreted by the kidney (Case 14).
REFERENCES
Adams LG, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, et al: 1992. Correlation of urine protein/creatinine ratio and
twenty-four-hour urinary protein excretion in normal cats and cats with surgically induced chronic
renal failure. J Vet Intern Med 6:36-40.
Allen IA, Jones RI, Pervance J: 1987. Microbiologic evaluation of canine urine: Direct microscopic
examination and preservation of specimen quality for culture. J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1289-1291.
contamination on the urine protein/creatinine ratio in the dog J Vet Intern Med 5:66-70.
Barsanti JA, Lees GE, Willard MD, Green RA: 1999. Urinary Disorders. In: Willard MD, Tvedten H,
Turnwald GH (eds): Small Animal Clinical Diagnosis by Laboratory Methods, 3rd ed. W.B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, pp. 108-135.
 Bayly WM, Brobst DF, Elfers RS, et al: 1986. Serum and urinary biochemistry and enzyme changes in
ponies with acute renal failure. Cornell Vet 76:306-316.
Berry WL, Leisewitz AL: 1996. Multifocal Aspergillus terreus discospondylitis in two German shepherd
dogs. J S Afr Vet Assoc 67:222-228
Bertone JJ, Iraub-Dargatz JL, Fettman MJ, et al: 1987. Monitoring the progression of renal failure in a
horse with polycystic kidney disease: Use of the reciprocal of serum creatinine concentration and
sodium sulfanilate clearance half-time. J Am Vet Med Assoc 19l:565-568
Biewenga WJ: 1986. Proteinuria in the dog: A clinicopathological study in 5l proteinuric dogs. Res Vet
Sci 4:257-264.
Billet J-PHG, Moore AH, Holt PE: 2002. Evaluation of a bladder tumor antigen test for the diagnosis of
      5  
URINARY SYSTEM
281
 Borjesson DL, Christopher MM, Ling GV: 1999. Detection of canine transitional cell carcinoma using a
bladder tumor antigen urine dipstick test. Vet Clin Pathol 28:33-38.
Brobst D: 1989. Urinalysis and associated laboratory procedures. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prart
19:929-949
Center SA, Smith CA, Wilkinson E, et al: 1987. Clinicopathologic, renal immunofluorescent, and light
microscopic features of glomerulonephritis in the dog: 4l cases (1975-1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc
190:81-90.
Center SA, Wilkinson E, Smith CA, et al: 1985. 24-hour urine protein/creatinine ratio in dogs with
      5 
Chew DJ, DiBartola SP: 1998. Interpretation of Canine and Feline Urinalysis. Ralston Purina Company,
St. Louis, MO.
DiBartola SP, De Morais HA: 2o0o. Disorders of Potassium: Hypokalemia and Hyperkalemia. In:
DiBartola SP (ed): Fluid Therapy in Small Animal Practice, 2nd ed. WB. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, pp.
91-93.
 DiBartola SP, Green RA, De Morais HA, et al: 1999. Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders. In: Willard
MD, Tvedten H, Turnwald GH (eds): Small Animal Clinical Diagnosis by Laboratory Methods, 3rd ed.
WB. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, pp. 97, 100.
DiBartola SP, Rutgers HC, Zack PM, et al: 1987. Clinicopathologic findings associated with chronic
DiBartola SP, Tarr MJ, Parker AT, et al: 1989. Clinicopathologic findings in dogs with renal amyloidosis:
59 cases (19761986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:358-364.
Echols S: 1999. Collecting diagnostic samples in avian patients. Vet Clin North Am Exot Anim Pract
2:636637.
Elliot J, Barber PJ: 1998. Feline chronic renal failure: Clinical findings in 80 cases diagnosed between
1992 and 1995. J Small Anim Pract 39:78-85
Fettman MJ: 1987. Evaluation of the usefulness of routine microscopy in canine urinalysis. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 190:892-896.
Fettman Mf: 1989. Comparison of urinary protein concentration and protein/creatinine ratio vs.
routine microscopy in urinalysis of dogs: 500 cases (1987-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:972-976.
Finco DR, Brown SA, Barsanti JA, et al: 1997. Reliability of using random urine samples for “spot"
determination of fractional excretion of electrolytes in cats. Am J Vet Res 58:1184-1187.
Finco DR: 1997. Kidney Function. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds): Clinical Biochemistry of
Domestic Animals, 5th ed. Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 441-484.
Finco DR, Tabaru H, Brown SA, et al: 1993. Endogenous creatinine clearance measurement of
glomerular filtration rate in dogs. Am J Vet Res 54:1575-1578.
Garry F Chew DJ, Hoffsis GF: 1990. Enzymuria as an index of renal damage in sheep with induced
aminoglycoside nephrotoxicosis. Am J Vet Res 5l:428-432.
Grauer GF, Greco DS, Behrend EN, et al: 1995. Estimation of quantitative enzymuria in dogs with
Vet Intern Med 9:324327.
Holan KM, Kruger JM, Gibbons SN, et al: 1997. Clinical evaluation of a leukocyte esterase test-strip
for detection of feline pyuria. Vet Clin Pathol 26:126-131.
282
CHAPTER 9
Hughes D: 1992. Polyuria and polydipsia. Compend Contin Eauc Prart Vet 14:1161
Kohn LW, Chew DJ: 1987. Laboratory diagnosis and characterizations of renal disease in horses. Vet
Clin North Am Equine Pract 3:585-615.
Lulich JP, Osborne CA: 199o. Interpretation of urine protein-creatinine ratios in dogs with glomerular
and nonglomerular disorders. Compend Contin Edur Prart Vet 12:59-72.
Lulich JP, Osborne CA, O'Brien TD, et al: 1992. Feline renal failure: Questions, answers, questions.
Compend Contin Edurc Pract Vet 14:127-152.
Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Moore FM, Brum SL, Brown L: 199l. Urine protein determination in dogs and cats: Comparison of
dipstick and sulfosalicylic acid procedures. Vet Clin Pathol 20: 95-97.
          '     
electrophoresis, and an immunoturbidimetric assay for measuring microalbuminuria in dogs. Vet Clin
Pathol 38:485-492.
Neiger RD, Hagemoser WA: 1985. Renal percent clearance ratios in cattle. Vet Clin Pathol 14:3l-35.
Newman DJ, Pugia MJ, Lott JA, et al: 20oo. Urinary protein and albumin excretion corrected by
      s
Osborne CA, Davis LS, Sanna J, et al: l99o. Identification and interpretation of crystalluria in domestic
    o      s
Palacio J, Liste F, Gascon M: 1997. Enzymuria as an index of renal damage in canine leishmaniasis. Vet
Rec 140:477-480.
Penny MD, Oleesky DA: 1999. Renal tubular acidosis. Ann Clin Biochem 36:408-422
Pressler BM, Vaden SL, Jensen WA, et al: 2008. Detection of canine microalbuminuria using
semiquantitative test strips designated for use with human urine. Vet Clin Pathol 3l:56-60.
Pugia MJ, Lott JA, Profitt JA, et al: 1999. High-sensitivity dye binding assay for albumin in urine. J Clin
Lab Anal 13:180-187.
Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR (eds): 1994. Avian Medicine: Principles and Applications. Wingers
Publishing Company, Lake Worth, FL.
Ross DL, Neely AE: 1983. Textbook of Urinalysis and Body Fluids. Appleton-Century-Crofts, Norwalk,
CT.
Schultze AE, Jensen RK: 1989. Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of canine
urinary proteins for the analysis and differentiation of tubular and glomerular diseases. Vet Clin Pathol
18:93-97
Welles EG, Whatley EM, Hall AS, et al: 2006. Comparison of Multistix PRO dipsticks with other
biochemical assays for determining urine protein (UP), urine creatinine (UC), and UP:UC ratio in dogs
and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 35:3l-36.
Wallace JF, Pugia MJ, Lott JA, et al: 200l. Multisite evaluation of a new dipstick for albumin, protein,
and creatinine. J Clin Lab Anatysis 15:231-235.
CHAPTER
10
MUSCLE
Robert L. Hall, DVM, PhD, and Holly S. Bender, DVM, PhD
Muscle diseases characterized by degeneration, necrosis, or inflammation with degeneration/necrosis may be
detected with clinical chemistry techniques. The common feature of these conditions is disruption of
muscle cell membranes and release of enzymes and cytoplasmic contents into surrounding blood and
lymph. Muscular atrophy and neoplastic conditions not associated with cell membrane disruption usually
do not cause changes in standard clinical chemistry tests.
1. SERUM ENZYMES oF MUSCLE ORIGIN
A. Creatine kinase (CK)
1. CK is critical to muscle energy production. CK makes adenosine triphosphate (ATP) available
for muscle contraction by catalyzing the transfer of a high-energy phosphate bond from creatine
phosphate to adenosine diphosphate (ADP). CK also catalyzes the reverse reaction when muscles
are at rest. Muscle cells contain eight times more creatine phosphate than ATP, thereby providing a
reservoir of high-energy phosphate bonds for contraction.
brain. Liver has negligible CK activity.
3. CK is one of the most organ-specific clinical enzymes, as most serum CK activity is of muscle
origin.
4. CK is a dimeric enzyme with two subunits, designated B for brain and M for muscle. Three
principal isoenzyme types exist: CK-BB (CK,), CK-MB (CK2), and CK-MM (CK).
a. CK isoenzymes can be separated electrophoreticall, and the proportion of each determined.
CK-BB is the most anodal.
 b. CK isoenzymes may also be separated by species-specific immunological methods or by ion-
exchange chromatography.
c.
 CK-BB is present in brain, peripheral nerves, cerebrospinal fluid, and viscera.
d. CK-MB is present in cardiac muscle with relatively low activity in other tissues.
2.
 CK-MM is present in both skeletal and cardiac muscle.
f.
CK activity in serum is mostly CK-MM, followed by CK-BB, and very little, if any, CK-MB.
9. CK isoenzyme analysis has not been very informative in veterinary medicine and is rarely used
 in a clinical setting.
5. Erythrocytes contain very little CK, but enzymes and intermediates released from erythrocytes
may affect assay reactions, causing falsely increased activity when hemolysis is present. Hemolyzed
serum specimens are unsatisfactory for determination of CK activity.
6. Dilution of serum samples to reduce CK activity to an acceptable range for measurement may
paradoxically falsely increase enzymatic activity due to dilution of naturally occurring CK
inhibitors.
283
284
CHAPTER 10
7. Serum CK activity in healthy dogs varies with age and breed.
a. CK activity decreases with age; pups can have much higher CK activity than adult dogs.
b. Adult levels of CK activity are achieved by seven to 12 months of age.
c. Small breeds of dogs tend to have higher activities
8. Plasma CK half-life is short (less than three hours in dogs, approximately four hours in cattle,
less than two hours in horses).
9. Specimens analyzed for CK activity should be processed quickly.
  s n        
b. CK activity may diminish if a prolonged delay occurs between obtaining and analyzing the
serum specimen (e.g., transport via mail from the veterinary hospital to the laboratory)
c. If CK analysis must be delayed beyond 12 hours, serum or plasma should be frozen (-20°C) to
minimize loss of activity.
d. Loss of activity can be partially reversed through the use of reducing agents in the assay
system.
e. Serum CK activity is higher than plasma CK activity in the dog, and perhaps other species, due
to release of CK from platelets during clot formation.
B. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (Chapter 7)
1. AST catalyzes the reversible transamination of L-aspartate and 2-oxoglutarate to oxaloacetate
and glutamate. Oxaloacetate can enter the Krebs cycle. The enzyme was previously known as serum
glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT).
 2. AST has cytosolic and mitochondrial isoenzymes, and AST activity is present in almost all cells,
including red blood cells.
3. Serum AST activity is tissue-nonspecife, but muscle and liver are the major sources.
4. Plasma AST half-life is less than 12 hours in cats, approximately 12 hours in dogs,
approximately 18 hours in swine, and probably longer in horses and cattle.
5. Plasma AST half-life is longer than plasma CK half-life.
6. AST is relatively stable at room, refrigerator, and freezer temperatures.
7. Separate serum or plasma from cells immediately because imperceptible hemolysis may falsely
 increase AST activity.
C. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (Chapter 7)
1. ALT catalyzes the reversible transamination of L-alanine and 2-oxoglutarate to pyruvate and
glutamate. Pyruvate can be used for gluconeogenesis or enter the Krebs cycle. The enzyme was
previously known as serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT).
2. ALT is primarily a cytosolic enzyme considered liver-specifc in dog and cat; however, increases
in ALT activity have been reported with muscle diseases such as X-linked muscular dystrophy or
toxic myopathies.
 e    s     e s  a s a i
large animals is very low. Increased activity has been reported in myopathies of lambs, pigs, and
horses.
4. Plasma ALT half-life in dogs is considered approximately two and a half days. Plasma ALT
half-life is likely greater than that for AST or CK in most species.
D. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
1. LDH is a cytosolic enzyme present in all cells, and therefore all tissues, that catalyzes the
 reversible conversion of L-lactate to pyruvate.
2. Muscle, liver, and erythrocytes are usually the sources of high LDH activity in serum.
3. LDH is less useful than CK and AST for determining muscle damage because it lacks tissue
specificity and is significantly affected by even mild hemolysis.
4. LDH is a tetrameric enzyme made up of two subunits, H and M, to form five isoenzymes: LDH,
(H4), LDH, (H3M1), LDH, (H2M2), LDH4 (H1M3), and LDH, (M4). In general, isoenzymes with
M US CL E
285
mostly H subunits (LDH, and LDH) predominate in aerobic tissue and those with mostly M
subunits predominate in anaerobic tissue.
a. LDH isoenzymes can be separated electrophoretically, and the proportion of each determined
LDH, (H4) is the most anodal.
b. LDH, (H4) is heat stable; LDH-s are inactivated in serum when heated at 65°C for
30 minutes.
c. LDH, (H4) is the principal isoenzyme in cardiac muscle and kidney.
d. LDH, (M4) is the principal isoenzyme in skeletal muscle and erythrocytes.
2. Liver contains primarily LDH and LDH, (H1M3 and M4) in many species, but the liver
isoenzyme profile for cattle and sheep is more similar to heart.
f.  All tissues contain variable amounts of the five LDH isoenzymes, and even with electrophoretic
separation, the tissue source of increased serum LDH activity is often uncertain.
5. Separate serum or plasma from cells immediately because imperceptible hemolysis may falsely
increase LDH activity.
6. LDH is unstable at freezer temperatures (-20C), and more stable at refrigerator temperatures
(4°℃).
7. Plasma LDH half-life varies for each isoenzyme, with LDH, (H4) the longest and LDH, (M4) the
shortest.
E. Aldolase
1. Aldolase in muscle (also called aldolase A) is a cytosolic enzyme that catalyzes the cleaving of
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate to form glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate in
the glycolytic utilization of fructose for energy.
2. Aldolase has been used to investigate skeletal muscle disorders, but isoenzymes exist in multiple
tissues, including liver and heart.
3. Aldolase is generally considered inferior to CK for diagnosis of skeletal muscle disorders because
CK has better diagnostic sensitivity and greater ease of measurement in the laboratory.
Il. DIAGNoSTIC SIGNIFICANCE Of CK, ASt, AND LDH
A. Increased serum CK, AST, and LDH activities occur with degenerative or necrotizing muscle injury.
Diseases associated with increased serum activity of these enzymes are listed in Table l0.l.
1. CK is the most sensitive serum enzyme indicator of striated muscle damage.
a. CK is the enzyme of choice to detect skeletal muscle damage.
b. Serum CK activity increases within four to six hours after muscle injury, and typically reaches
maximum levels in six to 12 hours
c. Serum CK activity returns to the reference interval within 48 to 72 hours once muscle injury
abates.
d. Persistently high serum CK activity indicates continued muscle injury.
2. The magnitude of increased serum CK activity generally correlates with the extent of muscle
injury, but exceptions occur. Only marked (e.g., greater than 5,0oo IU/L) or moderate but
persistent increases (e.g., greater than 2,000 IU/L) are considered clinically significant.
f.  Minor increases of serum CK activity are considered more significant in cats because of smaller
muscle mass and comparatively low CK activity in cat muscle. However, anorexic cats can exhibit
increased serum CK activity in the absence of diseases directly affecting muscle.
2. Serum AST activity increases slower than serum activities of CK and LDH following muscle
injury, increased serum AST activity may persist several days after muscle injury abates.
3. Serum LDH activity increases following muscle injury are less apparent than those for CK and AST
and more difficult to assess because of the broad tissue distribution of LDH.
B. Serum CK and LDH isoenzymes have some tissue specificity
TABLE 10.1
WITH SEVERE DISRUPTION OF MUSCLE CELL MEMBRANES MAY PRESENT WITH MYOGLOBINURIA.
lnflarmmatory myopathies
Respiratory chain defect (Arabian horses)
 lnfectious
Muscular dystrophy (cattle, sheep, dogs, cats,
Bacterial
chickens)
Clostridial myositis
Myophosphorylase deficiency (cattle)
lrmmune-mediated Streptococcus equi infections
Myotonia (dogs, goats, horses)
Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae
Chloride-channel myotonia (goats)
Pasteurella multocida myositis (cats)
 Phosphofructokinase deficiency (English
 Staphylococcal amd streptococcal myositis
Springer Spaniels)
(dogs)
Lysosomal alpha-polysaccharide storage
Parasitic
myopathy (horses)
Hepatozoon canis
 Metabolic or unknown cause
Neospora caninum
Otobius megnini (equine ear tick)
Anesthesia (horses, swine)
 Associated muscle cramping
Canine exertional rhabdomyolysis in racing
Sarcocystis spp.
Greyhounds
Toxoplasma gondii
Capture myopathy
Trypanosoma cruzi
Equine rhabdomyolysis (paralytic
Viral
myoglobinuria, azoturia, Monday morming
Blue tongue
disease, tying-up syndrome)
Bovine ephermeral fever
Hyperadrenocorticism (dogs, horses)
Bovine virus diarrhea
Hypokalemic polymyopathy (cats)
Equine herpesvirus 1
Hypothyroidism (dogs, horses)
 Equine infectious anemia
Malignant hyperthermia (swine, dogs)
Equine influenza virus A2
 Porcine stress syndrome
 Malignant catarrhal fever
Toxic
Noninfectious
Blister beetle toxicosis
Derrmatomyositis (dogs)
Bracken ferm (myocardial necrosis in horses)
Eosinophilic myositis (dogs, cattle)
Cassia sp. (coffee weed, castor bean, sicklepod)
lmmune-mediated polymyositis (dogs, cats)
toxicosis (cattle, horse)
Masticatory muscle myositis (dogs)
Copper poisoning (sheep)
Gossypol toxicosis (cattle, horse)
Iraumatic myopathies
Horsetail (Equisetum arvense) (horses)
Accidental
lonophore-induced myocardial and skeletal
Capture myopathy (birds)
muscle degeneration from
CNS disease (especially with seizures)
monensin, lasalocid, maduramicin, or
Extreme exercise
salinomysin (horse, ruminants, turkey)
Post-operative
Organophosphate toxicosis
Post-cardiac resuscitation
 Nutritional
Prolonged recumbency of large animals (downer
Anorexia (cats)
animals)
Thiamine (vitamin B,) deficiency
Imtrarmuscular injections of irritating substances
Destruction of thiamine in heat (above loo°C)
Gastrocnemius rupture (horses)
processed diets (dogs, cats)
Secondary to joint diseases
Excessive thiaminase ingestion
Toumiquet syndrome
Bracken fern (horses)
Vitamin E/selenium deficiency (calves, lambs,
Degenerative myopathies
yearling catle, foals, kids, swine, dogs.
 Inherited or congenital
ostriches)
Lysosomal alpha-l,4-glucosidase deficiency
Horsetail (Equisetum arvense) (horses)
(dogs, Shorthorn and Brahman cattle)
lschemic myopathies
Debranching enzyme deficiency (dogs, foals)
Aortic thrombosis (cats)
Hyperkalermic periodic paralysis (horses)
Bacterial endocarditis
Mitochondrial myopathy
Diroflariasis
 Decreased cytochrorme C oxidlase (Sheep Dogs)
lliac thrormbosis (horses, calves)
286
M US CL E
287
1. Serum CK-MM and LDH5 (M4) activities increase in greater proportion following skeletal
muscle injury.
 2. Serum CK-MB and LDHl (H4) activities increase in greater proportion following cardiac muscle
 injury. However, CK-MB has not proven effective for diagnosing equine cardiac muscle injury.
3. Serum LDHl (H4) activity increases in hemolytic disease but also hemolyzed samples
4. In general, determination of serum CK and LDH isoenzyme patterns have not proven valuable
or practical for clinical veterinary medicine. Cardiac troponins are proving to be more sensitive,
specific, and practical for assessing cardiac muscle injury.
C. Serum CK activity can be affected by minor muscle injuries unrelated to primary muscle disease.
1. Placement of electrodes for electromyography increases serum CK activity but usually not above
the reference interval.
2. Intramuscular injections increase serum CK activity. Irritating drugs (e.g., ketamine) or drug
vehicles can cause dramatic increases lasting up to one week.
3. Traumatic venipuncture, even in the absence of hemolysis, can increase serum CK activity. Sample
contamination with perivenous connective tissue or muscle can occur.
4. Strenuous exercise in dogs and horses increases serum CK and LDH activities.
a.
Rarely more than three-fold baseline after light exercise
b. Physical training minimizes post-exercise increases.
5. Animal shipping may cause increased serum CK activity
D. Cerebrospinal fluid (CsF) CK activity originates from the brain and may increase with central
nervous system (CNS) disease.
1. Increased CSF-CK activity does not affect serum CK activity.
2. Increased serum CK activity associated with CNS disease likely originates from injury to muscle
cells during convulsions (e.g., involuntary muscle contractions or contusions) or prolonged
recumbency.
E. Increased serum LDH activity has been associated with canine lymphoma.
F. Lymphoma in cattle is associated with high serum LDH activity in about 70% of affected animals
1. Serum LDH activities overlap between clinically healthy and affected cattle
 2. Serum LDH activity is not elevated for cattle with persistent lymphocytosis
G. CK, AST, and LDH activities are used to diagnose skeletal muscle disease in birds.
1. As in mammals, serum CK activity is the most muscle-specific indicator.
 2. Hemolysis markedly increases avian serum LDH activity.
Ill. OTHER LABORATORY FINDINGS IN MUSCLE DISEASE
A. Troponins
1. Troponins are globular proteins bound to tropomyosin that help modulate the interaction
between actin and myosin within the myofibril of striated muscle.
a. Three troponin proteins form a regulatory complex: troponin I, troponin I, and troponin C.
b. Troponin I and T have genetically distinct cardiac isoforms and are therefore useful for
evaluating cardiac muscle injury.
c. Cardiac troponins I and T (cTnl and cTnT) are considered the markers of choice for acute
cardiac injury in humans, replacing CK-MB
cross-react with cardiac troponins in animals.
e. Many functional assay systems exist for cInI. The cTnT assay is limited to one vendor and less
available.
f There is no clear diagnostic advantage to measuring both cTnl and cTnT.
288
CHAPTER 10
2. Cardiac troponins are released into blood by degenerating/necrotic cardiac muscle cells.
3. Serum cardiac troponin concentrations are normally very low, and increases are apparent within
a few hours of cardiac muscle injury.
4. Cardiac troponins have short half-lives (hours) so serum levels decrease quickly (one or two
days) unless cardiac muscle injury is ongoing.
5. Increased serum cardiac troponin concentrations have also been observed with strenuous
exercise in horses and renal failure.
B. Natriuretic peptides
1. Iwo natriuretic peptides, atrial or A-type (ANP) and brain or B-type (BNP), have been studied
as markers for cardiac muscle function/dysfunction.
2. Natriuretic peptides are released as prohormones from cardiac muscle in response to mechanical
stress or cardiac muscle stretching, most often due to increased pressure.
3. The prohormones are cleaved into inactive N-terminal fragments (NTproANP or NTproBNP)
and active C-terminal fragments (ANP and BNP).
4. Active ANP and BNP contribute to cardiovascular homeostasis by inhibiting the renin-
angiotensin-aldosterone system, promoting vasodilatation, increasing natriuresis and diuresis, and
decreasing arterial blood pressure.
5. Assays have been developed for the inactive N-terminal fragments and active C-terminal
fragments.
a. BNP and NTproBNP are used in human medicine as sensitive but nonspecific markers for
congestive heart failure.
b. Human BNP and NTproBNP assays do not cross-react well with animal peptides, s0
development of species-specific assays has limited use of these markers until recently.
c. Half-lives for the inactive fragments may be longer than those for active fragments, making
the inactive fragments (NTproANP and NTproBNP) more attractive as potential markers of heart
disease.
C. Myoglobin
1. Myoglobin is a heme protein responsible for transporting and storing oxygen within muscle
cells. Myoglobin is normally absent in serum.
2. Myoglobin is considered a specific and sensitive indicator of muscle necrosis.
a. Myoglobin released from muscle enters blood immediately.
b. CK and AST frst enter lymph, delaying increased serum activity.
c. Serum myoglobin falls rapidly once muscle injury abates.
3. Myoglobin is a low-molecular-weight monomer that, unlike hemoglobin, does not bind
significantly to plasma proteins.
4. Myoglobin readily passes through the glomerulus, and plasma may not become discolored.
5. Both myoglobin and hemoglobin cause a positive urine occult blood reaction on urinalysis test
strips (Chapter 9) and pink to red to brown urine depending on concentration and degradation/
oxidation.
a. An ammonium sulfate precipitation test to differentiate myoglobin from hemoglobin is
unreliable (in theory, hemoglobin precipitates in an 80% ammonium sulfate solution, but
myoglobin does not)
b. Myoglobinuria is typically associated with other evidence of muscle injury normal plasma
color, and normal hematocrit
c. Hemoglobinuria is typically associated with other evidence of hemolysis (e.g., low hematocrit),
pink to red plasma, and no supporting evidence for muscle injury.
6. Myoglobin can be measured in serum or urine by a variety of immunoassays but they are used
infrequently in clinical veterinary medicine.
M US CL E
289
D. Potassium
1. Intracellular fluid contains much more potassium than extracellular fluid
2. Degeneration or necrosis of a large muscle mass may release enough potassium to cause
hyperkalemia.
a. Correlation between hyperkalemia and increased muscle serum enzyme activity may be poor.
b. Hyperkalemia is more commonly associated with disorders of acid-base and electrolyte balance
(Chapter 5).
3. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in Quarter horses is due to skeletal muscle sodium channel
defects and often results in hyperkalemia.
a. Hyperkalemia is present during or immediately following clinical signs of disease (e.g., muscle
 fasciculations, collapse) but not between episodes.
b. Serum CK activity may be mildly increased or within the reference interval.
4. Hypokalemic polymyopathy may occur in cats with chronic renal failure or fed acidifying diets.
Hypokalemia and increased serum CK activity are typical.
E. Lactate (Chapters 5 and 6)
1. Lactate is a byproduct of anaerobic glycolysis produced primarily by skeletal muscle,
erythrocytes, brain, skin, and renal medulla.
2. Blood lactate concentration reflects a balance between lactate production, metabolism by the
liver (used for gluconeogenesis), and elimination in urine.
3. Plasma lactate increases markedly after exercise in dogs with exercise-induced mitochondrial
and lipid storage myopathies and Labrador Retrievers with hereditary myopathy
4. Meticulous sample acquisition and handling are esential for lactate analysis in whole blood or
plasma.
a. Blood should be collected into tubes containing sodium fluoride and potassium oxalate,
chilled, and centrifuged within 15 minutes. Fluoride inhibits anaerobic glycolysis and lactate
production by erythrocytes.
b. Blood lactate can increase if the patient struggles during venipuncture (muscle activity) or if
the vein is held off for a prolonged period (venous stasis and local hypoxia).
c. Blood lactate also can increase after a meal.
F. Dystrophin and muscular dystrophy
    n        n  
of a transmembrane protein complex that connects the muscle fber to extracellular matrix.
 2. An X-linked inherited deficiency of dystrophin causing muscular dystrophy has been described
in dogs and cats. The disorder is characterized by progressive muscle degeneration/necrosis with
hypertrophy of some muscle groups, and increased serum muscle enzyme activities.
3. Dystrophin in muscle can be assessed by immunocytochemistry or immunoblot techniques.
4. Cases of canine muscular dystrophy without dystrophin deficiency have been reported.
G. Acetylcholine receptor antibodies and myasthenia gravis
1. Immunoprecipitation tests are used to detect circulating autoantibodies to acetylcholine
 receptors in dogs and cats with immune-mediated myasthenia gravis.
2. Antibodies are absent in congenital (non-immune-mediated) myasthenia gravis.
H. Erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase activity and selenium deficiency
1. Decreased erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase activity is associated with selenium deficiency
because selenium is a cofactor for the enzyme.
2. Serum vitamin E and selenium concentrations also can be measured.
1. Thiamine (vitamin B,) deficiency
1. Although infrequent to rare, thiamine deficiency may cause myocardial necrosis as well as CNS
disease.
2. Increased serum CK activity may not be apparent.
290
CHAPTER 10
REFERENCES
Aktas M, Auguste D, Concorder D, et al: 1994. Creatine kinase in dog plasma: Preanalytical factors of
variation, reference values, and diagnostic significance. Res Vet Sci 56:30-36.
Apple FS, Henderson RA: 1999. Cardiac Function. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER (eds): Tietz Textbook of
Cliniral Chemistry. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 1178-1203.
Balogh N, Gaal T, Ribiczeyne PS, et al: 200l. Biochemical and antioxidant changes in plasma and
erythrocytes of pentathlon horses before and after exercise. Vet Clin Pathol 30:214-218.
Barth AI, Kommers GD, Salles MS, et al: 1994. Coffee senna (Senna occidentalis) poisoning in cattle in
Brazil. Vet Human Toxicol 36:541-545.
Bastianello SS, Fourie N, Prozesky L, et al: 1995. Cardiomyopathy of ruminants induced by the litter of
poultry fed on rations containing the ionophore antibiotic, maduramicin. Il. Macropathology and
histopathology. Onderstepoort J Vet Res 62:5-18.
Bender HS: 2003. Muscle. In: Latimer KS, Mahaffey EA, Prasse KW (eds): Duncan and Prasses
Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical Pathology, 4th ed. Iowa State Press, Ames, IA, pp. 260-269.
Benson JE, Ensley SM, Carson TL, et al: 1998. Lasalocid toxicosis in neonatal calves. J Vet Diagn Invest
10:210-214.
Bjurstrom S, Carlsten J, Thoren-Tolling K, et al: 1995. Distribution and morphology of skeletal muscle
lesions after experimental restraint stress in normal and stress-susceptible pigs. Zentralbl Veterinarmed
A 42:575-587.
Blot S: 2000. Disorders of the Skeletal Muscles. In: Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds): Textbook of
Veterinary Internal Medicine Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 5th ed. WB. Saunders Co., Philadelphia,
pp. 684-690.
Boemo CM, Tucker JC, Huntington PJ, et al: 199l. Monensin toxicity in horses. An outbreak resulting
in the deaths of ten horses. Aust Equine Vet 9:l03-107.
Boyd JW: 1983. The mechanisms relating to increases in plasma enzymes and isoenzymes in diseases
of animals. Vet Clin Pathol 12:9-24.
Braund KG: 1997. Idiopathic and exogenous causes of myopathies in dogs and cats. Vet Med
92:629-634.
Brown C: 2002. Rhabdomyolysis. In: Brown C, Bertone J (eds): The 5-Minute Veterinary Consult: Equine,
Ist ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 926-929.
Cardinet GH: 1997. Skeletal Muscle Function. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds): Clinical
Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. Academic Press, San Diego, pp. 407-440.
Cavaliere MJ, Calore EE, Haraguchi M, et al: 1997. Mitochondrial myopathy in Senna occidentalis-seed-
fed chicken. Ecotoxicol Environ Safety 37:18l-185.
Child G: 2000. Myopathy. In: Tilley LP, Smith FWK (eds): The 5-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and
Feline, 2nd ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 990-993.
Christopher MM, O'Neill S: 2000. Effect of specimen collection and storage on blood glucose and
lactate concentrations in healthy, hyperthyroid and diabetic cats. Vet Clin Pathol 29:22-28
Connolly DJ, Guitian J, Boswood A, et al: 2005. Serum troponin I levels in hyperthyroid cats before
and after treatment with radioactive iodine. J Feline Med Surg 7:289-300.
MUSCLE
291
Cornelisse CJ, Schott HC, Olivier NB, et al: 20o0. Concentration of cardiac troponin I in a horse with
a ruptured aortic regurgitation jet lesion and ventricular tachycardia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:231-235.
Daugschies A, Hintz J, Henning M, et al: 2000. Growth performance, meat quality and activities of
glycolytic enzymes in the blood and muscle tissue of calves infected with Sarcocystis cruzi. Vet
Parasitol 88:7-16.
 De La Corte FD, Valberg SJ, MacLeay JM, et al: 1999. Glucose uptake in horses with polysaccharide
storage myopathy. Am J Vet Res 60:458-462
Divers TJ, Kraus MS, Jesty SA, et al: 2o09. Clinical findings and serum cardiac troponin I
concentrations in horses after intragastric administration of sodium monensin. J Vet Diagn Invest
21:338-343.
Duncan JR, Prasse KW, Mahaffey EA: 1994. Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical Pathology. Iowa
State University Press, Ames, IA, pp. I84-I87.
Eades SC, Bounous Dl: 1997. Laboratory Profiles of Equine Diseases. Mosby, St. Louis.
Edwards CM, Belford CJ: 1995. Hypokalaemic polymyopathy in Burmese cats. Aust Vet Pract 25:58-60.
anorexia in cats. J Vet Intern Med 1l:913.
Fonfara S, Loureiro J, Swift S, et al: 20l0. Cardiac troponin I as a marker for severity and prognosis of
cardiac disease in dogs. Vet J 184:334-339.
Gaschen F, Gaschen L, Seiler G, et al: 1998. Lethal peracute rhabdomyolysis associated with stress and
Gunes V, Atalan G, Citil M, et al: 2008. Use of cardiac troponin kits for the qualitative determination
of myocardial cell damage due to traumatic reticuloperitonitis in cattle. Vet Record 162:5l4-517.
Gunes V, Ozcan K, Citil M, et al: 20lo. Detection of myocardial degeneration with point-of-care
cardiac troponin assays and histopathology in lambs with white muscle disease. Vet J 184:376-378.
Haraguchi M, Gorniak SL, Calore EE, et al: 1998. Muscle degeneration in chicks caused by Senna
occidentalis seeds. Avian Pathol 27:346-351.
Harris PA, Mayhew I: 1998. Musculoskeletal Disease. In: Reed SM, Bayly WM (eds): Equine Internal
Medicine, lst ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 37l-426.
Hinchcliff KW, Shaw LC, Vukich NS, et al: 1998. Effect of distance traveled and speed of racing on
body weight and serum enzyme activity of sled dogs competing in a long-distance race. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 213:639-644.
Hoffmann WE, Solter PF, Wilson BW: 1999. Clinical Enzymology In: Loeb WF, Quimby FW (eds): The
Clinical Chemistry of Laboratory Animals, 2nd ed. Taylor and Francis, Philadelphia, pp. 399-454.
Holbrook TC, Birks EK, Sleeper MM, et al: 2006. Endurance exercise is associated with increased
plasma cardiac troponin I in horses. Equine Vet J Suppl 36:27-31.
Holmgren N, Valberg S: 1992. Measurement of serum myoglobin concentrations in horses by
immunodiffusion. Am J Vet Res 53:957-560.
Horie Y, Tsubaki M, Katou A, et al: 2008. Evaluation of NT-pro BNP and CT-ANP as markers of
concentric hypertrophy in dogs with a model of compensated aortic stenosis. J Vet intern Med
22:1118-1123.
Kramer JW, Hoffmann WE: 1997. Clinical Enzymology. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds):
292
CHAPTER 10
Kraus MS, Jesty SA, Gelzer AR, et al: 2010. Measurement of plasma cardiac troponin I concentration
by use of a point-of-care analyzer in clinically normal horses and horses with experimentally induced
cardiac disease. Am J Vet Res 71:55-59.
Lappin MR: 1998. Polysystemic Protozoal Diseases. In: Nelson RW, Couto CG (eds): Small Animal
Internal Medicine, 2nd ed. Mosby, St. Louis, pp. 1313-1324.
Leonardi F Passeri B, Fusari A, et al: 2008. Cardiac troponin I (cInl) concentration in an ovine model
of myocardial ischemia. Res Vet Sci 85:141-144.
Lewis HB, Rhodes DC: 1978. Effects of I.M. (intramuscular) injections on serum creatine
phosphokinase (CPK) values in dogs (Diagnostic or prognostic importance). Vet Clin Pathol 7:1l-12.
MacDonald KA, Kittleson MD, Munro C, et al: 2003. Brain natriuretic peptide concentration in dogs
with heart disease and congestive heart failure. J Vet Intern Med 17:172-177.
 a sd  ix p  po i   1a 'af 1ed 's  ' a
activity and lactate concentration in Thoroughbred horses with recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis.
Am J Vet Res 61:1390-1395.
Mellanby RJ, Henry JP, Cash R, et al: 2009. Serum cardiac troponin I concentrations in cattle with
cardiac and noncardiac disorders. J Vet Intern Med 23:926-930
Meyer DJ, Harvey JW: 1998. Vterinary Laboratory Medicine: Interpretation and Diagnosis. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 157-186.
Moss DW, Henderson RA: 1999. Clinical Enzymology. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER (eds): Tietz Textbook
of Cliniral Chemistry. WB. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 617-721.
Mushi EZ, Isa JFW, Chabo RG, et al: 1998. Selenium-vitamin E responsive myopathy in farmed
ostriches (Struthio camelus) in Botswana. Avian Pathol 27:326-328.
Naylor JM: 1994. Equine hyperkalemic periodic paralysis: Review and implications. Can Vet J
35:279-285.
Nostell K, Haggstrom J: 2008. Resting concentrations of cardiac troponin I in fit horses and effect of
racing. J Vet Cardiol 10:105-109.
O'Brien PJ: 2008. Cardiac troponin is the most effective translational safety biomarker for myocardial
injury in cardiotoxicity. Toxicology 245:206-218.
O'Brien PJ, Smith DE, Knechtel TJ, et al: 2006. Cardiac troponin I is a sensitive, specific biomarker of
       
measurement of plasma atrial natriuretic peptide, B-type natriuretic peptide, and cardiac troponin I
concentrations. Am J Vet Res 68:42-47.
Panciera RJ, Ewing SA, Mathew JS, et al: 1999. Canine hepatozoonosis: Comparison of lesions and
parasites in skeletal muscle of dogs experimentally or naturally infected with Hepatozoon americanum.
Vet Parasitol 82:261-272.
Parent J: 1999. Neurologic Disorders. In: Willard MD, Tvedten H, Turnwald GH (eds): Small Animal
Clinical Diagnosis by Laboratory Methods, 3rd ed. WB. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 279-287.
Philbey AW: 1991. Skeletal myopathy induced by monensin in adult turkeys. Aust Vet J 68:250-251.
Podell M, Valentine BA, Cummings JF, et al: 1995. Electromyography in acquired equine motor neuron
disease. Prog Vet Neurol 6:128-134.
MUSCLE
293
Porciello F, Rishniw M, Herndon WE, et al: 2008. Cardiac troponin I is elevated in dogs and cats with
azotaemia renal failure and in dogs with non-cardiac systemic disease. Aust Vet J 86:390-394.
sp 8t u 1ap s-ou pue s ususi oo e na ' eo 'a osss ' yso
Intern Med 21:238-242.
Radostits OM, Gay CC, Blood DC, Hinchcliff, KW: 1999. Diseases of the Musculoskeletal System. In:
Radostits OM, Gay CC, Blood DC, Hinchcliff, KW (eds): Vterinary Medicine: A Textbook of the Diseases
of Cattle, Sheep, Pigs, Goats and Horses, 9th ed. Saunders, New York, pp. 551-578.
Ritchie BW: 1998. Interpreting the avian CBC and serum chemistry profile. Proc North Am Vet Conf
12:783-784
Sharkey LC, Berzina I, Ferasin L, et al: 2o09. Evaluation of serum cardiac troponin I concentration in
dogs with renal failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc 234:767-770.
Shell LG: 1997. Diseases of Peripheral Nerve, Neuromuscular Junction, and Muscles, In: Leib MS,
Monroe WE (eds): Practical Small Animal Internal Medicine. WB. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 59l-612.
and Feline, 2nd ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 984-989, 994-995.
Shelton GD, Ho M, Kass PH: 2000. Risk factors for acquired myasthenia gravis in cats: 105 cases
(1986-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:55-57.
Solter PF: 2007. Clinical Biomarkers of Cardiac Injury and Disease. In: Proceedings of the ACVP/ASVCP
Annual Meetings, Savannah, Georgia.
Spratt DP, Mellanby RJ, Drury N, et al: 2005. Cardiac troponin I: Evaluation of a biomarker for
diagnosis of heart disease in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 46:139-145
Stockham SL, Scott MA: 2008. Fundamentals of Veterinary Clinical Pathology, 2nd ed. Blackwell, Ames,
IA, pp. 639-674.
Swenson CL, Graves TK: 1997. Absence of liver specificity for canine alanine aminotransferase (ALT).
Vet Clin Pathol26:26-28
Taylor SM: 1998. Disorders of Muscle. In: Nelson RW, Couto CG (eds): Small Animal Internal Medicine,
2nd ed. Mosby, St. Louis, pp. 1059-1075.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp.
417-420.
Valberg SJ, Hodgson DR, Carlson G, Parish, SM, Maas J: 2002. Diseases of Muscle. In: Smith BP (ed):
Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd ed. Mosby, St. Louis, pp. 1266-1269, 1271-1272, 1274-1291.
Valberg S, Jonsson L, Lindholm A, et al: 1993. Muscle histopathology and plasma aspartate
aminotransferase, creatine kinase and myoglobin changes with exercise in horses with recurrent
exertional rhabdomyolysis. Equine Vet J 25:11-16.
Valentine BA, Blue JT, Shelley SM, et al: 199o. Increased serum alanine aminotransterase activity
associated with muscle necrosis in the dog. J Vet Intern Med 4:140-143.
Valentine BA, Credille KM, Lavoie JP, et al: 1997. Severe polysaccharide storage myopathy in Belgian
and Percheron draught horses. Equine Vet J 29:220-225
294
CHAPTE R10
van Kimmenade RRJ, Januzzi JL: 2009. The evolution of the natriuretic peptides—Current applications
in human and animal medicine. J Vet Cardiol 11, Supplement 1:S9-S21
Varga A, Schober KE, Holloman CH, et al: 2009. Correlation of serum cardiac troponin I and
myocardial damage in cattle with monensin toxicosis. J Vet Intern Med 23:1108-1116.
Willins PA: 2002. White Muscle Disease. In: Brown C, Bertone J (eds): The 5-Minute Veterinary
Consult: Equine, Ist ed. Lippincott Williams and Willkins, Baltimore, pp. 1l134-1135.
CHAPTER
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Duncan C. Ferguson, VMD, PhD, and Margarethe Hoenig,
Dr med vet, PhD
PaRaThyroid Gland, Calcium, PhoSphorUs, And MaGNesiuM
Parathyroid function is integrated with thyroid parafollicular cell function and vitamin D metabolism
in the regulation of calcium and phosphorus homeostasis. Altered serum calcium and phosphorus
concentrations are often encountered coincidentally during screening with biochemical profles and
in animals with clinical signs of altered calcium metabolism. Magnesium abnormalities are of greatest
concern in ruminants due to feed intake, but also may be of concern in small animals with diabetic
ketoacidosis. An overview of major disorders involving calcium, phosphorus, parathormone, and
vitamin D metabolism is presented in Figure ll.1.
1. BASIC CONCEPTS
A. The ionized calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) regulates the response of parathyroid chief cells,
C-cells, and renal epithelial cells.
1. CaSR is present along the nephron on renal epithelial cells.
a. Stimulation of the CaSR by extracellular iCa concentration decreases NaCl, Ca, and Mg
 reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubule and decreases water reabsorption in the collecting
ducts.
b. Magnesium also is an agonist of the CaSR. Severe magnesium depletion decreases PTH
secretion, increases resistance to PTH, and impairs calcitriol synthesis.
B. Parathormone (PTH) and parathormone-related peptide (PTHrp)
1. PTH is produced by the parathyroid gland in response to hypocalcemia and, to a lesser extent,
in response to hypomagnesemia. Although serum phosphorus has no direct effect on PTH
secretion, hyperphosphatemia may cause a reciprocal decrease in serum calcium and, thus,
indirectly stimulate PTH release.
2. The net effect of PTH is increased serum calcium, decreased serum phosphorus, and increased
renal excretion of phosphorus. PTH promotes the following:
a. Calcium release from bone
b. Phosphorus excretion by the kidney
C. Arcelerated formation of the active form of vitamin D (1 ,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol) by
stimulation of the l-alpha-hydroxylase enzyme activity of the kidney
d. Calcium absorption from the gut
e. Calcium reabsorption by renal tubules
295
Primary Hyperparathyroidism
 Primary Hypoparathyroidism
Intestine
Blood
Intestine
Btood
>↑Ca:PO3
↑Ca²and PO
↓Ca"and PO3-
↓Ca: PO
absorption
ratio
absorption
ratio
↑PTH
↓PTH
Kidney
Kidney
Bone
Bone
↑Resorption
↓Resorption
(weak bones,
↑Ca
PU/PD ↓C?
↑PO²
↑VitaminD
fractures)
excretion
excretion
excretion
excretion
activation
↓Vitamin D activation
Nephrocalcinosis
Chronic Renal Failure
Intestine
业
Decreasednumberoffunctionatnephrons
Ca?+
Vitamin D
malabsorption
malabsorption
Metabolic
√ Formation of
√GFR
→↑PO” retention
acidosis
1,25-DHC
↓ Intestinal Ca”t and
Nutritional Secondary
↑lonized
↑Ca
-PO3
↑PTH
PQ² absorption
binding
Hyperparathyroidism
Ca".
↓Serurn Ca?+
Kidney
+
Bone
Blood
↑PTH
Renal Secondary
↓Ca and ↑PO3-
↑Resorption
Ca+(Jow normal)
↑Bone
resorption
secretion
Hyperparathyroidism
excretion
PO(low normal)
FIGURE 11.1.
 Overview of major disorders involving calcium, phosphorus, parathormone, and vitamin D
metabolism.
  n      a  i    
and phosphorus absorption from the intestine, increased release of calcium and phosphorus from bone, increased
renal retention of calcium, increased renal excretion of phosphate, and increased renal activation of vitamin D.
B. Primary hypoparathyroidism. Reduced PTH production by the parathyroid gland (because of agenesis, surgical
removal, or atrophy) results in reduced calciurm and phosphate absorption from the intestine, reduced release of
calcium and phosphorus from bone, increased renal excretion of calcium, decreased renal excretion of phosphate,
and reduced renal activation of vitarmin D.
C. Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism. With a reduction in functional nephrons in chronic renal failure,
metabolic acidosis develops. Metabolic acidosis increases the ionized calcium fraction. This effect is mitigated by
reduced activation of vitamin D to l,25-DHC by the kidney, which results in a decreased serum calcium
concentration and increased retention of phosphate by the kidney. Ihe serum calcium concentration may be
further decreased via the calcium:phosphate solubility product. The reduction in serum calcium concentration
leads to a secondary increase in PTH secretion, resulting in increased calcium and phosphate release from bone.
D. Nutritional or malabsorption secondary hyperparathyroidism. PTH concentration increases in response to
decreased dietary intake of calcium and/or vitarmin D or malabsorption that results in reduced availability of these
nutrients. The increased PIH concentration promotes renal retention of calcium, renal excretion of phosphate, and 
bone resorption (resulting in rubberjaw). Serum calcium and phosphate concentrations generally are decreased but
remain within the reference interval.
 PIH = parathyroid hormone
Ca²+ = calcium
PO4² = phosphate
1,25-DHC = 1,25 cihydroxycholecalciferol
GFR = glomerular fltration rate
PU/PD = polyuria and polydipsia
296
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 
297
 ss   nax hid s  i i  s dd s
physiological role of PTHrp also may include stimulation of placental calcium transport in the
newborn.
4. Quantitation of PTH and PTHrp
a. A radioimmunoassay is commercially available to quantitate intact PTH in the serum of dogs,
cats, and horses.
b. A research radioimmunoassay is available for PTHrp produced by round cell malignancies
(e.g., lymphoma)
C. Calcitonin (thyrocalcitonin)
1. Calcitonin is produced by thyroid parafollicular cells (C cells) in response to hypercalcemia.
2. Calcitonin's effects are to decrease serum calcium and phosphorus. It produces these changes
through the following mechanisms:
a. Inhibition of PTH-stimulated bone resorption
 b. Increased phosphorus excretion by the kidney
3. In concert with PTH, calcitonin regulates blood calcium concentration within precise limits and
tempers the PTH resorptive action on bone.
4. Although a research assay has been developed for dogs, cattle, horses, and birds, validated assays
for quantitation of calcitonin are not commercially available for animals.
D. Metabolically active vitamin D
1. 25-hydroxylation of vitamin D to 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (25-OH-D3) occurs in the liver
1-alpha hydroxylation of 25-OH-D3 to 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol occurs under PTH regulation
in the kidney.
2. 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol is the metabolically active form of vitamin D. It promotes calcium
and phosphorus absorption by the intestinal mucosa and may facilitate PTH action on bone
3. Immunoassays and HPLC procedures to quantitate 25-OH-D3 and 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
are available at specialty diagnostic laboratories. The major application of these assays is to confirm
vitamin D toxicosis.
E. Calcium
1. Total serum calcium exists in three forms
a. Ionized calcium (iCa) accounts for approximately 50% of total serum calcium, and is the most
important biologically active fraction.
b. Protein-bound calcium represents approximately 40% of total serum calcium. Albumin is
the major protein to which calcium is bound in serum. Protein-bound calcium (pCa) acts as a
buffering system, diminishing acute changes in the iCa fraction.
C. Chelated or complexed calcium and magnesium is forrmed largely with phosphate, citrate,
bicarbonate, sulfate, and lactate anions, and accounts for approximately l0% of total serum
calcium.
2. Ionized calcium
a. Only ionized calcium is biologically active in bone formation, neuromuscular activity, cellular
biochemical processes, and blood coagulation.
b. The proportion of total calcium that is ionized is affected by acid-base balance.
(1)  Alkalosis decreases serum ionized calcium concentration.
(a)  Metabolic alkalosis may cause subclinical hypocalcemia.
(b)  Milk fever in cows is the result of an alkalizing diet supplying more cations (Na, K, Ca
and Mg) than anions.
(c)  Alkalosis blunts tissue responses to PTH.
(2) Acidosis increases serum ionized calcium concentration.
c. Ionized calcium is almost always increased in hypercalcemic conditions
298
CHAPTER 11
d. Ionized calcium is almost always decreased (less than 6.5 mg/dL or 1.3 mmol/L) in severe
hypocalcemia.
3. The protein-bound fraction and total serum calcium decrease in hypoalbuminemia, but ionized
calcium remains within the reference interval.
a. Although hypocalcemia is found in hypoalbuminemic conditions, clinical signs of
hypocalcemia do not occur.
b. In hypoalbuminemic dogs, measured serum calcium can be adjusted with a correction formula
to help exclude the possibility of functional hypocalcemia:
adjusted calcium (mg/dL) = 3.5-albumin (g/dL) + measured calcium (mg/dL)
C. An alternative formula uses total protein measurements:
adjusted calcium (mg/dL)= measured calcium (mg/dL)-(0.4X serum protein [g/dL])+ 3.3 
d. Research and clinical studies have demonstrated that ionized calcium does not always
parallel the predictions of these formulae. Therefore, direct measurement of ionized calcium is
preferred.
2. In dogs, serum total calcium overestimates normocalcemia and underestimates hypocalcemia.
f. Use of a calcium adjustment formula to correct tCa to total protein or albumin concentration
overestimates hypercalcemia and underestimates hypocalcemia.
4. Dietary intake of calcium seldom affects the serum calcium concentration directly.
a. Reduced intake of calcium is accommodated by increased PTH activity, and normocalcemia
occurs.
b. Increased calcium intake is balanced by exogenous fecal loss and urinary excretion.
5. Special comments about horses
a. Compared to other species, horses have been noted as having high serum total Ca and iCa
poorly regulated intestinal Ca absorption, high urinary fractional clearance of calcium, low serum
concentrations of vitamin D metabolites, and an increased Ca setpoint.
b. Reduced renal excretion of calcium causes hypercalcemia in some horses with renal disease;
however, renal failure in other species usually does not produce hypercalcemia (Chapter 9).
6. Methods of measurement
a. Colorimetric
(1) Colorimetric methods measure total serum calcium (i.e., ionized, protein-bound, and
complexed forms of calcium)
b. Ion-selective electrodes
(1) Special ion-selective electrodes are required to measure ionized calcium, the biologically
active form of this metal.
(2) Samples must be maintained anaerobically at 37°C, which limits clinical utility of this test
method.
(3) The amount and type of heparin used for whole blood or plasma samples also may affect
the measurement of iCa
(a) Zinc heparin leads to overestimation of iCa due to decrease in pH, which displaces Ca
 from proteins.
(b) Lithium heparin leads to underestimation of iCa.
(c)Consistency in the blood/heparin volume ratios is important unless dry heparin is
used.
c. Urinary calcium excretion
(1) Differentiation of diseases causing abnormal serum calcium concentrations can be
 facilitated by measuring urinary calcium excretion.
(2) A 24-hour urine collection is made, and the amount of calcium excreted/24 hours is
determined. Difficulty of sample collection limits the practical value of this technique.
ENdOCRiNE SYSTEM
299
(3) A simpler method is to determine the fractional clearance of calcium on samples of serum
and urine collected at the same time.
FE =(urine Ca++/serum Ca++) x (serum creatinine/urine creatinine)
See Chapter 9 for additional discussion on fractional clearance of electrolytes
F. Phosphorus
1. Phosphorus, in its various anionic forms, functions with phosphoric acid as a buffer system in
body fluids. However, acid-base balance is evaluated by measuring components of the bicarbonate
buffer system instead of the phosphate buffer system because the latter is predominately an
intercellular ion (Chapter 5).
2. Serum phosphorus is regulated primarily by the kidneys. When the tubular reabsorption
maximum is exceeded, phosphaturia occurs.
a. PTH may enhance phosphaturia by decreasing tubular reabsorption of phosphorus.
b. Dietary intake of phosphorus may directly affect the serum phosphorus concentration.
c. Abnormal serum phosphorus concentration is caused by altered dietary concentrations.
decreased renal excretion,and hormonal imbalances that affect serum calcium concentration.
3. Methods of measurement
a. Colorimetric methods measure inorganic phosphate that is present in bodily fluids as HPO3
and H,PO (primarily the former)
 b. Hemolyzed serum may cause falsely high or falsely low phosphorus values, depending upon
the specific assay.
C. Young animals have higher serum phosphorus concentrations than adults due to active skeletal
growth.
d. Urinary excretion over 24 hours or fractional renal clearance determination may help evaluate
phosphorus metabolism. Fractional clearance of phosphorus is determined in the same manner as
fractional clearance of calcium.
G. Magnesium
 jo s n  i     n sn   
e wiu oq-d i sai oiog szua Aue no oo e uiq i
complexed magnesium have not been investigated.
 2. Serum magnesium concentration depends on dietary intake and is regulated by
mineralocorticoids and PTH.
3. Colorimetric laboratory methods are used to measure serum and urine magnesium
concentrations.
4. Abnormal magnesium metabolism and associated diseases are described primarily in ruminants.
However, magnesium and phosphate depletion has been documented in insulin-treated dogs with
diabetic ketoacidosis.
5. Magnesium concentration occasionally is monitored in small animals on total parenteral
nutrition.
Il. Laboratory AbnorMalifies In Calcium, phosphorUs, And MagnesiuM
IMBALANCE
A. Hypercalcemia
 1. Based upon one large study, hypercalcemia was relatively common and occurred in 19% of dogs
and 17% of cats.
2. Primary hyperparathyroidism is caused by functional parathyroid neoplasms or idiopathic
hyperplasia (Figure 1l.1A)
300
CHAPTER 11
a. Serum PTH concentration is high or, occasionally, within the reference interval in affected
dogs. A PTH value that is within the reference interval is consistent with hyperparathyroidism in a
hypercalcemic, hypophosphatemic dog that is not azotemic.
b. Increased urinary excretion of calcium and decreased urinary excretion of phosphorus in
hyperparathyroid dogs seem to conflict with the known effects of PTH. However, hypercalcemia
and hypophosphatemia, which are usually marked in these dogs, explain the urinary findings.
C. Hypophosphatemia is severe, but serum phosphorus may increase as nephrocalcinosis and
renal failure develop.
 d. Bone lesions, soft-tissue mineralization, and increased serum alkaline phosphatase activity may
occur.
2. Isosthenuria is common in affected dogs.
3. Pseudohyperparathyroidism associated with neoplasia
a. Neoplasia is the most common cause of symptomatic hypercalcemia in dogs and also has been
reported as a cause of hypercalcemia in cats and horses.
b. The mechanisms that produce hypercalcemia in affected animals are multiple and vary with
the type of tumor.
(1) A variety of neoplasms may produce PTHrp, a vitamin-D-like steroid, a prostaglandin,
or osteoclast-activating factor, any of which may cause hypercalcemia and
hypophosphatemia.
c. Lymphoma has been associated with hypercalcemia in several animal species and is the most
common cause of tumor-associated hypercalcemia. More than 90% of dogs with lymphoma and
hypercalcemia have enlarged lymph nodes (Case 10).
d. Apocrine gland adenocarcinoma of the anal sac is the second most commonly associated tumor
 in dogs with PTHrp-associated hypercalcemia. More than 50% of affected dogs are hypercalcemic
at the time of tumor diagnosis.
e. Hypercalcemia in multiple myeloma is partially the result of an osteoclast-activating factor
secreted by neoplastic plasma cells.
f. Hypercalcemia occasionally occurs in animals with other neoplasms, primarily carcinomas
(e.g., squamous cell carcinoma, nasal carcinoma, ovarian stromal tumor, thymoma). Secretion of
PTH-related protein (PTHrp) by some carcinomas results in hypercalcemia.
g. Hypophosphatemia may be severe, but serum phosphorus concentration may increase after the
onset of nephrocalcinosis and renal failure
h. Serum PTH concentration is decreased.
4. Other causes of hypercalcemia
a. Hypervitaminosis D is an uncommon cause of hypercalcemia, but occurs occasionally after
excessive dietary supplementation.
b. Ingestion of cholecalciferol-containing rodenticides produces acute vitamin D toxicosis.
C. Ingestion of plants that contain vitamin D glycosides (e.g., Cestrum sp. and Solanum sp.) may
ause hypercalcemia, parathyroid atrophy, and soft tissue mineralization.
d. Renal disease in horses often is associated with hypercalcemia.
(1) Decreased renal calcium excretion may cause nephrocalcinosis and mineralization of other
soft tissues.
(2) The equine kidney excretes large amounts of calcium in health
(3) The likelihood of hypercalcemia occurring in a given horse with renal disease may be
related to the calcium content of the diet.
2. Renal failure in dogs infrequently may be accompanied by hypercalcemia.
(1) Hypercalcemia occurs most frequently in relatively young dogs with familial renal disease
(e.g., Lhasa Apso).
(2) Hypercalcemia is not a common laboratory abnormality in aged dogs with chronic renal
failure.
f. Canine adrenal insufficiency often is accompanied by hypercalcemia.
ENDOCRiNE SySTeM
301
(1)  The mechanism, which appears to be associated with glucocorticoid deficiency, involves
reduced calcium excretion in the urine and possibly reduced antagonism of vitamin D on
intestinal absorption of calcium.
hyperphosphatemia, and azotemia.
(3) Ionized calcium is normal in affected dogs.
g. Bone disease that is accompanied by osteolysis (e.g., septic osteomyelitis, metastatic neoplasia)
may produce hypercalcemia.
 h. Granulomatous disease, especially blastomycosis, occasionally is accompanied by
 hypercalcemia in dogs. Excessive production of 1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol by macrophages
has been suggested as the causative mechanism.
4. The severity of hypercalcemia may be masked when concomitant hypoalbuminemia is present,
provided that total serum calcium is being measured.
B. Hypocalcemia (Table 1l.1).
1. Relatively common as follows:
a. Based on serum iCa (ionized calcium), one study showed the prevalence of hypocalcemia to be
31% in sick dogs and 27% in sick cats.
b. In a critical care population of horses with enterocolitis, iCa was low in nearly 80% of the
cases. Of these cases, 71% had elevated PTH and 29% was inappropriately normal or low.
C.
 Foals with sepsis also have a high incidence of hypocalcemia
d. Recent research has shown that a systemic inflammatory response leads overexpression of
CaSR in equine parathyroid cells, resulting in a blunted PTH response to hypocalcemia.
2. Hypoalbuminemia (in all species) and alkalosis (especially in ruminants) are common causes
of hypocalcemia that must be excluded in each patient (Cases 13, 14, 16, 18, 19).
3. Other causes of hypocalcemia include chronic renal failure, critical illness, hemorrhage
gastrointestinal disease, pancreatitis, diabetes mellitus, lactation, urethral obstruction, renal
transplantation, vitamin D deficiency, and hypoparathyroidism.
TABLE 11.1
CAUSES OFHYPERCALCEMIA AND HYPOCALCEMIA.
Hypercalcemia
Hypocalcemia
Acidosis
Acute pancreatitis
Granulomatous disease (blastomycosis)
Alkalosis
Hemoconcentration
C-cell thyroid neoplasms
 Hyperproteinemia, including paraproteinemia
 Eclampsia, milk fever
Hypoadrenocorticism
EDIA
Hyperparathyroidism
Enterocolitis (adult horses)
Immobilization
Hypomagne semic tetany (grass tetany)
Neoplasia
Hypoparathyroidism
Apocrine gland tumors of the anal sacs
Hypoproteinemia (hypoalbuminemia)
Carcinomas metastatic to bone
Malabsorption
Lymphoma
Phosphate enema, phosphate-containing fluids
 Plasma cell myeloma
Renal failure
Osteolytic lesions
Sepsis (foals)
Renal failure
Toxicosis
Toxicosis
Blister beetle (cantharidin) toxicosis
Calciferol-containing rodenticides
Ethylene glycol toxicity
Hypervitaminosis D
Vitamin D glycoside-containing plants
302
CHAPTER 11
4. Either acute or chronic renal disease (CRD) in dogs, cats, and ruminants may cause
hypocalcemia through several mechanisms, including decreased formation of
1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol and soft tissue deposition of calcium salts secondary t0
hyperphosphatemia (Cases 15, 22).
a. In one large case series, hypocalcemia was observed in 36% of 490 dogs with CRD and 10%
of 102 cats with CRD. In cats with CRD, hypocalcemia is found more frequently with more
advanced magnitudesof azotemia
b. Acute renal failure in ethylene glycol toxicosis may be accompanied by profound hypocalcemia
 because of the chelation of calcium by oxalate (Case 18).
c. Postrenal urinary obstruction in cats may cause hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia.
d. Uremic acidosis may temper the severity of hypocalcemia because the proportion of ionized
calcium in serum is increased (Case 20).
5. Hypoparathyroidism is described in dogs, cats, and horses. It may occur spontaneously or
following surgical removal of thyroid and parathyroid tissue (as in surgically treated hyperthyroid
cats). The latter accounts for most cases of hypoparathyroidism; however, this surgical complication
has become less common with newer surgical techniques designed to preserve parathyroid tissue.
a. As with hypercalcemia, PTH concentrations should be interpreted in conjunction with
serum calcium or, preferably, serum ionized calcium concentrations. Serum iCa is low and
PTH concentration is decreased or within the reference interval in animals with primary
 hypoparathyroidism.
b. Serum phosphorus concentration is within the reference interval or mild hyperphosphatemia
is present.
C. Patients with low iCa and increased PTH have parathyroid-independent hypocalcemia.
6. Approximately 50% of dogs with acute pancreatitis have hypocalcemia.
a. Multiple mechanisms have been suggested as the cause of hypocalcemia, including the
following:
(1) Formation of calcium‘soaps'in the pancreas
(2) Hypomagnesemia
(3) Decreased PTH secretion
(4)Hypoproteinemia
(5) Glucagon-stimulated calcitonin secretion
(6) Amylin, which is normally secreted from the endocrine pancreas along with insulin, is
structurally related to calcitonin and has weak calcitonin-like activity on calcium metabolism
b. No single factor has been proven to be the cause of hypocalcemia in pancreatitis (Case 14).
c. In most cases of pancreatitis, coexisting acidosis results in an increase in the ionized fraction of
calcium and limits the possibility of tetany.
7. Parturient paresis (milk fever) in catle is caused by hypocalcemia. Puerpural tetany
(eclampsia) in the bitch, mare, or ewe is similar.
a. In the cow, parturient paresis accompanies the sudden demand for calcium during lactation.
b. An increased incidence of parturient paresis may occur after high-calcium diets are fed in the
dry period. Such diets depress the ability of the animal to respond to the intense calcium demand
of lactation.
C. Other concurrent metabolic abnormalities probably contribute to the paresis.
d. Affected cows usually have concurrent hypophosphatemia.
n  se (n s) n   s p   8
hypocalcemia.
 9. Intestinal malabsorption may produce hypocalcemia via decreased absorption of calcium and
vitamin D (Case 16).
10. Other uncommon causes of hypocalcemia include phosphate enemas in cats, blister beetle
toxicosis in horses, and hypercalcitonism in bulls with thyroid C-cell neoplasms
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
303
TABLE 11.2
CAUSES OF HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA
AND HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA.
 Hyperphosphatemia
Hemolysis (in vitro)
Hypervitaminosis D
Hypoparathyroidism
 Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism
 Osteolytic bone lesions
 Phosphate enema, phosphate -containing fhuids
Renal failure
Tumor lysis syndrome
 Young animals
Hypophosphatermia
C-cell thyroid neoplasms
Hemolysis (in vitro)
Hyperinsulinism, insulin therapy
Hyperparathyroidism
Milk fever
Neoplasia
Renal failure (horse)
C. Hyperphosphatemia (Table 11.2)
1. The most common mechanism of hyperphosphatemia is decreased glomerular filtration rate
associated with various causes of prerenal, renal, and postrenal azotemia (Cases 15, 17, 18, 19, 20,
34; Chapter 9).
2. Hyperphosphatemia that is secondary to disturbances of calcium metabolism has been described
above, under disorders of hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia.
a. Hyperphosphatemia that accompanies hypercalcemia and precedes renal failure may occur
with hypervitaminosis D.
b. Hyperphosphatemia that accompanies hypocalcemia occurs with hypoparathyroidism and
nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism from excessive dietary phosphorus.
3. Hyperphosphatemia may result from increased intestinal absorption of phosphorus related to
high-phosphorus diets or phosphate-containing enemas.
4. Osteolytic bone lesions may cause hyperphosphatemia.
D. Hypophosphatemia (Table 11.2)
1. Hypophosphatemia is an uncommon laboratory abnormality, the cause of which is often
undetermined.
2. Primary hyperparathyroidism and pseudohyperparathyroidism cause hypophosphatemia (see
description under hypercalcemia, above).
3. Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism, caused by dietary lack of calcium or
hypovitaminosis D, is associated with hypophosphatemia or a serum phosphorus value that is
within the reference interval.
4. Other causes of hypophosphatemia include the following:
a. Inadequate dietary phosphorus intake or intestinal malabsorption
b. Milk fever and eclampsia
304
CHAPTER 11
c. Hyperinsulinism or insulin administration
d. Hyperalimentation
2. In vitro hemolysis with some laboratory analytical methods
E. Hypermagnesemia
1. Hypermagnesemia is an uncommon laboratory abnormality because the kidneys readily excrete
excessive magnesium.
2. Hypermagnesemia may occur in herbivores with renal failure.
3. Administration of antacids or magnesium cathartics to patients with renal failure may result in
hypermagnesemia.
F. Hypomagnesemia
1. Hypomagnesemia has been associated with hypoparathyroidism, critical illness, diabetes
 mellitus, lactation tetany, and protein-losing enteropathy.
2. Hypomagnesemia is of greatest concern in calves, adult cattle, and sheep.
a. Both slow-onset and acute-onset clinical forms of hypomagnesemia are described.
b. Concurrent hypocalcemia may be refractory to treatment until hypomagnesemia is corrected.
3. Inadequate dietary magnesium intake is related to the development of clinical disease (i.e., grass
tetany), but the pathogenesis of this disease is poorly understood.
4. Grass tetany is the classical presentation of hypomagnesemia in cattle, but asymptomatic
hypomagnesemia also occurs frequently in adult cattle.
hypomagnesemia.
a. Healthy cattle have urine magnesium concentrations of approximately 50mg/dL
b. In hypomagnesemic states, the renal tubular absorptive mechanism may capture almost all
magnesium in the glomerular filtrate, resulting in urine magnesium concentrations of less than
5 mg/dL.
THYROID FUNCTION
The principal thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triodothyronine (T3), increase metabolism of most
 cells and stimulate growth in the young. They induce DNA translation, which results in the production
of proteins associated with cell growth, oxidative phosphorylation, and membrane transport of electro
lytes. The hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis is presented in Figure 11.2.
1. BASIC CONCEPts
A. Secretion and transport of T4 and T3
1. In the thyroid glands of dogs and cats, approximately 80% of the secreted thyroid hormone is
T4 and 20% is T3.
 2. T3 is approximately four-fold more potent than T4, but both hormones function at the cellular
level.
a. 50% of serum T3 in dogs and 80% in cats is derived from deiodination of T4 outside of the
thyroid gland by 5'-deiodinase enzymes.
(1)  Iype I 5'-deiodinase (D1)
(a)  Present in tissues such as liver and kidney.
(b) T3 produced by Dl contributes significantly to circulatory T3 concentration for
distribution to other tissues.
(c)  Activity of Dl is reduced in hypothyroidism and increased in hyperthyroidism
(d) Dl activity is reduced by protein-calorie malnutrition and severe illness.
ENDOCRiNE SySteM
305
Central Nervous System
> Hypothalamus 
TRH
 Pituitary 
FreeT3
TSH
Free T4
T3
Thyroid
14
rT3 T3
Circulation
Extrathyroidal Tissue
     (      
hypothalamus produces thyrotropin releasing hormone (IRH) that is released into the pituitary portal system. IRH
stimulates the anterior pituitary thyrotrope cells to produce thyrotropin (thyroid stimulating horrmone, ISH). ISH
 promotes the growth and secretory function of the thyroid glands. Ihe thyroid glands produce both thyroxine (I4)
 a     s n   (  
the I3 is produced by the thyroid gland and 50% is produced by extrathyroidal tissue conversion of I4 to I3 by
5'-deiodinase enzymes. In the circulation, thyroid horrmones are highly bound by serum-binding proteins. Free I4
H jo uni a i yaa aau e s ias id pe su a aq p s ()
and ISH secretion.
(e) Dl activity is inhibited by drugs such as propylthiouracil and iodinated radiocontrast
agents such as iopanoic acid.
(2) Iype I 5'-deiodinase (D2)
(a) Present in the brain, pituitary, and central nervous system of most species, and has
been identified in the skin of dogs.
(b)  T3 produced by D2 largely is retained at the tissue site and does not contribute to
serum T3 concentration under euthyroid conditions but probably maintains serum T3
 concentrations during hypothyroidism
(c) D2 activity is increased in hypothyroidism and decreased in hyperthyroidism.
(d) Serum TSH (or its logarithm) is inversely proportional to circulating free T4
concentrations:
i) Virtually all of the available (free) T4 fraction entering the pituitary is converted to
T3 by type II 5'-deiodinase.
ii)A negative feedback effect that reduces pituitary TSH release is triggered when
generated T3 interacts with pituitary nuclear receptors.
b. I4 also may be deiodinated to reverse T3 (rT3), a metabolically inactive molecule, and T3 is
 inactivated by the 5-deiodinase enzyme (type IlI deiodinase, D3).
(1) D3 expression is high in some tissues under development (e.g., nervous system) and white
blood cells at sites of inflammation.
306
CHAPTER 11
(2) When Dl is inhibited, the clearance of rT3 is also decreased, resulting in increased rT3
concentration.
(3) Under most circumstances, rT3 concentration generally parallels that of unbound (free)
T4.
c. In impending thyroid failure (primary hypothyroidism) and in iodine deficiency, serum T3
tends to be maintained within the reference interval longer than T4.
(1) Maintenance of T3 concentration presumably is due to both increased thyroidal and
peripheral 5'-deiodination from the diminished amount of T4 substrate being made by the
thyroid gland.
(2) For the above reasons, serum T3 concentration generally does not decline in early or mild
 primary thyroid failure.
d. Thyroid hormone secretion is regulated by the pituitary gland through thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), which stimulates thyroid secretion.
(1) Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), a hypothalamic hormone, is essential for normal
TSH secretion by the pituitary.
(2) Negative feedback control of TSH secretion is mediated by the unbound fractions of T3
and T4 at both the hypothalamic and pituitary levels.
sd sd 0n q a 21 n po %6 p →1  g %66 xg 
 in most non-primate mammalian species.
b. In the dog, T4 and T3 are bound to thyroid-binding globulin (TBG) as well as thyroxine-
binding pre-albumin (TBPA), albumin, and lipoproteins.
(1) Serum TBG concentrations are low in dogs (l5%) and undetectable in cats compared to
those in man.
(2) Decreased TBG concentrations in dogs and cats largely account for lower serum T4
concentrations and higher free T4 fractions in these species.
(3) In reptiles and birds, total T4 concentrations are extremely low, due in part to the absence
of some high-affinity serum-binding proteins.
c. Free T4 (fT4) and free T3 (fT3) are the fractions of these hormones which are not protein
bound. Thus, circulating fT4 and fT3 represent the fraction available to tissues at steady-state and
are generally proportionate to the true thyroid status.
(1) The free T4 fraction (fT4/total T4 expressed as a percentage) averages 0.1% in healthy
dogs, cats, and horses.
(2) Free T4 concentrations, measured by dialysis methods, are fairly consistent between
species. While reference intervals should be determined for the laboratory performing the test,
fT4 often averages approximately 2 ng/dL or 25 pmol/L
B. Measurement of serum T4
1. Commercial immunoassays are used to quantitate T4 in canine, feline, and equine serum
samples.
a. Most of these commercial assay kits are designed to measure T4 in human sera, in which
higher concentrations of T4 are encountered in health.
b. Commercial assay kits for use with human sera are inaccurate at the low I4 concentrations
often found in animal sera.
c. Human commercial assay kits may be modified for use with animal serum samples by
 preparing standards with lower T4 concentrations.
(1) These standards are prepared in thyroid-hormone-depleted serum from the species of
interest.
(2) The concentration of the anti-T4 antibody reagent often must be diluted to obtain optimal
test sensitivity
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
307
2. Total thyroxine (T4) radioimmunoassays measure both bound and unbound (free, fT4)
hormone.
3. Alterations in serum T4 concentration can occur with nonthyroidal illness and drug
administration.
a. Hypoproteinemia may result in decreased total T4 concentration, even though the animal is
euthyroid. Free T4 concentrations are then within the reference interval.
b. Total T4 concentration gradually declines with age in dogs and horses but not in cats.
c. Increased serum total T4 concentration in dogs and increased serum fT4 concentration in cats
 may be observed with obesity, but usually remains within the normal range and does not reflect a
condition of hyperthyroidism.
d. Severe illness results in decreased total serum T4 concentrations in dogs and cats; a poorer
clinical prognosis is associated with a lower total T4 concentration.
e. Small breeds of dogs tend to have slightly higher reference intervals for serum T4
 concentration. Therefore, reference intervals for individual breeds should be established, if
practical.
f. Administration of glucocorticoids, sulfonamides, phenobarbital, and nonsteroidal analgesics
illnesses, has been shown to depress T4 concentrations.
g. Decreased serum-free T4 concentration and increased TSH also has been associated with
sulfonamide administration, indicating a drug-induced form of hypothyroidism.
h. In a recent study, serum T4 concentration decreased significantly from baseline during surgery
and remained low at one, two, four, and 24 hours postoperatively. Serum T3 was depressed
at one hour and serum rT3 was increased at eight, 12, 24, and 36 hours. Serum fT4 increased
signifcantly from baseline in the surgery group compared to the control at one and seven days
and compared to the anesthesia-only group at two days.
4. Interpretation of total T4 concentration
a. Serum total T4 concentration is within the reference interval.
(1) Hypothyroidism generally can be excluded
(2) In 10% of cases of hypothyroidism, the presence of anti-T4 autoantibodies may increase
total T4 concentration into (9%) or above (1%) the reference interval and hypothyroidism will
not be detected.
b. Serum total T4 concentration is decreased (Cases 3l and 32).
(1) Hypothyroidism may be present (see below)
(2) A decreased serum total T4 concentration does not confirm hypothyroidism, even when
this disease is suspected clinically.
(3) Nonthyroidal illness may depress the serum total T4 concentration.
(4) If the serum total T4 concentration is decreased and nonthyroidal illness is present based
upon medical history, physical examination, and routine laboratory testing (i.e., complete
blood cell [CBC] count and biochemical profle), hypothyroidism should be confirmed or
excluded by determining ISH and/or fI4 concentrations (see below).
C.
 Serum total T4 concentration is increased.
(1)  Hyperthyroidism may be present
(2) If the serum total T4 concentration is increased when hypothyroidism is suspected
(approximately 1% of hypothyroid individuals), the patients serum should be tested for anti-
T4 autoantibodies.
C. Measurement of serum T3
1. Immunoassays for quantitation of serum T3 concentration are available.
a. Serum T3 concentration is lower than serum T4 concentration
b.A larger volume of serum is needed to measure T3 concentration.
809
CHAPTER 11
c. In constructing the standard curve, it is critical to include hormone-free serum from the
species being tested.
2. T3 is the most active form of thyroid hormone, but serum T3 concentrations correlate poorly
with clinical disease largely because the body has both thyroidal and peripheral tissue mechanisms
to increase the T3/T4 ratio in early thyroid failure
3. Little diagnostic value is gained by routinely quantitating serum T3 concentration.
4. In some animals with hypothyroidism and thyroiditis, falsely high or falsely low T3
concentrations can result from the presence of anti-T3 autoantibodies in the serum (see below).
a. High T3 concentrations are obtained with assays, which capture the antibody form of the
hormone.
b. Low or undetectable T3 concentrations are produced by assays, which depend upon
quantifying the antibody unbound radioactive hormone by charcoal or other extractants.
D. Measurement of serum-free T4 (fT4)
1. Analytical methods
a. A commercial two-step analytical method using equilibrium dialysis is the only widely
validated procedure for determination of fT4 in domestic animals.
  s  d   ss te s n  
serum, which has more TBG than sera from most animal species.
c. Some laboratories' new two-step free T4 immunoassays may show better correlation with fT4
by equilibrium dialysis than older non-dialysis fT4 immunoassays.
d. Potential arifacts of most fT4 immunoassays
(1) The effcts of low affinity inhibitors (e.g., fatty acids, highly protein bound drugs) are
underestimated.
(2) Dilution may result in an underestimation of fT4 and potential overdiagnosis of
hypothyroidism in the dog.
(3) fI4 concentration usually is increased in hyperthyroid cats.
(4) False-positive fT4 test results occur in approximately 5% of euthyroid cats.
(5) fI4 usually should be interpreted in conjunction with other thyroid tests.
(6)  Despite potential limitations, the commercial, direct dialysis fT4 assay has the highest
single-test diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in detecting thyroid disease.
2. Commercial one-step analytical methods
(1) Most of these assays are designed for human sera.
(2) These assays use solid phase antigen-linked tubes (SPALT) in which a thyroid hormone
analogue linked to the assay tube competes for serum-binding proteins to quantitate the fT4
fraction.
(3) One-step analytical methods and two-step dialysis methods only correlate when sera from
healthy animals are tested.
(4)  Adequate correlation of fT4 by this method compared to the equilibrium dialysis
 method does not occur in the presence of serum-binding inhibitors due to illness or drug
administration
2. Effect of drug administration on fT4 (Case 33)
a. Heparin interferes with fT4 determination in vitro because it promotes the release of free fatty
acids.
b. High concentrations of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may displace T4.
These drugs may include the following:
(1) Phenylbutazone in the horse
(2) Carprofen and aspirin in the dog
c. Furosemide displaces T4 in dog serum.
E. Influence of breed on T4 and fT4 concentrations in dogs
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 
309
1. Basal serum T4 and fI4 concentrations are decreased significantly in sighthounds (i.e.,
Greyhounds, Scottish Deerhounds, etc.) and Basenjis compared with other breeds.
 2. Serum T4 concentrations after TSH and TRH administration are significantly lower in
Greyhounds than in other breeds of dogs.
3. In sighthounds, serum T3 concentrations are more similar to those of non-sighthounds than
either T4 or fT4 concentrations.
4. Ideally, breed-specific reference intervals should be established.
F. Measurement of endogenous thyrotropin (TSH) concentration (Cases 3l, 32, 33)
1. TSH concentration is quantitated to detect a lack of negative feedback on the pituitary and
hypothalamus.
2. TSH assays are available commercially for the dog but not for other animal species.
a. Although a TSH assay is not commercially available for cats, about 35% cross-reactivity of the
available canine TSH assay exists.
(1) The canine TSH assay can detect elevated TSH, such as is seen following overtreatment of
hyperthyroid cats with antithyroid drugs.
(2) Generally, TSH is nondetectable in hyperthyroid cats. However, unlike in human
medicine, the assay is not sensitive enough and undetectable TSH concentrations are seen in a
significant number of euthyroid cats.
b. A research ISH assay has been evaluated in horses.
3. If determination of serum TSH concentration is contemplated, it should be performed in
conjunction with total T4 or fT4 quantitation.
4. Serum TSH concentrations are elevated in approximately 75% of dogs with primary
hypothyroidism.
a. A recent study has demonstrated that in chronically hypothyroid dogs (one year or longer)
serum TSH may eventually fall into the normal range. The mechanism for this unique change in
the dog has not yet been clarified, but may be due to either exhaustion of pituitary TSH secretion
or a resetting of the pituitary-thyroid setpoint.
b. Other theories for poor sensitivity of TSH as a screening assay for hypothyroidism.
(1) Hypothyroid dogs may a have pulsatile release of TSH, possibly accounting for TSH values
that are within the reference interval at certain times of the day.
(2) The available TSH immunoassay system may not detect all glycosylation variants of
circulating TSH in the dog.
5. Mean serum TSH concentrations do not appear to vary with breed.
G. Anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies (Case 3l)
1. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) are used to quantitate anti-thyroglobulin
autoantibodies in dogs.
 2. The presence of anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies is indicative of thyroid autoimmunity
(autoimmune thyroiditis)
3. Newer generation ELISA tests have fewer false-positive test results. False-positives in early
versions of the assay have been reduced by routinely testing for non-specific binding.
 4. Anti-thyroglobulin autoantibody ELISA tests appear to be highly specifc for the presence of
thyroid disease.
a. Anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies are present in 36% to 60% of dogs with hypothyroidism and
in 91% of dogs with thyroiditis.
b. False-positive test results occur at a rate of 5% to 6%.
C. Anti-thyroglobulin autoantibody concentrations may be elevated prior to the onset of clinical
signs of disease.
(1) Approximately 20% of dogs with a positive anti-thyroglobulin autoantibody test exhibit
One other test abnormality suggestive of hypothyroidism within one year.
310
CHAPTER 11
d. Anti-thyroglobulin autoantibody, TSH, and fT4 testing have been suggested by the Thyroid
Registry (Orthopedic Foundation for Animals) as screening tests for thyroid disease in breeding
dogs; however, the results of these tests have not been demonstrated conclusively to have
predictive value in the diagnosis of disease.
H. Anti-T4 and anti-T3 autoantibodies (Case 31)
1. Anti-I4 (approximately 15% of hypothyroid dogs) and anti-T3 (34% of hypothyroid dogs)
autoantibodies occur in dogs with thyroiditis.
2. Anti-T4 and anti-T3 autoantibodies are measured in some diagnostic laboratories simply by
diluting serum specimen in immunoassay buffer containing radioactive hormone. The percentage of
hormone binding relative to an antibody-negative control is measured.
3. Sera that are positive for anti-T4 and anti-T3 autoantibodies almost always have a positive titer
for anti-thyroglobulin (Tg) antibodies because the high-molecular-weight glycoprotein Tg is the
likely immunogen and T3 and T4 antibodies may develop because they are haptens linked to Ig.
4. Clinical significance
a. Anti-T4 and anti-T3 autoantibodies have been observed in autoimmune thyroiditis; however,
these antibodies also may be detected in some clinically healthy animals
b. Anti-T4 and anti-T3 autoantibodies may interfere with accurate measurement of T3 or T4
by altering the amount of hormone-specific antibody in the tube relative to the standard curve,
leading to very high or very low T3 or T4 concentrations.
(1) Very low T3 concentration has been misdiagnosed as poor conversion of T4 to T3, a
condition which has not been identified outside of the pathophysiological conditions already
described.
(2) Very high T3 and/or T4 concentrations in patients with clinical signs of hypothyroidism
have been diagnosed inappropriately as thyroid hormone resistance.
(3) In the presence of anti-T4 immunoglobulin in a dog's serum, only fT4 concentration
determined by the dialysis technique is accurate because the immunoglobulin does not pass
into the dialysate prior to immunoassay.
(4) Accurate total T4 or total T3 concentrations can be determined only by research
techniques such as ethanolic extraction of the hormone or heat inactivation of the
immunoglobulin followed by chromatographic separation of the immunoglobulin fraction.
1.  Comparison of single and multiple analytes for sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in the diagnosis
of primary hypothyroidism in dogs is presented in Table 1l.3.
J. T4 response to TRH or TSH
1. T4 response to TRH or TSH administration is a test of thyroid reserve
2. TSH stimulation test
a. The TSH stimulation test previously was performed with bovine TSH, which is no longer
 available in a pharmaceutical preparation.
b. Recombinant human TSH (rhTSH) administration is effective in animals but is very expensive.
(1) rhTSH at a fixed dose of 75μg (approximately one unit) has beenrecommended and can be
given repeatedly IV or IM to dogs with little adverse reaction.
(2) A recent study utilized 25 μg rhTSH in healthy cats, cats with NTI, and cats with low
 total T4 and azotemia following 3'1 treatment. Total T4 and thyroidal pertechnetate were
 measured. Post-rhTSH serum I4 concentrations did not rise in the post-radioiodine group,
whereas I4 concentrations in healthy and nonthyroidal illness groups increased significantly
 in response to TSH. The authors concluded that rhTSH stimulation allowed the differentiation
of euthyroidism from iatrogenic hypothyroidism.
(3) Post TSH blood samples are generally drawn at four or six hours post-TSH given IV.
c. The TSH stimulation test is primarily a research technique but is considered to be the gold
standard to diagnose thyroid disease
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
311
TABLE 11.3
COMPARISON OF SINGLE AND MULTIPLE ANALYTES FOR SENSITIVITY, SPECIFICITY, AND
SS
Percentage of Cases with Abnormal Test Result
Test
TT4
TT3
FT4D
TSH
TT4/TSH
FT4D/TSH
Sensitivity
89/100*
10
98/80
76/86.7
67/86.7
74/80
 Specificity
82/75.3
92
93/93.5
93/81.8
98/92.2
98/97.4
Accuracy
85
55
95
84
82
86
TT4 = total I4
TT3 = total T3
FT4D = free T4 determined by dialysis technique
TSH = thyroid stimulating hormone
TT4/TSH = total T4 to ISH ratio
FI4D/ISH = free I4 (determined by dialysis) to ISH ratio
Sensitivity is the percentage of cases which are actually positive that are detected as positive by the test.
Specificity is the percentage of euthyroid dogs that have values within the reference interval.
Accuracy is the percentage of all cases with true positive and true negative test results (Chapter 13).
References: Peterson et al., 1997; Dixon and Mooney, 1999. If only one mumber is listed, the datum is
from Peterson et al., 1997.* 100% sensitivity when patients with positive anti-I4 autoantibodies were 
removed from consideration (Dixon and Mooney, 1999).
d. TSH stimulation test procedure
(1) A blood sample is drawn for baseline T4 determination.
(2) Generally, 0.l unit TSH/kg body weight is injected and asecond blood sample for I4
determination is drawn six hours later.
(3) Alternatively in dogs, one unit TSH/dog is injected and a second blood sample for I4
determination is drawn four hours later.
e. Interpretation of TSH stimulation test
(1) In euthyroid (healthy) animals, a two-fold elevation of the serum T4 concentration above
baseline values should be apparent in the second serum sample using the above protocol.
(2) An alternative interpretation guideline is that the serum T4 concentration in the post-TSH
serum sample should increase by at least 2μg/dL (25 nmol/L) or exceed the upper limit of the
reference interval in the euthyroid state.
3. TRH stimulation test
a. In the diagnosis of hypothyroidism, TRH stimulation, with measurement of pre- and post-TRH
 T4 concentrations, has been used to evaluate pituitary and thyroid secretory reserve.
b. The TRH stimulation test is used most commonly to diagnose hyperthyroidism in cats
(see below).
c. TRH stimulation test procedure
(1) A blood sample is drawn for baseline determination of serum T4 concentration.
(2) TRH is administered by injection at a dosage of 200 or 250 μg in dogs or 100 μg/kg in cats.
(3) A second blood sample is drawn four4 hours later for determination of serum T4
concentration.
d. Interpretation of the TRH stimulation test
312
CHAPTER 11
(1) The TRH stimulation test often shows only marginal elevation of serum T4 concentrations
in euthyroid dogs.
(2)  Thyroid autonomy (lack of response to negative feedback control) and hyperthyroidism
are considered to exist if the serum T4 concentration fails to increase by 50% following the
administration of TRH.
2. The TRH stimulation test has shown poor discrimination between hyperthyroid cats and cats
with nonthyroidal illness.
response to TRH administration can be used to differentiate euthyroid from hypothyroid dogs, this test
has little advantage over measurement of baseline serum TSH concentrations because at the time of
diagnosis, TSH is being secreted maximally in most dogs.
Il. HYPOTHYROIDISM (CASE 28)
A. Incidence of hypothyroidism
1. Hypothyroidism occurs commonly in dogs. It usually is associated with thyroid atrophy or
lymphocytic thyroiditis.
2. Hypothyroidism in cats is almost always an iatrogenic disease that follows treatment for
hyperthyroidism.
3. Familial hypothyroidism has been reported in Giant Schnauzers and Abyssinian cats
4. Hypothyroidism has been observed occasionally in horses.
B. Regardless of the animal species, T4 measurements often are inadequate for diagnosis of
hypothyroidism.
except in approximately 10% of individuals in which anti-T4 autoantibodies exist and lead to a
falsely elevated T4 value.
 o s te e i s        s
measured.
3. An increased serum TSH concentration adds specificity to the diagnosis.
 4. A decreased serum fT4 by dialysis concentration is highly specific for hypothyroidism in
non-sighthounds
Ss   d s  a s  s a r s
consistent with this disease.
C. Thyroid function testing in birds
1. The circulating half-life (T 1/2) of thyroid hormones in birds is much shorter than in mammals.
 Accurate determination of thyroid hormonal status in birds is diffcult when only a single serum
sample is evaluated.
2. Diurnal and seasonal fluctuations in thyroid hormone occur in birds; therefore, the
interpretation of thyroid function tests is diffcult.
3. Resting thyroid hormone or TSH response is used to evaluate the thyroid status.
4. Standardization of the TSH response test in individual laboratories is necessary to interpret test
results reliably.
5. TSH response test protocol
a. A blood sample is drawn for determination of baseline serum T4 concentration.
b. 0.1 IU of TSH is given intramuscularly.
C. A second blood sample is drawn six hours after TSH administration.
d. Serum T4 concentrations are determined by commercial radioimmunoassay.
2. The serum T4 concentrations are interpreted as in other animal species.
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
313
D. Secondary hypothyroidism is an uncommon disease in which TSH secretion is inadequate, usually
due to a pituitary lesion.
1. Inadequate stimulation of the thyroid gland by TSH results in glandular atrophy.
bape  sam xis sbai a g sixe pi jo aoi aad 
thyroxine replacement therapy.
3. Indirect evidence suggests that pituitary ISH release is suppressed with glucocorticoid
administration.
E. Common laboratory abnormalities in hypothyroidism include the following:
1. Normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia occurs in approximately 50% of affected
dogs.
2. Hypercholesterolemia is present in approximately 80% of affected dogs
3. Serum creatine kinase activity is increased in approximately l0% of affected dogs.
4. Experimental hypothyroidism in dogs caused a significant decrease in GFR without altering
plasma creatinine concentrations likely because creatinine production was reduced. These results
imply that some measurement of GFR might be necessary to evaluate renal function in a
hypothyroid patient.
Il. HyperthyroiDIsm (Case 27)
A. Hyperthyroidism occurs commonly in older cats with nodular (adenomatous) thyroid hyperplasia
or thyroid adenomas (Figure 1l.3).
B. Hyperthyroidism is uncommon in dogs. It usually is associated with thyroid neoplasia, but most
canine thyroid neoplasms are nonfunctional.
C. Common laboratory abnormalities in hyperthyroidism include the follwing:
1. Polycythemia occurs in approximately 50% of affected cats.
 2. Increased serum activity of alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate
aminotransferase occurs in approximately 50% to 66% of affected cats. Some studies indicate that
feline hyperthyroidism is associated with increased serum activity of the bone isoenzyme of alkaline
phosphatase, whereas other studies indicate that serum activity of the hepatic isoenzyme of alkaline
phosphatase is increased.
3. Renal function
a. Treatment of hyperthyroidism in some patients may result in a mild to severe exacerbation
of azotemia, because cardiac output and glomerular filtration declines with re-establishment of
euthyroidism
b. Serum creatinine concentration may be elevated because both chronic renal disease (CRD) and
hyperthyroidism are diseases of old age. Furthermore, hyperthyroidism leads to muscle catabolism
with the generation of additional creatinine.
c. Hyperthyroidism may mask CRD and it has become a concern to predict cats which might
develop overt renal insufficiency following treatment of hyperthyroidism.
(1) Urinary protein/creatinine (UPC) ratios may be elevated (greater than 0.5) in affected cats
but the UPC does not predict which cats will develop azotemia following treatment. However,
UPC ratios decline significantly with treatment for hyperthyroidism
(2) Measurements of tubular function, such as urinary retinol binding protein/creatinine ratio,
provided no additional predictive value.
(3) Pre-treatment measurement of GFR, USG, and serum TT4 were shown to have possible
predictive value regarding the development of post-treatment renal azotemia.
  p s   s  a s   ()
hyperthyroidism, with no further progression thereafter.
314
CHAPTER 11
Hypothalamus
TRH
T3
Suppression
Pituitary
Test
TRH Stimulation
TSH
+
Test
Negative
Feedback
Thyroid
T3
Circulation
Diagnosis
TRH Stim.
T3 Supp.
Normal
T44
Hyper
T4 +
+山
FlGURE ll.3. Overview of function tests in the diagnosis of feline hyperthyroidism. The TRH stimulation test
and I3 suppression test evaluate thyroid glandular autonomy When an appropriate dosage of IRH is given
intravenously, the I4 concentration is expected to increase in the healthy euthyroid arimal because IRH stimulates
ISH release from the pituitary, which in turm stimulates the thyroid glands to secrete I4. ln hyperthyroidism, the
I4 concentration does not increase significantly Conversely, if an appropriate dosage of L-I3 is given to a healthy
euthyroid animal, the serum I4 concentration should decrease because I3 suppresses ISH release by the pituitary.
 In hyperthyroidism, I4 secretion is unaffected by I3 administration, presumably because ISH is already
suppressed.
4. Glucose and glucose tolerance tests
a. Some cats with hyperthyroidism are glucose-intolerant or have overt diabetes mellitus.
However, treatment of hyperthyroidism does not generally reverse this abnormality, and may
exacerbate it.
b. Fasting hyperglycemia may be present because glucose elimination rates are reduced. Insulin
response to glucose also is delayed.
5. Serum fructosamine concentration
a. Serum fructosamine concentrations of hyperthyroid cats are significantly lower than values in
healthy cats due to accelerated plasma protein (albumin) turnover.
b. Hyperthyroid cats with diabetes mellitus may have serum fructosamine concentrations that
may fall within or below the euglycemic reference interval of normal cats.
c. Serum fructosamine concentration should not be used to diagnose or assess the adequacy of
 treatment of diabetes in cats with concurrent hyperthyroidism that has not been controlled for at
least six weeks.
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 
315
D. Diagnosis of hyperthyroidism
1. Serum total T4 concentration is the screening test of choice for hyperthyroidism.
 2. Serum total T4 concentration is elevated in the majority of animals with hyperthyroidism.
3. Serum total T4 values may be within the reference interval in mild hyperthyroidism and with
nonthyroidal illness.
4. Cats with mild hyperthyroidism may have serum total T4 concentrations that remain within the
high end of the reference interval or fluctuate in and out of the high end of the reference interval.
E. Additional tests to confirm hyperthyroidism when serum total T4 concentration is within the
reference interval
1. Free T4 (fT4) by dialysis
a. This test identifies most cats with mild hyperthyroidism or nonthyroidal illness, but has a
false-positive rate of approximately 5% to 6% in euthyroid cats.
b. Cats with severe obesity may develop increased fT4 by dialysis, but test values are usually
within the upper end of the reference interval.
C. The fIT4 concentration should be interpreted with knowledge of clinical signs and serum total
T4 concentration.
2. T3 suppression test
a. Serum T4 concentration is measured in blood samples taken before and after exogenous T3
(25μg given intramuscularly) is administered for seven doses over 48 hours.
b. The final blood sample is drawn four hours after the seventh dose of exogenous T3.
c. In healthy cats, the serum T4 concentration decreases by at least 50%.
d. In hyperthyroid cats, little or no change occurs in serum T4 concentration (Figure ll.1).
3. TRH stimulation test
a. Blood samples for serum total T4 determination are collected before and after intravenous
 administration of 0.1 mg/kg of TRH.
b. Thyroid autonomy (lack of response to negative feedback control) and hyperthyroidism are
suspected if the serum T4 concentration fails to increase by 50% following TRH administration
(Figure 11.2).
c. In severely ill cats, the TRH stimulation test may not routinely identify patients with
hyperthyroidism because serum T4 concentrations do not increase markedly as anticipated.
d. The TRH stimulation test in the horse is performed as follows: Administer l mg of TRH
intravenously and then collect serum samples four and four hours after administration. of TRH
Serum levels of T3 and T4 in normal horses will be at least twice that of baseline after two and
four hours.
ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
In addition to its digestive functions, the pancreas secretes hormones that regulate glucose, lipid, and
protein metabolism. Diabetes mellitus and hyperinsulinism, associated with abnormalities of the islets
    s  rn a  a ' os
diseases occur most often in the dog and cat and only rarely in other domestic animals.
I. bASIC CONCEPTS OF ENDOCRINE PANCREaTIC HORMONEs
A. Metabolic effects of insulin
1. Beta cells of the islets of Langerhans secrete insulin
2. The major physiological stimulus for insulin secretion is glucose; however, other nutrients
(amino acids and fatty acids) and hormones also are involved in insulin release.
3. Insulin target organs are primarily liver, skeletal muscle, and fat.
316
CHAPTER 11
4. Insulin promotes anabolic metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and nucleic acids by
potentiating the cellular uptake of glucose, other monosaccharides, some amino acids, fatty acids,
potassium, and magnesium
5. Insulin is not required for glucose uptake by erythrocytes, neurons, enterocytes, pancreatic beta
cells, renal tubular cells, and ocular lens.
B. Metabolic effects of glucagon
1. Alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans secrete glucagon in response to hypoglycemia, inereased
plasma concentration of certain amino acids, or certain hormones.
2. The major effects of glucagon are to promote hepatic glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis,
thereby increasing blood glucose concentration
3. Glucagon also causes lipolysis and ketogenesis. Ketone bodies are used as alternative fuel when
cellular glucose uptake is low (e.g., starvation, diabetes mellitus).
C. Metabolic activity of other hormones that oppose the effcts of insulin
1. Glucocorticoids antagonize insulin effects by promoting gluconeogenesis, glycogenesis, and
lipolysis, and by inhibiting muscular protein synthesis.
 2. Catecholamines increase glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, and lipolysis.
3. Growth hormone inhibits glucose uptake by insulin-responsive cells and promotes lipolysis.
4. Delta cells of the islets of Langerhans produce somatostatin, which inhibits glucagon and insulin
secretion.
5. Progesterone, secreted in high concentration during late estrus and metestrus, may cause
dogs and thereby exert an anti-insulin effect.
Il. LABORATORY ASSESSMENT OF THE ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
A. Diabetes mellitus (Cases 15 and 34)
1. Diabetes mellitus results when insulin secretion is inadequate or when tissues fail to respond
normally to insulin.
2. Although various types of diabetes mellitus have been described based on glucose tolerance
testing and insulin responses, these classifications are not used widely in veterinary medicine
3. Most diabetic dogs and cats have an absolute deficiency of insulin.
 4. Some diabetic cats have normal to increased serum insulin concentrations with peripheral
insulin resistance.
5. Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus usually is made on the basis of persistent fasting hyperglycemia
and glucosuria.
6. Documentation that hyperglycemia is caused by diabetes mellitus usually can be accomplished
by repeated glucose measurements.
a. Most other causes of hyperglycemia are transient.
b. Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus can be made with one blood or urine sample if hyperglycemia
and ketonemia, or glucosuria and ketonuria, respectively, are present.
7. Laboratory measurement of serum glucose, considerations in sample handling, and general
interpretation of hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia are described in Chapter 6.
8. Glucose tolerance tests can be used to help confirm or exclude a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
in animals with equivocal blood glucose test results.
a. The glucose tolerance test is described in detail in Chapter 6
b. This test is labor-intensive and is not performed in most practice settings.
9. Other laboratory abnormalities in diabetes mellitus may include the following:
a. Ketonemia, ketonuria, and ketoacidosis occur with low blood insulin concentrations (Chapter
6, Case 34).
ENdoCRine system
317
b. Lipemia is common (Chapter 6).
C.
 Osmotic diuresis may produce progressive dehydration and electrolyte loss.
d. Proteinuria may occur due to lower urinary tract infection and/or glomerular disease.
C.
 Increased glycosylation of hemoglobin (gHb) and serum proteins (measured as fructosamine)
occurs and their concentrations may be used as time-averaged indices of blood glucose
concentration.
(1) gHb concentration reflects the blood glucose concentration over the previous two to three
months.
(2) Fructosamine provides an index of blood glucose concentration over the previous two t0
three weeks.
B. Hyperinsulinism
1. Functional pancreatic β-cell tumors occasionally cause persistent or periodic hypoglycemia in
dogs related to hypersecretion of insulin. However, pancreatic β-cell tumors may secrete other
 hormones in addition to insulin.
2. Serum insulin concentration is measured to establish a diagnosis of hyperinsulinism, presumably
due to β-cell neoplasia.
3. Insulin concentrations must be interpreted in conjunction with serum glucose concentrations.
a. Serum glucose is measured initially without fasting.
b. If the glucose concentration is below 60 mg/dL, insulin can be measured on the same serum
sample if it has been stored frozen.
c. If the glucose concentration is greater than 60mg/dL, the dog is fasted and serum glucose is
 measured at two-hour intervals until the serum glucose drops below 60 mg/dL
 d. When serum glucose is below 60 mg/dL, serum glucose and insulin are measured on the same
sample.
2. If hypoglycemia does not develop after eight to 10 hours of fasting, the test usually is
terminated.
 4. One widely used technique for evaluating serum glucose and insulin results in dogs with
possible hyperinsulinism is the amended insulin/glucose ratio.
a. Amended insulin/glucose ratio = serum insulin (μU/ml) xl00 ÷ serum glucose (mg/dL) - 30
b. Ratios below 30 are considered normal for dogs.
c. Ratios above 30 are suggestive of hyperinsulinism
ADRENAL CORTEX
 Iwo primary diseases affect the adrenal gland: hyperadrenocorticism and adrenal insuffciency.
adrenal-dependent, and iatrogenic. Laboratory tests are used to confirm the diagnosis of adrenal
insufficiency and hyperadrenocorticism, as well as to distinguish between the types of
hyperadrenocorticism.
1. BASIC CONCEPtS
A. Glucocorticoid secretion and function
1. The glucocorticoids (cortisol, corticosterone, and cortisone) are secreted by the zona fasciculata
and zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex.
2. Glucocorticoid secretion is stimulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which is
()  do po   d no a  i
from the hypothalamus.
318
CHAPTER 11
3. Glucocorticoid secretion is circadian in some species, although a distinct cyclical pattern has
been diffcult to demonstrate in the dog.
4. Corisol inhibits release of CRH, suppressing ACTH secretion. It also can suppress ACTH
5. Exogenous glucocorticoid administration also suppresses ACTH secretion.
6. Glucocorticoids have major dose-dependent effects on intermediary metabolism
a. Glucocorticoids antagonize the effects of insulin. They promote gluconeogenesis and
glycogenesis while decreasing glucose uptake by insulin-sensitive tissues
b. Glucocorticoids increase lipolysis
c. Other actions of glucocorticoids include suppression of wound healing, inflammation, and
immunologic responsiveness.
B. Mineralocorticoid secretion and function
1. Aldosterone is the primary mineralocorticoid secreted by the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal
cortex.
2. Aldosterone secretion is regulated by several complex mechanisms involving renin, ACTH, and
the primary control mechanism.
3. The kidney is the primary target organ of aldosterone
a. Aldosterone promotes renal tubular reabsorption of sodium (Nat).
b. Aldosterone promotes renal tubular excretion of K'.
C. The zona reticularis of the adrenal cortex secretes androgens and estrogens, which may relate to
certain clinical features of adrenocortical disease.
I. DISEASES OF THE ADRENAL CORTEX
A. Hyperadrenocorticism (Cases 26 and 34)
1. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism is the most common form of naturally occurring
canine hyperadrenocorticism.
a. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism results from hyperplasia or small neoplasms of the
ACTH-secreting cells of the anterior pituitary.
b. ACTH excess also may arise from the pars intermedia of the pituitary.
c. Chronic, excessive ACTH stimulation results in bilateral adrenal cortical hyperplasia.
2. Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism results from functional adrenal cortical neoplasms that
autonomously secrete excessive cortisol. Most of these adrenocortical neoplasms are unilateral
3. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism occurs in animals receiving long-term glucocorticoid therapy
The clinical signs of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism are indistinguishable from those of naturally
occurring hyperadrenocorticism.
forms of the disease are recognized.
5. Hyperadrenocorticism may be a component of a complex endocrinopathy in horses with
adenomas of the pars intermedia of the pituitary.
6. Hypercortisolemia, in extremely rare cases, may be caused by ectopic ACTH secretion by
 non-pituitary or adrenal tumors, or may be food-dependent.
B. Hypoadrenocorticism
1. Hypoadrenocorticism usually results from adrenal gland failure (adrenal-dependent
hypoadrenocorticism, Addison's disease) rather than failure of ACTH secretion by the pituitary
gland (pituitary-dependent hypoadrenocorticism); however, the specific cause of disease may be
undetermined.
ENDOCRiNE SySTeM
319
a.
Signs of both mineralocoricoid and glucocorticoid deficiency are seen.
b. Immune-mediated destruction of the adrenal cortex has been demonstrated in people and is
suspected to occur in dogs.
2. Inadequate ACTH stimulation resulting from pituitary disease is an occasional cause of
glucocorticoid deficiency.
3.
 Chronic or high-dose glucocorticoid therapy may cause adrenal corical atrophy which may
result in iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism when therapy is stopped suddenly. Signs of glucocorticoid
but not mineralocorticoid deficiency are seen.
4. Overzealous therapy of hyperadrenocorticism with o,p'-DDD (Lysodren?) can produce
glucocorticoid deficiency and, rarely, mineralocorticoid defciency. Clinically signifcant
mineralocorticoid defciency also can be produced with trilostane therapy, although this is rare.
Il. LaBORATORY EValUaTION OF THE ADRENaL CORTEX (fIGURE 11.4)
A.Plasma cortisol measurement
1. Immunoassays to quantitate cortisol concentrations of plasma have been validated for dogs, cats,
and horses. In birds, corticosterone is the principal glucocorticoid secreted by the adrenal gland.
2. In most laboratory assays, cortisol is the primary glucocorticoid that is detected; there is
minimal cross-reactivity with corticosterone and cortisone.
3. Prednisolone and other exogenous steroids except dexamethasone will cross-react in commonly
used cortisol immunoassays. The degree of cross-reactivity varies with individual assay kits.
4. Resting or baseline cortisol values of animals with hyperadrenocorticism may be within the
reference interval.
CNS
stress
Hypothalamus
CRH
Pituitary Gland
Shortloop
Feedback
Cortisol
Adrenal
Glands
FIGURE ll.4. Overview of the hypothalarmic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and tests of adrenal function. The
hypothalamus produces corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) in response to central nervous system factors often
associated with stress. CRH stimulates the secretion of adrenocorticotropic horrmone (ACIH) by the anterior
pituitary corticotroph cells. ACIH stimulates adrenal gland growth and secretion of cortisol in most dormestic
mammals (corticosterone is the main product in birds). Ihe unbound or free fraction of cortisol in plasma provides
negative feedback regulation of both the pituitary and hypothalarmus. Exogenous glucocorticoids, such as
dexarmethasone, are used in carefully defined dosages (e.g., low-dose dexamethasone suppression test) to evaluate
 the HPA axis negative feedback systems which become abnormal in pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
Appropriate dosages of ACTH analogues are adrministered to evaluate adrenal gland secretory reserve. The adrenal
gland secretory reserve is decreased in adrenal insuffciency and generally increased in hyperadrenocorticism and
chronic, stressful illnesses.
320
CHAPTER 11
5. Cortisol values after adrenal stimulation with exogenous ACTH or after administration of
dexamethasone to suppress pituitary-derived endogenous ACTH are used in conjunction with
baseline cortisol values to diagnose adrenocortical dysfunction. Several testing protocols and
guidelines for interpretation of cortisol values have been suggested.
B. ACTH stimulation test
1. This test evaluates the ability of the adrenal gland to increase plasma cortisol concentration in
response to ACTH stimulation.
2. ACTH stimulation test protocol
a. A blood sample is drawn for determination of baseline plasma cortisol concentration.
b. Synthetic ACTH (Cosyntropin*) is administered intravenously. The dosage of synthetic ACTH
varies with the animal species.
(1) 125μg Cosyntropin in the cat
(2) 250μg Cosyntropin in the dog
(3) 1 mg Cosyntropin? in the horse
c. A second blood sample is drawn post-ACTH administration to determine plasma cortisol
concentration following adrenal gland stimulation. The timing of blood sample collection is as
follows:
(1) 60 and 90 minutes post ACTH administration in the cat
(2) 60 minutes post ACTH administration in the dog
(3)  Iwo and four hours post ACTH administration in the horse
(4) These times approximate peak plasma cortisol concentrations after ACTH administration.
3. Interpretation of the ACTH stimulation test
a. Interpretation of the ACTH stimulation test should be based on absolute values of cortisol
concentration in the post ACTH sample rather than relative increases (percentages)
b. Normal adrenocortical activity in dogs typically exhibits a two- to three-fold increase in plasma
cortisol concentration above baseline values.
C. Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs typically produces post-ACTH cortisol
concentrations that are greater than 20μg/dL
d. Although individual test results must be interpreted with reference intervals for the laboratory
performing the tests, inter-laboratory variations in cortisol measurement by immunoassay usually
are minimal. Therefore, published reference intervals for plasma cortisol concentration may
provide useful guidelines for interpreting the ACTH stimulation test results.
4. At least 50% of dogs with functional adrenal tumors have abnormal ACTH responses.
5. Some dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism and a larger proportion of dogs with
functional adrenal tumors may have a normal response to the ACTH stimulation test.
6. Dogs with iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism have little or no response to exogenous ACTH
administration. This is the test of choice to diagnose iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
7. Dogs with naturally-occurring hypoadrenocorticism have little or no response to exogenous
ACTH administration. The ACTH stimulation test does not allow identification of the cause of
hypoadrenocorticism (pituitary vs. adrenal vs. iatrogenic).
C. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (Case 34)
 1. This test is used to screen animals for pituitary-dependent and adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.
2. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test protocol
a. A blood sample is drawn for baseline plasma cortisol determination.
b. Dexamethasone is injected intraveneously at the following dosages
(1)  0.01 mg/kg in the dog
(2)  0.1 mg/kg in the cat
c. A second blood sample is drawn eight hours after administration of dexamethasone for
determination of plasma cortisol concentration.
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM 
321
3. Interpretation of the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
hour cortisol concentrations less than l ug/dL.
cortisol concentrations usually are inadequately suppressed at eight hours post-dexamethasone
administration.
C. The low-dose dexamethasone suppression test is considered sensitive because only about 5%
of dogs with naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism have normal test results.
d. Abnormal low-dose dexamethasone suppression test results may be seen with stress.
D. High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (Case 34)
1. This test is used to distinguish dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism from dogs
with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
2. High-dose dexamethasone suppression test protocol
a. A blood sample is drawn for baseline plasma cortisol determination.
b. Dexamethasone is injected intraveneously at the following dosages:
(1) 0.1 to 1.0 mg/kg in the dog
(2) 1.0 mg/kg in the cat
C. A second blood sample is drawn eight hours after administration of dexamethasone for
determination of plasma cortisol concentration.
3. Interpretation of the high-dose dexamethasone suppression test
a. In normal dogs and cats, the cortisol concentration in the eight-hour sample is suppressed to
the low limit of detection of the cortisol assay.
b. Most dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism also suppress to this extent.
c. Inadequate suppression of plasma cortisol concentration is observed in most dogs with adrenal
tumors and in approximately 25% of dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
E. Urine cortisol/creatinine ratio
1. The urine cortisolcreatinine ratio has been advocated as a screening test for
hyperadrenocorticism.
2. An increased cortisolcreatinine ratio is a sensitive indicator of naturally occurring
hyperadrenocorticism; however, increased ratios also may occur in dogs that are stressed.
3. The urine cortisolcreatinine ratio attempts to offset within-day fluctuations in plasma cortisol
concentration. This is based on the premise that cortisol concentration in a randomly collected
urine sample reflects the average plasma cortisol during the time in which that urine was produced.
4. Cortisol and creatinine concentrations are measured concurrently in a randomly collected urine
sample.
5. Because of variations in the urine cortisol assay, it is particularly important to use reference
values from the laboratory performing the test.
6. The urine cortisolcreatinine ratio cannot be used to monitor treatment with trilostane of dogs
with hyperadrenocorticism.
F. Urinary cortisol/creatinine ratio with high-dose suppression test
1. This test is used to differentiate between pituitary-dependent and adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism, but is infrequently performed.
2. Urinary cortisol and creatinine concentrations are measured in samples from three consecutive
mornings. After collection of the second urine sample, three oral doses of 0.l mg/kg dexamethasone
are administered at eight-hour intervals.
3. If the ratio of the third urine sample is more than 50% lower than the mean of the frst two
4. Reference intervals from the laboratory performing the test should be used to interpret the test
results.
322
CHAPTER 11
G. Measurement of endogenous ACTH concentration
1. Measurement of endogenous ACTH concentration by radioimmunoassay may be useful in
 distinguishing pituitary-dependent forms of hyperadrenocorticism from adrenal-dependent forms.
Plasma concentrations were very high in a dog with ectopic ACTH secretion and low in a dog with
food-dependent glucocorticoid excess.
2. Interpretation of endogenous ACTH concentrations
a. Plasma ACTH concentration is within the reference interval or high in pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism, whereas plasma ACTH concentration is low in adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.
b. Plasma ACTH concentration is decreased in dogs with pituitary-dependent
hypoadrenocorticism, whereas plasma ACTH concentration is increased in dogs with adrenal-
dependent hypoadrenocorticism.
3. Measurement of endogenous ACTH concentration in animals has been limited by technical
difficulties including questionable stability of ACTH in the plasma and hormone interaction with
plastic and glass tubes.
H. Other laboratory abnormalities in hyperadrenocorticism
1. Other laboratory abnormalities may include the following:
a. Leukocytosis may be characterized by neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia. In some
animals with chronic disease, the neutrophil count may return to the reference interval.
b. Serum alkaline phosphatase activity frequently is increased in affected dogs.
(1) Both the hepatic and the steroid-induced isoenzymes of alkaline phosphatase may increase
(see Chapter 7).
(2) Serum activity of the steroid isoenzyme may be increased markedly. Determination
of steroid isoenzyme activity has been suggested as a useful screening test for
hyperadrenocorticism.
c. Hyperglycemia is sometimes present.
(1) In dogs, the magnitude of hyperglycemia usually does not exceed the renal threshold.
(2) In horses, the magnitude of hyperglycemia exceeds the renal threshold and glucosuria is
common.
d. Lipemia and increased serum cholesterol concentration may be observed.
e. The urine is dilute; the specifc gravity typicall indicates isosthenuria or hyposthenuria.
 2. Abnormalities in plasma cortisol concentration in pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
with bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia
a. The baseline plasma cortisol concentration may be within the reference interval or elevated.
b. Most affected dogs exhibit an exaggerated plasma cortisol response to ACTH stimulation;
however, a few affected dogs have plasma cortisol values within the reference interval
c. Low doses of dexamethasone fail to suppress plasma cortisol concentrations in horses and
d. High doses of dexamethasone suppress plasma cortisol concentrations in most dogs with
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
2. High doses of dexamethasone fail to suppress plasma cortisol concentrations in all horses and
a low percentage of dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
3. Abnormalities in plasma cortisol concentration in adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism with
a functional adrenocortical neoplasm and atrophy of the contralateral adrenal gland
a. Baseline plasma cortisol concentration may be within the reference interval or increased
b. The plasma cortisol response to ACTH stimulation is within the reference interval or
exaggerated.
C. The plasma cortisol concentration fails to suppress with either low or high doses of
dexamethasone.
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
323
adrenocortical atrophy
a. The baseline plasma cortisol concentration is within the reference interval or decreased.
b. There is no response to administration of ACTH.
1.  Laboratory findings in adrenal insufficiency with cortical atrophy or an absence of histologic lesions
in the adrenal gland
1. Plasma ACTH concentration and attempted ACTH stimulation
a. Baseline plasma cortisol concentration may be within the reference interval or decreased. A
 dose of 5μg/kg has been shown to be equivalent to 250 μg/dog to distinguish between nonadrenal
illness and hypoadrenocorticism in dogs
b. There is no response to attempted ACTH stimulation.
 2. Other laboratory abnormalities may include the following:
a. Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia develop from renal loss of Na and retention of Kt because of
aldosterone deficiency.
(1) Na*/K+ ratio less than 23:1 is highly suggestive of adrenal insufficiency.
(2) Na*/K+ ratio less than 26:1 also may be suggestive of adrenal insuffciency.
(3) Sodium and potassium values that are within the reference interval do not exclude adrenal
insufficieney.
b. Hypercalcemia may be present.
c. Lymphocytosis may be observed in a minor proportion of animals with adrenal insuffciency
d. Hypoglycemia may be observed. Hyperglycemia may be present with concurrent diabetes
mellitus.
2. The adrenal glands may have cortical atrophy or lesions may not be present.
REFERENCES
Angles JM, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, et al: 1997. Use of urine cortisol:creatinine ratio versus
adrenocorticotrophic hormone stimulation testing for monitoring mitotane treatment of pituitary
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:1002-1004.
Barber PJ, Elliott J: 1998. Feline chronic renal failure: Calcium homestasis in 80 cases diagnosed
between 1992 and 1995. J Small Anim Pract 39:108-116.
Becker TJ, Graves TK, Kruger JM, et al: 2ooo. Effects of methimazole on renal function in cats with
hyperthyroidism. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:215-223.
Chew DJ, Carothers M: 1989. Hypercalcemia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prart 19:265-287.
 op    d  r e na   i   s
cases (1982-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:1132-1136.
S            n  s
   s  d n m s  son n 
hypersomatotropism, hypoprolactinemia, and pituitary enlargement with transdifferentiation. Domest
Anim Endocrinol 35:98-111.
 Dixon RM, Mooney CT: 1999. Canine serum thyroglobulin autoantibodies in health, hypothyroidism
and non-thyroidal illness. Res Vet Sri 6:243-246.
 Drobatz KJ, Hughes D: 1997. Concentration of ionized calcium in plasma from cats with urethral
obstruction. J Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:1392-1395
324
CHAPTER 11
Elliott J, Dobson JM, Dunn JK, et al: 1991. Hypercalcemia in the dog: A study of 40 cases. J Small
Anim Pract 32:564-571.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Feldman MS: 1996. Use of low- and high-dose dexamethasone tests for
distinguishing pituitary-dependent from adrenal tumor hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 209:772-775.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW: 2003. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed. WB
Saunders Co., Philadelphia
Ferguson DC: 1995. Free Thyroid Hormone Measurements in the Diagnosis of Thyroid Disease. In:
Bonagura J, Kirk RW (eds): Current Veterinary Therapy Xll. WB Saunders Co., Philadelphia, pp.
360-363
Ferguson DC: 1997. Euthyroid sick syndrome. Canine Pract 22:49-51.
Ferguson DC: 20o0. Advances in interpretation of thyroid function tests. Adv Small Anim Med 13:1-3.
Ferguson DC: 2007. Testing for hypothyroidism in dogs. Vet Clin N Am Small Animal Prart
37:647669.
      s   s    
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, New York, pp. 735-770.
Ferguson DC, Dirikolu L, Hoenig M: 2009. Adrenal Corticosteroids, Mineralocorticoids, and Steroid
Synthesis Inhibitors. In: Riviere JE, Papich M (eds): Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th
ed. Wiley-Blackwell, New York, pp. 77l-802.
a) s 'snn   Pg d u    e a sn
Consultations in Feline Internal Medicine, Vol. 5. Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis, pp. 207-215.
Ferguson DC, Peterson ME: 1992. Serum free and total iodothyronine concentrations in dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism. Am J Vet Res 53:1636-1640.
Foster DJ, Thoday KL: 2000. Tissue sources of serum alkaline phosphatase in 34 hyperthyroid cats: A
qualitative and quantitative study. Res Vet Sei 68:89-94.
Galac S, Buijtels J, Kooistra Hs. 2009. Urinary corticoid:creatinine ratios in dogs with pituitary-
dependent hypercortisolism during trilostane treatment. J Vet Intern Med 23:1214-1219.
Galac S, Kars VJ, Voorhut G, et al: 2008. ACTH-independent hyperadrenocorticism due to meal-
induced hypercortisolemia in a dog. Vet J 177:141-143.
     6      '  '  ' 
of adrenocorticotropic hormone. Domest Anim Endocrinol 28:338-348.
Gaskill CL, Burton SA, Gelens HC, et al: 1999. Effects of phenobarbital treatment on serum thyroxine
and thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations in epileptic dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:489-496.
Gaughan KR, Bruyette DS: 2001. Thyroid function testing in Greyhounds. Am J Vet Res 62:1130-1133.
Goossens MM, Meyer HP, Voorhout G, et al: 1995. Urinary excretion of glucocorticoids in the
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in cats. Domest Anim Endocrinol 12:355-362.
Graham PA, Lundquist RB, Refsal KR, et al: 200l. A 12-month prospective study of 234 thyroglobulin
antibody-positive dogs which had no laboratory evidence of thyroid dysfunction. J Vet Intern Med
15:298 (abstract #105)
Graham PA, Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, et al: 200l. Lymphocytic thyroiditis. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract 31:915-33.
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
325
Greco DS, Peterson ME, Davidson AP, et al: 1999. Concurrent pituitary and adrenal tumors in dogs
with hyperadrenocorticism: 17 cases (1978-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1349-1353.
Greco Ds: 200l. Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in cats and dogs. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prart
31:845-953
Grosenbaugh DA, Gadawski JE, Muir WW: 1998. Evaluation of a portable clinical analyzer in a
veterinary hospital setting. J Am Vet Med Assor 213:691-694.
Guptill L, Scott-Moncrieff JC, Bottoms G, et al: 1997. Use of the urine cortisol:creatinine ratio to
monitor treatment response in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 210:1158-1161.
Harms CA, Hoskinson JJ, Bruyette DS, et al: 1994. Development of an experimental model of
hypothyroidism in cockatiels (Nymphicus hollandicus). Am J Vet Res 55:399-404.
Hoenig M, Ferguson DC: 1999. Diagnostic utility of glycosylated hemoglobin concentrations in the cat.
Domest Anim Endocrinol 16:1l-17.
Hoenig M, Peterson ME, Ferguson D: 1992. Glucose tolerance and insulin secretion in cats with
spontaneous hyperthyroidism. Res Vet Sri 53:338-341.
Huang HP, Yang HL, Liang SL, et al: 1999. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in 28 dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 35:200-207.
Domest Anim Endocrinol 15:525-536
Jensen AL, Iversen L, Koch J, et al: 1997. Evaluation of the urinary cortisol:creatinine ratio in the
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Small Anim Prart 38:99-102.
Kallet AJ, Richter KP, Feldman EC, et al: 1991. Primary hyperparathyroidism in cats: Seven cases
(19841989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1767-1771.
Kantrowitz LB, Peterson ME, Melian C, et al: 2o0l. Serum total thyroxine, total triiodothyronine, free
thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations in dogs with nonthyroidal disease. J Am Vet Med Assor
219:765-769.
Kaplan AJ, Peterson ME, Kemppainen RJ: 1995. Effects of disease and the results of diagnostic tests for
use in detecting hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:445-451.
 Kaptein EM, Hays MT, Ferguson DC: 1994. Thyroid hormone metabolism: A comparative evaluation.
Vet Clin North Am Small AnimPract 24:431-466.
Kerl ME, Peterson ME, Wallace MS, et al: 1999. Evaluation of a low-dose synthetic
developing hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:1497-1501.
Kintzer PP, Peterson ME: 1997. Diagnosis and management of canine cortisol-secreting adrenal tumors.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prart 27:299-307.
Kogika MM, Lustoza MD, Notomi MK, et al: 2006. Serum ionized calcium in dogs with chronic renal
failure and metabolic acidosis. Vet Clin Pathol 35:44l-445.
Kooistra HS, Diaz-Espineira M, Mol JA, et al: 2000. Secretion pattern of thyroid-stimulating hormone
in dogs during euthyroidism and hypothyroidism. Domest Anim Endocrinol 18:19-29.
Kooistra HS, Voorhout G, Mol JA, et al: 1997. Correlation between impairment of glucocorticoid
feedback and the size of the pituitary gland in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J
Endocrinol 152:387-394.
326
CHAPTER 11
hypoadrenocorticism in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 22:1070-1073.
Lyon ME, Guajardo M, Laha T, et al: I995. Electrolyte balanced heparin may produce a bias in the
measurement of ionized calcium concentration in specimens with abnormally low protein
concentration. Clin Chem Arta 233:105-113.
Marca MC, Loste A, Orden I, et al: 2ool. Evaluation of canine serum thyrotropin (TSH) concentration:
Comparison of three analytical procedures. J Vet Diagn Invest 13:106-110.
Melian C, Peterson ME: 1996. Diagnosis and treatment of naturally occurring hypoadrenocorticism in
42 dogs. J Small Anim Prart 37:268-275.
Merryman JI, Buckles EL: 1998. The avian thyroid gland. Part one: A review of the anatomy and
physiology. J Avian Med Surg 12:234-237.
Merryman JI, Buckles EL: 1998. The avian thyroid gland. Part two: A review of function and
pathophysiology. J Avian Med Surg 12:238-242.
Messinger JS, Windham WR, Ward, CR: 2009. Ionized hypercalcemia in dogs: A retrospective study of
109 cases (1998-2003). J Vet Intern Med 23:514-519.
Muller PB, Taboada J, Hosgood G, et al: 20o0. Effects of long-term phenobarbital treatment on the
thyroid and adrenal axis and adrenal function tests in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 14:157-164.
Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA, et al: 2002. Prevalence of serum thyroid hormone
autoantibodies in dogs with clinical signs of hypothyroidism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:466 471.
Nachreiner RF, Refsal KR, Graham PA, et al: 1998. Prevalence of autoantibodies to thyroglobulin in
dogs with nonthyroidal illness. Am J Vet Res 59:951-955.
Nelson R, Bertoy E: 1997. Use of the urine cortisol:creatinine ratio to monitor treatment response in
dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2lo:1l58-116l.
Norman EJ, Thompson H, Mooney CT: 1999. Dynamic adrenal function testing in eight dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism associated with adrenocortical neoplasia. Vet Rer 144:551-554.
Panciera DL, Lefebvre HP: 2009. Effect of experimental hypothyroidism on glomerular filtration rate
and plasma creatinine concentration in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 23:1045-1050.
Paster MB: 1991. Avian reproductive endocrinology. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prart 2l:1343-1359
Peterson ME, Gamble DA: l99o. Effect of nonthyroidal illness on serum thyroxine concentrations in
cats: 494 cases (1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1203-1208.
Peterson ME, Graves TY, Gamble DA: 1990. Triodothyronine (T3) suppression tests: An aid in the
diagnosis of mild hyperthyroidism in cats. J Vet Intern Med 4:233-238.
Peterson ME, James KM, Wallace M, et al: 1991. Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism in five cats. J Vet
Intern Med 5:47-51.
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Kass PH: 1996. Pretreatment clinical and laboratory findings in dogs with
hyperadrenocorticism: 225 cases (1979-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:85-91.
Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R: 2ool. Measurement of serum concentrations of free thyroxine, total
thyroxine, and total triodothyronine in cats with hyperthyroidism and cats with nonthyroidal disease.
Am Vet Med Assoc 218: 529-536.
ENDOCRiNE SYSTeM
327
 Peterson ME, Melian C, Nichols R: 1997. Measurement of serum total thyroxine, triodothyronine, free
thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
211:1396-1402.
Rae M: 1995. Endocrine disease in pet birds. Semin Avian Exotic Pet Med 4:32-38.
Randolph JF, Toomey J, Center SA, et al: 1998. Use of the urine cortisol-to-creatinine ratio for
monitoring dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism during induction treatment with
mitotane (o,p' DDD). Am J Vet Res 59:258-261
Rayalam S, Hoenig MH, Ferguson DC: 2009. Hypothalamic and Pituitary Hormones. In: Riviere JE,
 Papich M (eds): Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, New York, NY,
pp. 693-716.
Refsal KR, Nachreiner RF, Stein BE, et al: 1991. Use of the triodothyronine suppression test for
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in ill cats that have serum concentration of iodothyronines within normal
range. J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:15941601
Reimers IJ, Lawler DF, Sutaria PM, et al: 1990. Effects of age, sex and body size on serum
concentrations of thyroid and adrenocortical hormones in dogs. Am J Vet Res 5l:454-457.
 Reine NJ: 2007. Medical management of pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism: Mitotane versus
trilostane. Clin Terh Small Anim Prart 22:18-25.
Reusch CE, Tomsa K: 1999. Serum fructosamine concentration in cats with overt hyperthyroidism J
Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1297-1300.
Rodriguez Pineiro Ml, Benchekroun G, de Fornel-Thibaud P, et al. : 2009. Accuracy of an
from ACTH-independent hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 23:850-855.
Rosol TJ, Nagode LA, Couto CG, et al: 1992. Parathyroid hormone (PTH)-related protein, PTH, and
Ross JT, Scavelli TD, Matthiesen DT, et al: 199l. Adenocarcinoma of the apocrine glands of the anal
sac in dogs: A review of 32 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 27:349-355
Schaer M: 200l. A justification for urine glucose monitoring in the diabetic dog and cat. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 37:311-312
Schenck PA, Chew DJ: 2008. Calcium: Total or ionized? Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Prart
38:497-502.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ: 2003. Determination of calcium fractionation in dogs with chronic renal failure.
Am J Vet Res 64:1181-1184.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ: 2005. Prediction of serum ionized calcium concentration by use of serum total
calcium concentration in dogs. Am J Vet Res 66:1330-1336.
Scott-Moncrieff CR, Nelson RW, Bruner JM, et al: 1998. Comparison of serum concentrations of
thyroid stimulating hormone in healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and euthyroid dogs with concurrent
disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:387-391.
Scott-Moncrieff CR, Nelson RW: 1998. Change in serum thyroid-stimulating hormone concentration in
response to administration of thyrotropin-releasing hormone to healthy dogs, hypothyroid dogs, and
euthyroid dogs with concurrent disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1435-1438.
Smiley LE, Peterson ME: 1993. Evaluation of a urine cortisol:creatinine ratio as a screening test for
hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 7:163-168.
328
CHAPTER 11
Sterczer A, Meyer HP, Van Sluijs FJ, et al: 1999. Fast resolution of hypercortisolism in dogs with
portosystemic encephalopathy after surgical shunt closure. Res Vet Sci 66:63-67.
Suave F Paradis M: 20oo. Use of recombinant human thyroid-stimulating hormone for thyrotropin
stimulation test in euthyroid dogs. Can Vet J 4l:215-219.
Syme HM, Elliott J: 200l. Evaluation of proteinuria in hyperthyroid cats. J Vet Intern Med 15:299
(abstract #110)
Syring RS, Otto CM, Drobatz KJ: 200l. Hyperglycemia in dogs and cats with head trauma. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 218:11241129.
Teske E, Rothuizen J, de Bruijne JJ, et al: 1989. Corticosteroid-induced alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme
in the diagnosis of canine hypercorticism. Vet Rec I25:12-14.
Thoday KL, Mooney CT: 1992. Historical, clinical and laboratory features of 126 hyperthyroid cats. Vet
Rec 131:257-264.
Tomsa K, Glaus TM, Kacl GM, et al: 2o0l. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test to assess
thyroid function in severely sick cats. J Vet intern Med 15:89-93.
Toribio RE, Kohn CW, Capen CC, et al: 2003. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion, PTH mRNA and
calcium-sensing receptor mRNA expression in equine parathyroid cells, and effects of interleukin
(IL)-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha on equine parathyroid cell function. J Moler Endocrinol
31:609620
Toribio RE, Kohn CW, Chew DJ, et al: 200l. Comparison of serum parathyroid hormone and ionized
           n 
healthy horses and horses with enterocolitis. Am J Vet Res 62:938-947.
Toribio RE, Kohn CW, Chew DJ, et al: 200l. Comparison of serum parathyroid hormone and ionized
calcium and magnesium concentrations and fractional urinary clearance of calcium and phosphorus in
healthy horses and horses with enterocolitis. Am J Vet Res 62:938-947.
Iorrance AG, Nachreiner R: 1989. Intact parathyroid hormone assay and total calcium concentration in
the diagnosis of disorders of calcium metabolism in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 3:86-89.
Turrel JM, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, et al: 1988. Thyroid carcinoma causing hyperthyroidism in cats:
14 cases (1981-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:359-364.
van Hoek I, Lefebvre HP, Peremans K, et al: 2009. Short- and long-term follow-up of glomerular and
tubular renal markers of kidney function in hyperthyroid cats after treatment with radioiodine
Domestic Anim Endocrinol 36:45-56.
van Hoek IM, Vandermeulen E, Peremans K, et al: 20l0. Thyroid stimulation with recombinant human
thyrotropin in healthy cats, cats with non-thyroidal illness and in cats with low serum thyroxin and
azotaemia after treatment of hyperthyroidism. J Feline Med Surg 12:117-121.
Von Klopmann T, Boettcher IC, Rotermund A, et al: 2006. Euthyroid sick syndrome in dogs with
idiopathic epilepsy before treatment with anticonvulsant drugs. J Vet Intern Med 20:516-522.
Wathers CB, Scott-Moncrieff JCR: 1992. Hypocalcemia in cats. Compend Contin Educ Prart Vet
14:497-507.
Watson AD, Church DB, Emslie DR, et al: 1998. Plasma cortisol responses to three corticotrophic
preparations in normal dogs. Aust Vet J 76:255-257.
Whitley NT, Drobatz KJ, Panciera DL: 1997. Insulin overdose in dogs and cats: 28 cases (1986-1993).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:326-330.
EN DOCRINE SYSTE M
329
Wood MA, Panciera DL, Berry SH, et al: Influence of isoflurane general anesthesia or anesthesia and
surgery on thyroid function tests in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 23:7-15, 2009.
Yang X, McGraw RA, Ferguson DC: 2000. cDNA cloning of canine common alpha gene and its
Endocrinol 18:379-393.
Yang X, MeGraw RA, Su X, et al: 2000. Canine thyrotropin beta-subunit gene: Cloning and expression
in Escherichia coli, generation of monoclonal antibodies, and transient expression in the Chinese
hamster 0vary cells. Domest Anim Endocrinol 18:363-78.
CHAPTeR 12
CYTOLOGY
Pauline M. Rakich, DVM, PhD, and Kenneth S. Latimer, DVM, PhD
INTRODUCTION
patient. In many cases, a definitive cytologic diagnosis can be made. However, even when a specific diagnosis
cannot be rendered, the information provided by cytology (e.g., inflammation vs. neoplasia) is useful for
choosing additional tests to make a definitive diagnosis (e.g., culture vs. histopathology).
I. SPECIMEN COLLECTION AND HANDLING
The usefulness of cytology directly depends on the quality of sample collection and preparation.
A. Tissue imprints
1. Touch imprints can be prepared from external lesions or masses as well as from biopsies of deep
tissues.
2. Imprints of surface material may reflect only superfcial inflammation and infection and may not
may be present only on the tissue surface
3. The tissue should be blotted to remove blood and tissue fluid which dilute diagnostic material
and prevent cells from adhering to the slide and flattening out adequately for examination.
4. A slide is gently pressed against the tissue or lesion one or more times to make the cytologic
touch imprints.
B. Tissue scrapings
1. This method is used when impressions would yield too few cells (e.g., conjunctiva, firm tissues)
or it is not possible to imprint.
 2. A salpel blade is scraped across the tissue several times until a small amount of material
collects on the blade. This material is spread across a slide to make the smear.
3. For conjunctival scrapings, a specially designed spatula (Kimura platinum spatula) or scalpel
 handle can be used to collect cells. Swabs are not sufficiently abrasive to obtain a diagnostic
specimen.
C. Fine-needle aspiration
1. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is used for lesions beneath the skin surface or in deep tissues or
internal organs.
2. A 21- to 25-gauge needle, attached to a 3- to 12-mL syringe, is inserted into the tissue, negative
pressure is applied by withdrawing the plunger to approximately three-fourths of the syringe
volume, and the needle is redirected several times to sample multiple areas of the tissue or mass.
331
332
CHAPTER 12
3. Unless the mass is filled with fluid, aspirated material will be present in the needle but will not
be visible in the syringe.
4. If blood is seen in the syringe, negative pressure should be released immediately to prevent
dilution of the aspirated material with blood cells
5. Before the needle is removed from the tissue, negative pressure is released to prevent
J so naad on ue us pue snssn lupuns  sh yi ad au jo uo
aspirated material into the syringe.
6. The needle is then removed from the syringe, air is drawn into the syringe, the needle is
reconnected and placed against a glass slide, and the aspirated material within the needle is
expressed onto the slide.
7. The material is smeared out to prepare a monolayer of flattened cells.
D. Stab method/nonaspiration fine-needle biopsy
1. Specimens normally sampled by FNA also can be obtained by a needle inserted into the lesion/
tissue without use of negative pressure.
2. The (22-gauge to 25-gauge) needle is introduced into the tissue and gently moved up and down
the needle tract to harvest cells. The material in the needle is expelled onto a slide and smears are
made as usual.
3. This method is reported to obtain specimens that are more highly cellular but less bloody than
those obtained by the aspiration method.
E. Swabs
 1. Specimens from ear canals, fistulous tracts, exudates, and vagina or endometrium are obtained
by swabbing the tissue with a moistened sterile cotton swab
2. Smears are prepared by gently rolling the swab on a slide to form a linear preparation.
3. The swab should not be smeared back and forth on the slide because this method causes
excessive cellular damage and lysis.
F. Fluids
1. Fluids should be collected into tubes containing EDTA to prevent clotting.
2. If the fluid also will be cultured or used for biochemical tests, a separate aliquot should be
collected on a sterile swab or in a sterile tube. The collection tube for microbiological culture
should not contain EDTA because it is bacteriostatic.
3. Unless the sample will be processed within an hour or two, smears should be prepared
immediately to prevent cell deterioration and post-collection bacterial overgrowth.
4. Direct, blood-type smears can be prepared from cloudy fluids.
5. Squash preparations can be made from any particulate material in fluids.
6. Fluids that appear clear or only slightly turbid are usually sparsely cellular and must be
concentrated for smears to be cellular enough to be diagnostic. The fluid can be centrifuged (as for
urine sediment preparations), the majority of supernatant decanted, and cells resuspended in a
drop or two of the remaining fluid. Blood-type smears are made from the concentrated cell
suspension.
7. Fluid specimens requiring cell count and protein determination that are sent to a laboratory for
analysis should be submitted as an aliquot of fluid in EDTA along with two or three unstained
slides. Although reasonably accurate cell counts and protein concentrations can be obtained from
fluid that has been in transit for several days, the cells deteriorate within hours and cellular
morphology cannot be evaluated accurately on such old specimens.
G. Smear preparation
1. Cells must be in a monolayer and flattened to be examined cytologically. A variety of methods
provides diagnostic smears.
2. Blood-type smears usually provide the most diagnostic preparation. They are useful when the
collected material is soft (e.g., lymph node aspirates, soft masses) or a mixture of tissue fluid and
CYTOLOGY
333
particulate material. With the tip of the needle touching the slide, the harvested material is gently
expressed onto the slide in a single drop. A second slide is brought up to the drop and a smear is
 made. When a large amount of material is obtained with aspiration and the drop is larger than
 needed for a smear, multiple smears can be made.
3. Squash preparations are used when the material is too frm or tenacious for blood-type smears.
a. They are prepared by placing a second slide on top of the slide containing the specimen and
the two slides are pulled apart, producing two smears. The weight of the slide is suffcient to
spread out the material.
b. When excessive pressure is placed on the spreader or upper slide as the two are pulled apart,
cells may be lysed. These smears have a tendency to be too thick.
4. Needle smears are prepared by using the syringe needle to pull the aspirated material outward in
several different directions to produce a star-shaped smear.
a. This method frequently produces a thick smear with the majority of cells insuffciently
flattened for microscopic examination.
b. Cells at the tips of the projections often form an adequate monolayer for microscopic
examination.
5. The material should not be sprayed onto a slide because this produces droplets that are too thick
and the cells are in multiple layers and insufficiently flattened to examine and identify. Thinner
droplets usually consist of free nuclei and nuclear debris of lysed cells.
6. Unstained smears must be protected from formalin fumes because they interfere with
Romanowsky staining and may render the smears nondiagnostic.
I. MASSES, LESIONS, AND TISSUES (FIGURE 12.1)
The first objective of cytologic evaluation of tissue and mass smears is to differentiate between
inflammatory and noninflammatory conditions. Noninflammatory lesions can then be separated into
neoplastic and nonneoplastic conditions. Mixtures of inflammatory cells and tissue cells present a
diagnostic challenge because it may be difficult cytologically to differentiate a neoplasm with
 inflammation from inflammation with hyperplasia of a normal cellular component. Some aspirates may
not yield diagnostic information, either because of the quality of the smears or because some lesions
cannot be diagnosed cytologically. In such instances, histopathology is required for diagnosis
A. Inflammatory lesions
1. The inflammatory cell type that predominates characterizes the exudate (purulent,
pyogranulomatous, granulomatous, eosinophilic, lymphocytic) and may suggest the cause of the
lesion.
2. Purulent exudates usually are associated with infectious agents, particularly bacteria, and a
diligent search for organisms should be conducted. Depending on the particular organism
involved, neutrophils are nondegenerate or exhibit varying degrees of degeneration. Degenerate
neutrophils indicate a toxic environment. They have swollen, smooth chromatin that stains less
intensely.
3. Macrophages are numerous or predominate in infections caused by fungal organisms, foreign
material, protozoa, and mycobacteria. The type of inflammation associated with such conditions is
commonly granulomatous or pyogranulomatous.
4. A predominance of eosinophils usually is associated with allergic reactions, parasites, some
infectious agents (e.g., Pythium), and eosinophilic granulomas.
5. Injection site reactions are associated with a mixed cell population in which small lymphocytes
predominate. Macrophages, plasma cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils are less numerous
Frequently, bright pink-purple granular to globular (injected) material may be seen within
macrophages as well as free in the background of the smear.
           
B. Unstained rod-shaped structures consistent with mycobacteria are present within the cytoplasm of macrophages.
C. Footprint-shaped Malassezia yeasts. D. Blastomyces dermatitidis yeasts. E. Cryptoroccus neoformans yeasts.
F: Histoplasma capsulatum yeasts within macrophages; continued.
334
FIGURE 12.1.continued. G. Coccidioides immitis yeasts surrounded by inflammatory cells. H. Sporothrix schenckii
               t e
335
FIGURE 12.1.
 continued. M. Pyogranulomatous inflammation associated with a ruptured keratin-producing cyst
or tumor. N. Sebaceous cells. O. Large amorphous masses of mucin and macrophages from a sialocele. P
 o    n    n   si   n
a lipoma or normal fat R. Plump spindle cells from a hemangiopericytoma; continued.
336
FIGURE 12.1.
transmissable venereal turmor. X. Malignant melanoma.
337
338
CHAPTER12
6. Xanthomas are common skin lesions of birds such as Parrots, Cockatiels, and Budgerigars that
are fed excessive sunflower seds. Cutaneous xanthomas consist of lipid-laden macrophages,
multinucleated giant cells, and occasional cholesterol crystals.
7. A variety of infectious agents can be seen in inflammatory lesions and many can be identifed
definitively by cytologic examination.
a. Bacteria are the most common organisms observed in cytologic preparations.
(1) With Romanowsky staining, the majority of bacteria appear dark blue as compared to
purple-staining nuclei and nuclear debris
(2) Bacteria may be cocci, bacilli, coccobacilli, or filaments.
(3) Clostridium spp. appear as large, blue bacilli with an unstained spore that may give the
organism a safety-pin-like appearance. Clostridial enteritis is relatively common in some
species of birds such as lorikeets.
(4) Mycobacteria fail to stain with Romanowsky stains and appear as clear, rod-shaped,
refractile structures within macrophages or in the background of the smear.
(5) Bacteria usually are extracellular or have been phagocytosed by neutrophils. They are
by neutrophils may be seen in macrophages when the neutrophil that contains the bacteria is
phagocytosed by the macrophage.
(6) Microbiological culture usually is required for definitive identification of most bacteria.
b. Superficial yeasts
(1) Malassezia spp. are footprint- or peanut-shaped yeasts commonly seen in cytologic
preparations from inflamed ears and skin imprints from dogs and, less frequently, cats.
(2) Candida spp. are oval to egg-shaped, basophilic yeasts that may be seen in the oral cavity
of many species or in cloacal swabs of birds. They also form hyphae and pseudohyphae.
C. The agents of deep, systemic, and miscellaneous mycoses
(1) Blastomyces dermatitidis is a round, basophilic yeast that generally measures 6 to 15μm
in diameter (approximately the size of an erythrocyte to slightly larger than a neutrophil) and
has a thick, distinct, clear, refractile capsule. This organism usually stains dark blue and
exhibits broad-based budding.
(2) Cryptocorrus neoformans is a yeast that most commonly causes infections in cats. The
          n   n 
mucopolysaccharide capsule. They may be present in large numbers admixed with very few
inflammatory cells.
(3) Histoplasma capsulatum is smaller than the above-mentioned yeasts, usually measuring 2
 s sisa  d  s on   s   u g o
a thin, clear halo. They usually are present within macrophages that typically contain
multiple yeasts within their cytoplasm.
(4)  Cocridioides immitisis the largest of the systemic mycotic agents. It is usually in low
 numbers in lesions and thus can be missed in cytological preparations. The organisms are 20- t0
200-qμm diameter spherules with a thick, refractile cell wall and granular basophilic protoplasm
 or multiple internal endospores that measure 2 to 5 μm in diameter.
(5) Sporothrix schenrkii may be associated with proliferative to ulcerated skin lesions, most
commonly in cats, dogs, and horses. The organisms are round to cigar-shaped, measure 3 to
9 μm long x l to 3μm wide, and stain blue. Organisms are numerous in feline lesions, but
they are infrequent to rare in canine lesions.
(6)  The so-called megabacteria of birds are now considered fungi that may be observed in
cloacal swabs of affected and some clinically healthy birds. These organisms are rod-shaped
 po azis an aiexde) qu u  I Axide ansu pu snuy on
microfilaria). They stain blue with Romanowsky and Gram's stains
(7) Many fungi that cause infections of various tissues form hyphae.
CYTOLOGY
339
(a) The majority of these are not identifiable on the basis of cytologic features and
require microbiological culture for identification.
(b) Fungal hyphae are recognized as linear structures, usually measuring in the range of
5 to 10 μm in width, that may have internal septation and/or branching.
(c) The hyphae usually stain blue, but some fungi stain poorly or may not stain at all
but may be visible as clear, elongate structures.
(d) Some fungi are pigmented (i.e., dematiaceous fungi) and are various shades of gold,
brown, or black.
 a a  s    a ()
d. Protozoa are observed infrequently.
(1) Coccidia that infect enterocytes and deep tissues (e.g., Sarcocystis spp., Toxoplasma
gondi) often appear as crescent- or banana-shaped organisms with a small purple nucleus
and poorly staining cytoplasm.
(2) Trichomonas sp. is observed commonly in caseous, oral lesions of free-ranging birds such
as doves and pigeons. In Romanowsky-stained preparations they appear as pear-shaped
organisms with a small nucleus, curvilinear nonstaining structure (axostyle), and anterior
flagella. They may be recognized readily in cytologic wet mounts by their undulating
movement.
(3) Leishmania sp. may be associated with cutaneous lesions. These organisms are 2 to 3 μm
in diameter and slightly oval, with a small nucleus and kinetoplast that appears as a flat bar.
e. Prototheca sp. are classified as achlorophyllous algae. They vary from 15 to 40 μm in diameter
and have a clear cell wall. They appear compartmentalized because of endosporulation.
 Internally, they have a blue to purple, speckled appearance.
B. Noninflammatory, nonneoplastic lesions
1. Keratin-producing lesions
a. Epidermal and follicular cysts contain keratin.
b. These lesions yield a gray or white, pasty material composed of keratin, cornifed cells,
 debris, cholesterol crystals, and occasional squamous epithelial cells.
c. Certain benign keratin-producing tumors (e.g., intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma
 pilomatrixoma, trichoepithelioma) also may yield keratin and epithelial cells. These neoplasms may
be cytologically indistinguishable from cysts.
d. Keratin-producing cysts and tumors may rupture, and free keratin incites a foreign body
inflammatory response. In such cases, pyogranulomatous inflammation comprised of
se      n     s
2. Sebaceous gland hyperplasia is usually a wart-like mass comprised of uniform, large, round cells
with moderately abundant cytoplasm that contains many round, clear vacuoles. Nuclei are round
and have a single, centrally located nucleolus.
3. Sialocele
a. Grossly, a sialocele appears as a soft, fluctuant, ventral cervical or submandibular mass.
b. Cytologically the fluid contains large vacuolated macrophages and variable numbers of
neutrophils, erythrocytes, and occasional bright gold rhomboidal hematoidin crystals derived
from breakdown of hemoglobin.
c. Mucin appears as irregular masses of hyaline, pale blue material, or a more diffuse pink to
blue granular to fibrillar background material.
4. Seroma/hematoma
a. The fluid is sparsely cellular and has a high protein content, visible as a basophilic
background.
b. Monocyte-macrophages are the principle cell type. Macrophages frequently contain
phagocytosed cellular debris within their cytoplasm, particularly erythrocytes. Leukocytes are
340
CHAPTER 12
present in low numbers and often appear degenerate. Hemosiderin and/or hematoidin may be
seen in older lesions.
C. A finely granular, eosinophilic, proteinic background may be present.
d. Variable numbers of erythrocytes are present. If erythrocytes are present in large numbers,
the lesion is probably a hematoma.
C. Neoplasms
1. Neoplasms can be classified as epithelial or mesenchymal/connective tissue tumors.
Mesenchymal tumors are further subdivided as spindle cell or round cell tumors.
2. In the case of well differentiated neoplasms, a specific diagnosis may be made by
cytologic examination. Less well differentiated tumors, however, may only be identifiable as
epithelial or mesenchymal in origin. Some tumors may be insuffciently differentiated for
 classification at all. When architectural organization of the neoplasm and/or evidence of local
invasion must be evaluated for diagnosis or grading, histopathology is needed for definitive
diagnosis.
3. Classification of a neoplasm as malignant is based on the presence of morphologic criteria of
malignancy, which primarily involve nuclear features (Table l2.l).
4. Epithelial tumors
a. Epithelial tumors usually exfoliate readily, so smears tend to be cellular. The cells frequently
are arranged in clumps, clusters, and sheets. Occasional tubular or acinar arrangements may be
seen in smears from adenomas and adenocarcinomas.
b. Individual cells are polyhedral and have a round to oval nucleus, fne chromatin pattern, a
single nucleolus (usually), and moderately abundant cytoplasm.
c. Squamous cell carcinoma
TABLE 12.1
CYTOMORPHOLOGIC FEATURES OF
MALIGNANCY.
General features
Macrocytosis (cell enlargement)
 Monomorphic population (belonging to
a single cell line)
 Pleomorphic
Anisocytosis (variation in cell size)
Poikilocytosis (variation in cell shape)
Nuclear features
Anisokaryosis (variation in muclear size)
High nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio (nuclear
enlargement greater than increase in
cytoplasm)
 Increased mumber of mitotic figures, abnormal
mitotic figures
Macrokaryosis (nuclear enlargement)
Multinucleation
 Nuclear molding (muclear deformation by
adjacent cells)
Variation in number, size, and shape of nucleoli
CYTOLOGY
341
(1) The cells frequently are suffciently characteristic to permit a cytologic diagnosis.
(2) Neoplastic squamous cells have moderate to abundant, hyaline, pale blue cytoplasm with
perinuclear vacuolation or pallor.
(3) Purulent inflammation commonly is associated with these neoplasms. It can be difficult
to distinguish a squamous cell carcinoma with inflammation from a chronic inflammatory
lesion with squamous cell hyperplasia and dysplasia.
5. Spindle cell tumors
a. This group of tumors is derived from connective tissue. Neoplasms are comprised of cells
that may be spindloid, stellate, or polyhedral. Nuclei are oval to elongate and the cytoplasm
merges gradually with the background of the smear.
b. Smears usually contain few cells because the supporting collagenous stroma surrounding the
cells prevents their detachment or exfoliation.
c.
 This group of neoplasms includes fbroma/fibrosarcoma, lipoma/liposarcoma,
osteosarcoma, chondroma/chondrosarcoma, myxoma/myxosarcoma, malignant fibrous
histiocytoma, leiomyoma/leiomyosarcoma, and rhabdomyoma/rhabdomyosarcoma. These
neoplasms usually are difficult to differentiate from each other cytologically. Specific diagnosis
and frequently determination of malignancy require histopathology.
d. Hyperplastic connective tissue (i.e., granulation tissue) cytologically resembles connective
tissue tumors. Histopathology usually is required to distinguish hyperplasia from neoplasia.
Lipoma
(1) Lipomas are comprised of well differentiated lipocytes (adipocytes) and are
indistinguishable from normal fat.
(2) Smears consist of oily appearing, nonstaining, lipid droplets, and large, clear round cells
with a small, pyknotic, peripherally displaced nucleus.
 s  s   s  s    (
Cockatiels, and some species of parrots. They occur rarely in cats.
f.Hemangiopericytoma
(1) Unlike the majority of spindle cell tumors, hemangiopericytomas frequently exfoliate
radily, producing moderately cellular smears. These cells frequently are sufficiently
characteristic to allow a definitive cytologic diagnosis.
(2) Individual cells are stellate or spindloid and have a round to oval nucleus, fine chromatin
pattern, and one or two nucleoli that are usually small. The cytoplasm is pale to medium
blue, may have small vacuoles, and sometimes resembles a veil around the nucleus.
Binucleate and multinucleate cells are commonly present.
(3) These cells are frequently in loose sheets or clumps in the smear and occasionally are
arranged in whorls that are characteristic of this tumor.
6. Round cell tumors
a. This group of neoplasms includes various mesenchymal tumors comprised of discrete round
to polyhedral cells. Cells generally exfoliate in large numbers. Diagnosis is based solely on
 n e  i sn  jo  r  ad r
criterion. Therefore, cytology is frequently better than histopathology for diagnosis of round cell
tumors because cellular morphology is more clearly visible in smears than in tissue sections.
b. Mast cell tumor
(1) Mast cells have moderate amounts of cytoplasm that contains variable numbers of
metachromatic (purple) granules. Nuclei stain poorly when cells are highly granulated
Granules may not stain or stain very poorly with Diff-Quik stain (Dade International, Ine.).
(2) Variable numbers of eosinophils, macrophages, and connective tissue spindle cells also
may be present.
(3) Free metachromatic granules from ruptured cells and mucin are present in the
background.
342
CHAPTER 12
(4) Poorly differentiated tumors exhibit anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, and are more
c. Histiocytoma
(1) This is a tumor of epidermal dendritic (Langerhans) cells that frequently undergoes
spontaneous regression.
(2) This tumor is relatively unique to dogs.
(3) The cells have oval, reniform, or folded nuclei with fine chromatin and inconspicuous
 ad se pe e un a s s a 
(4) Fewer cells are usually aspirated in comparison to the other types of round cell tumors.
d. Lymphoma (lymphosarcoma)
(1)  This tumor is comprised of a uniform population of immature lymphocytes that are
medium- (approximately size of neutrophils) to large-sized cells.
(2) The neoplastic cells have a round, oval, or polyhedral nucleus with a fine chromatin
pattern and multiple and/or large nucleoli. The cytoplasm is scant to moderate and
dark blue, and may infrequently contain fine vacuoles or dust-like azurophilic (purple)
granules.
(3) Cytoplasmic droplets may be numerous in the background of the smear, particularly
when the cells are very large.
e. Plasmacytoma
(1) The neoplastic cells have a round, eccentrically situated nucleus with a small to
moderate amount of medium blue cytoplasm. A paranuclear patch of cytoplasmic pallor
represents the Golgi zone that contains immunoglobulin.
(2) Binucleate and multinucleate cells usually are observed.
(3) Anisokaryosis and anisocytosis may be prominent.
f. Transmissible venereal tumor
(1) This round cell tumor is unique to dogs.
(2) The cells comprising this tumor have a round nucleus with coarse, cord-like chromatin
and a prominent, large nucleolus. The cytoplasm is moderate in amount and medium blue
with several clear, round vacuoles. Cellular margins are distinct.
(3) Mitotic fgures are frequent.
(4) Lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages may be scattered among the tumor cells.
(5) The tumor is usually located on the genitalia but occasionally occurs in the nasal cavity
and skin (secondary to bite wounds).
g. Melanoma
(1) Neoplastic cells may be round, polyhedral, or spindle-shaped and usually exfoliate
 individually, so this tumor is frequently included in the group of round cell tumors.
(2) The cytoplasm contains scant to abundant melanin pigment that varies from fine,
dust-like to globular particles and appears black-brown to green-black.
 as e s as pe lo on pn si s onsdou jo snu ai ()
centrally located nucleolus.
IIl. LYMPH NODES
metastasis of a tumor to draining lymph nodes (Figure 12.2)
A. Normal lymph node
1. Normal lymph nodes are comprised primarily of small lymphocytes (75% to 95%). They have
round nuclei with dense chromatin and a thin rim of cytoplasm. They are slightly larger than
erythrocytes. Lymphocytes are fragile and easily ruptured. Thus, free nuclei of lysed cells are
common in lymph node smears and must not be confused with large lymphocytes.
FIGURE 12.2.  (A—D) Lymph node aspirates: A. Normal lymph node with small lymphocytes predorminating
several free nuclei and one plasma cell. B. Degenerate neutrophils and chains of bacterial cocci from S. equi
lymphadenitis. C. Normal salivary gland cells. D. Metastatic marmmary carcinoma cells in lymph node. (E—1) Body
 cavity effusions: E. Mesothielial cells. F Small lymphocytes in chylothorax; continued.
343
FIGURE 12.2.
 continued. G. Macrophages, neutrophils, and a diffuse pink background precipitate from
abdominal effusion caused by feline infectious peritonitis. H. lntracellular and free bile pigment in bile peritonitis.
1. Degenerate neutrophils and mixed bacteria from pyothorax. (J—K) Joint fluid: J. Neutrophilic inflarmmation. K.
with pleocytosis and Cryptococcus neoformans yeasts; continued.
344
FIGURE 12.2. continued. M. Squamous cells with adherent Simonsiella sp. and other bacteria from oral cavity N.
Ciliated epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages. Q. Rhodocorcus equi and degenerate neutrophils. R. Iwo
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus larvae and eosinophils; continued.
345
FIGURE 12.2.
:continued. S. Eosinophils. I. Pulmonary carcinoma. (U—V) Vaginal cytology: U. Noncornified
epithelial cells and neutrophils during proestrus. V Cormified/superficial cells predominant during estrus. (W—X)
Endometrial cytology: W. Endometrial epithelial cells and free cilia. X. Candida sp. yeasts.
346
CYTOLOGY
347
2. Small numbers of plasma cells, medium- (approximately size of neutrophils) and large-sized
lymphocytes, macrophages, granulocytes, and occasional mast cells usually are present.
B. Hyperplastic/reactive lymph node (Case 9)
n a jo s a ps st  pa n i q  i u  
 n     s
2. The cytologic appearance of a hyperplastic lymph node is similar to that of a normal lymph
node but the node is clinically enlarged. Medium- and large-sized lymphocytes and plasma cells
may be slightly more numerous than in normal lymph node aspirates.
C. Lymphadenitis
1. Depending on the etiology, inflammation may be primarily neutrophilic, eosinophilic,
granulomatous, or a combination of cell types.
2. Neutrophils may be degenerate or nondegenerate and usually are associated with bacterial
infections.
3. Eosinophils usually are associated with allergic or parasitic reactions. The disease process often
is distant to the lymph node (e.g., dermatitis, enteritis, pneumonitis).
4. Granulomatous reactions are comprised of epithelioid macrophages and, frequently,
multinucleated giant cells. Granulomatous inflammation is associated most often with fungal,
protozoal, or mycobacterial infections.
D. Lymphoma (Case 10)
1. Normal cells are replaced by a uniform monomorphic population of usually immature, medium
to large-sized lymphoblasts. These cells are the size of neutrophils or larger and have a fine
chromatin pattern; prominent nucleoli; and moderately abundant, dark blue, granular cytoplasm.
o siso an 'saoqdn pis-ae no - ae shn al jo ao no o u 7
lymphoma can be made cytologically. Early stages of lymphoma may be missed, but if multiple
enlarged lymph nodes are aspirated, the diagnosis usually can be made.
3. The rare form of small cell lymphoma may be very difficult to differentiate from hyperplasia
cytologically.
E. Metastatic neoplasia
(  a )        s   a 
or increased numbers of cells that are present normally in only small numbers (e.g., mast cells)
indicate metastatic neoplasia
2. Epithelioid macrophages must be differentiated from epithelial cells. Normal salivary epithelial
cells, which are frequently obtained when submandibular masses are aspirated, must be recognized
and not confused with metastatic epithelial cells
IV. BoDY CAVItY EffuSIoNS
 Effusions are classified as transudates, modified transudates, and exudates based on the protein
concentration and nucleated cell count. Although all effusions don't easily fit these categories and there
is some overlap between the groups, these cytologic classifications are helpful in limiting the potential
causes for a particular case of effusion.
A. General considerations
1. Fluid cannot be obtained from the body cavities of small animals unless there is an effusion. In
large animals, however, fluid usually can be aspirated from the peritoneal cavity and frequently
 from the thorax in the absence of disease. Birds lack a diaphragm and have a single coelomic cavity
instead of distinct thoracic and peritoneal cavities.
2. Evaluation of a body cavity effusion can help determine the cause of the disease process or
provide information to suggest additional diagnostic tests to determine a specific diagnosis.
348
CHAPTER 12
3. A variety of methods is available for fluid collection; and once obtained, the fluid should be
placed in a tube containing EDTA to prevent clotting. If fluid will be cultured, an aliquot should be
placed in a sterile tube without EDTA, which is bacteriostatic and can interfere with culture results.
4. If a delay of more than one or two hours is anticipated before the sample is processed, smears
should be prepared immediately to prevent autolytic changes that interfere with cytologic
examination, bacterial overgrowth, and in vitro changes (e.g., phagocytosis of erythrocytes by
macrophages, degeneration of cells) that confuse cytologic interpretation. Fluid that is clear or only
slightly turbid likely has low cellularity. Smears of these specimens should be made from
centrifuged sediment to concentrate cells and other material to optimize the chances of making a
diagnosis.
B. Fluid analysis
1. Color
a. Normal fluid is clear or slightly opalescent and colorless to pale yellow
b. Red color is due to iatrogenic or real hemorrhage. Aspirating the spleen may yield a cytologic
mmple that resembles peripheral blood.
C. Turbidity is caused by increased cellularity, bacteria, fibrin, lipid, or ingesta from
gastrointestinal rupture or accidental enterocentesis.
d. Dark green color is caused by bile. Yellow discoloration is caused by urine.
2. Protein
a. Protein determination can be done by refractometry or by biochemical methods. Turbidity
can interfere with refractometer readings; refractometry is done on the centrifuged supernatant
when the fluid is cloudy
b. Protein concentration of normal peritoneal fluid is less than 2.5 g/dL.
c. Transudates have a protein concentration less than 2.5 g/dL.
3. Nucleated cell counts
a. Nucleated cell counts can be done manually, as for white blood cell counts, or by electronic
particle counters.
b. Values may be in error because cell clumping, cell fragmentation, and non-cellular particulate
 debris are common in effusions.
c. Normal peritoneal cell counts in large animals are usually fewer than 5,0o0 cells/μL; counts
between 5,000 and 10,000/μL may or may not be normal; cell counts above 10,000/μL indicate
inflammation.
4. Cytology
a. Direct smears can be used to estimate cellularity when a cell count cannot be done or can be
used to verify the accuracy of the measured cell count.
b. Cell populations in effusions
(1) Mesothelial cells
(a) Mesothelial cells line the pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal cavities and visceral
surfaces. They readily exfoliate in effusions
(b) Mesothelial cells commonly undergo hypertrophy and hyperplasia when effusions
develop. They may exhibit anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. Activated mesothelial cells are
phagocytic and may be difficult to differentiate from macrophages.
(c) Mesothelial cells have a round or oval nucleus, fine chromatin pattern, and a single
nucleolus. Binucleate and multinucleated cells are common. The cytoplasm is dark blue,
and a red-pink fringe frequently outlines the cell. Mitotic figures may be seen.
(d) The cells are distributed singly and in clusters.
(e) With inflammation, mesothelial cells become markedly hyperplastic, which produces
increased cellular pleomorphism. As mesothelial cells become reactive, anisocytosis,
anisokaryosis, binucleation and multinucleation, mitotic fgures, and cytoplasmic
basophilia become more prominent. Hyperplastic mesothelial cells may be difficult to
CYTOLOGY
349
differentiate from neoplastic mesothelial cells (mesothelioma) or malignant epithelial
cells (carcinoma).
(2) Macrophages
(a) Macrophages are large cells that originate from blood monocytes. They are a normal
component of peritoneal fluid.
(b) Macrophages have an oval to reniform (kidney-shaped) nucleus; fine chromatin
pattern; small nucleoli; and moderate to abundant, vacuolated cytoplasm that frequently
contains phagocytosed cell debris, erythrocytes, foreign material, or fungal organisms.
Macrophages usually do not phagocytose bacteria.
(c)  Macrophages may be diffcult to differentiate from activated mesothelial cells, but the
distinction usually is not important.
(3) Neutrophils
(a) Neutrophils are present in normal peritoneal fluid and are seen in most effusions.
(b) Neutrophils are the predominant cell type in most exudates.
(c) Neutrophils are nondegenerate in fluids with a low degree of toxicity such as
 transudates and modifed transudates. They resemble neutrophils in peripheral blood
smears and have nuclear lobes comprised of densely aggregated, darkly staining chromatin.
(d) Degenerate neutrophils indicate a toxic environment and are associated with septic
 inflammation. They are characterized by swollen nuclear lobes with loose, paler staining
chromatin. When neutrophils are degenerate, a search for bacteria and/or culture of the
effusion should be done. Autolysis of neutrophils causes similar morphologic changes.
  s no sa e a sid pe sda  (a)
not indicate toxicity.
(4) Lymphocytes, plasma cells, and mast cells are observed less commonly in effusions.
(5) Eosinophils are usually in low numbers in effusions but they may comprise 60% or
fewer of the cells in normal peritoneal fluid of cattle. Effusions containing numerous
eosinophils have been associated with various parasitic conditions (e.g., heartworm disease,
aelurostrongylosis, Dioctyphyma renale infection), presumed hypersensitivity reactions,
various neoplasms (e.g., lymphoma, mast cell tumor), and pneumothorax.
C. Classification of effusions
1. Transudate (Case 19)
a. Transudates develop most commonly as a result of decreased plasma osmotic pressure
because of hypoalbuminemia. Effusions usually do not develop until the albumin value is less
than 1 g/dL (or less than or equal to 1.5g/dL if hypertension is also present).
b. Uncommon causes of transudative effusions are obstruction of low-protein-containing
lymphatics of the intestine and effusion associated with early urinary bladder rupture.
c. The fluid is clear and colorless and has a low protein concentration (less than 2.5g/dL) and
low nucleated cell count (less than 1,500 cells/μL).
 d. It contains a mixed population of macrophages, nondegenerate neutrophils, and mesothelial
cells.
2. Modified transudate (Case 27)
a. This category has the least specificity because many diseases can be associated with
 production of a modified transudate.
 b. The effusion develops in response to increased hydrostatic pressure or permeability of
capillaries and/or lymphatic vessels
c. The fluid has low to moderate cellularity (1,000 to 7,000 cells/μL) and a variable protein
concentration (2.5 to 5 g/dL).
d. Common causes of modifed transudates include cardiac disease, neoplasms, hepatic disease.
 and feline infectious peritonitis (Case 7).
2. Color and turbidity are variable and depend on the cause of the effusion.
350
CHAPTER 12
f. Cells typically present in modified transudates include nondegenerate neutrophils,
macrophages, reactive mesothelial cells, small lymphocytes, and erythrocytes. If neoplastic cells
are seen, a definitive diagnosis can be made
3. Exudate
a. Exudates develop because of increased vascular permeability caused by inflammation.
b. The fluid varies in color but is usually turbid because of high cell count.
c. The nucleated cell count is usually greater than 5,000 to 7,000 cells/μL.
d. Neutrophils are usually the predominant cells and they may be nondegenerate or degenerate
depending on the degree of toxicity of the fluid. Numbers of macrophages, lymphocytes, reactive
mesothelial cells, plasma cells, eosinophils, and erythrocytes vary according to the type and
severity of the irritant and duration of the disease process.
e. Nonseptic exudates are caused by irritants such as bile, urine, and pancreatic enzymes or
 because of tisue necrosis (e.g., neoplasms, lung lobe torsion). Neutrophils in such effusions are
nondegenerate.
f. Septic exudates are caused by microorganisms which may or may not be evident cytologically.
 Some bacteria produce toxins that cause neutrophilic degeneration but many organisms do not.
Therefore, any exudate should be examined carefully for the presence of infectious agents and/or
be cultured.
D. Specific conditions
1. Chylous effusions
a. Chylous effusions are milky white to creamy pink fluid that usually develops in the thorax
(chylothorax) but may also occur in the abdomen.
b. The opacity of the fluid is due to the high fat content (in the form of chylomicrons) of
lymph fluid being transported from the mesenteric lymphatics to the venous system via the
thoracic duct. Lymphocytes entering peripheral blood are also returned to circulation via the
thoracic duct.
c. Chylous effusions develop because of trauma to or obstruction of the duct and have been
associated with neoplasms, cardiac disease, mediastinal granulomas, dirofilariasis, diaphragmatic
hernia, and lung lobe torsion. Some cases of chylous effusion are termed idiopathic because the
cause cannot be identified. The condition occurs most commonly as pleural effusion in cats with
cardiac disease.
d. The fluid may be a modified transudate or exudate. It is classically comprised almost entirely
of small lymphocytes. However, neutrophils and macrophages may predominate in chronic
chylothorax or after repeated thoracocentesis.
2. When the diagnosis of chylous effusion is in question, it can be confirmed by comparing
thoracic fluid cholesterol and triglyceride values to those of blood. Chylous effusions have a
higher triglyceride concentration and lower cholesterol concentration than does the blood. In
addition, the cholesterol concentration of the fluid divided by the triglyceride concentration is
less than l in chylous effusions.
2. Feline infectious peritonitis
a. Effusions caused by feline infectious peritonitis are usually yellow and may contain fibrin
clots.
b. The fluid may be a modifed transudate or exudate based on the nucleated cell count, but the
protein concentration is usually high (greater than 3.5 g/dL).
C. The fluid is a mixture of nondegenerate neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes. A
characteristic granular, eosinophilic, proteinic precipitate is evident in the background.
d. The presumptive diagnosis can be confirmed by demonstration of coronaviral antigen withir
 the fluid (e.g., by fluorescent antibody testing).
3. Heart failure
a. Cats with heart failure usually develop chylothorax.
CYTOLOGY
351
b. Dogs with congestive heart failure typically develop ascites, which is produced by leakage of
high-protein hepatic lymph secondary to increased intrahepatic hydrostatic pressure.
C. Ascitic fluid is a modifed transudate containing erythrocytes, macrophages, nondegenerate
neutrophils, reactive mesothelial cells, and lymphocytes.
4. Hemorrhagic effusions
a. Hemorrhagic effusions are caused by many conditions but are most commonly due to trauma
and neoplasia.
b. A true hemorrhagic effusion must be differentiated from blood contamination and inadvertent
splenic aspiration. Hemorrhagic effusions more than a few hours old contain macrophages that
have phagocytosed erythrocytes within their cytoplasm. If hemorrhage occurred more than a day
 0r two previously, macrophages contain hemosiderin and/or hematoidin crystals within their
cytoplasm. These are pigments derived from the breakdown of erythrocytes.
r. If blood is present in an effusion because of contamination or acute hemorrhage (less than
one hour), platelets are visible in smears, whereas erythrophagocytosis is not evident. However,
if there is a delay of several hours or more before the fluid is processed, platelets disintegrate
and will not be visible and in vitro erythrophagocytosis can occur, leading to erroneous cytologic
interpretation.
d. Tumor cells are found infrequently in smears of effusions caused by neoplasms, particularly
when the PCV is greater than or equal to 20%.
e. Pericardial effusions in dogs are most commonly hemorrhagic and are usually caused by
neoplasia (e.g., hemangiosarcoma, heart base tumors, mesothelioma) or are idiopathic
 and histopathology is required.
5. Neoplasia
a. Neoplasms commonly cause effusions in the thorax, abdomen, and pericardial sac, but
frequently cannot be diagnosed cytologically because tumor cells may not be exfoliated into the
effusion.
b. Cytologic examination is most successful for detecting discrete cell tumors such as
lymphoma and mast cell tumors.
C. As a continually proliferating cell population, mesothelial cells typically exhibit some degree
 of cellular pleomorphism. However, when they are stimulated to proliferate more rapidly,
cellular atypia becomes more exaggerated and differentiation of neoplastic from markedly
 reactive mesothelial cells or reactive mesothelial cells from a carcinoma may not be possible.
d. Carcinomas and adenocarcinomas that seed the surfaces of body cavities exfoliate cells more
readily than do most sarcomas.
6. Uroperitoneum
a. Rupture of the urinary bladder, urethra, ureter, or kidney leads to a yellow-tinged effusion
that may be a modified transudate or an exudate.
 b. The fluid commonly is comprised of a mixture of nondegenerate neutrophils, macrophages, and
reactive mesothelial cells.
c. The diagnosis can be confrmed by measuring creatinine concentrations in the effusion and
blood. The creatinine concentration of the fluid should exceed that of blood.
7. Bile peritonitis
a. Rupture of the gallbladder or bile duct causes peritonitis characterized by a yellow-green
effusion.
b. The fluid is comprised of neutrophils, macrophages, reactive mesothelial cells, erythrocytes, and
lymphocytes. Macrophages contain yellow-green to blue-green bile pigment within their cytoplasm.
c. The diagnosis can be confrmed by demonstrating a higher concentration of bilirubin in the
fluid than in blood.
8. Egg yolk peritonitis (serositis, coelomitis) in birds
a. This condition may occur in older hens or hens with intense egg production.
352
CHAPTER12
b. Free egg yolk material within the coelomic cavity incites mild to moderate inflammation.
c. Heterophils and macrophages usually are the predominant inflammatory cells.
d. The background of the smear may have a variable appearance. Yolk may appear light pink t0
blue with a smooth to granular to globular protein precipitate (that occasionally may be
reminiscent of FIP in cats).
V. SYNOVIAL FLUID
Synovial fluid analysis, in conjunction with history, physical examination findings, radiography, and
other ancillary tests such as culture and serology, is important in the diagnosis of joint diseases.
Complete synovial fluid analysis consists of description of the appearance of the fluid, mucin clot test,
protein determination, nucleated cell count, and cytologic examination. When the sample volume is
limited, cytologic examination is the single most useful test.
A. Appearance
1. Normal synovial fluid is transparent and colorless to pale yellow.
2. Normal synovial fluid does not clot because it lacks fibrinogen and other clotting factors.
3. When synovial fluid is bloody, hemarthrosis must be distinguished from iatrogenic hemorrhage
caused by arthrocentesis (more common) (Case 25)
a. Usually this distinction is made at the time of specimen collection.
b. With hemarthrosis, the fluid is uniformly bloody.
c. With iatrogenic hemorrhage, the synovial fluid and blood appear separately and blood may
not be present throughout the sample collection
d. Bloody fluids should be placed into EDTA tubes to prevent coagulation.
4. Chronic hemorrhage is characterized by yellow-orange discoloration, termed xanthochromia,
due to the presence of hemoglobin breakdown pigments.
5. Synovial fluid may exhibit thixotrophy. This property is characterized by formation of a gel
when the fluid remains undisturbed for several hours and it returns to a fluid state when gently
shaken.
 6. Turbidity usually is caused by increased cellularity due to inflammation.
B. Viscosity
1. The normal viscosity of synovial fluid is produced by high hyaluronic acid concentration.
2. Viscosity usually is evaluated subjectively by observing the length of strand formed when
synovial fluid is expressed from a syringe through a needle. Normal fluid usually forms a strand
3. Viscosity is recorded as normal, decreased, or markedly decreased.
4. Viscosity also can be evaluated qualitatively during cytologic examination. In normal synovial
  jo Asosa a yo asnq (,) s snisu u pae ae so ses i
As viscosity decreases, the cells become progressively more randomly distributed.
5. Viscosity is decreased because of dilution of hyaluronic acid by effusion into the joint (e.g.
 inflammation, hydrarthrosis) or by degradation of hyaluronic acid by bacterial hyaluronidase.
C. Mucin clot test
1. This is a semiquantitative test of the quality and quantity of synovial fluid mucin (hyaluronic
acid).
sase pee %s7 sed + on sueieuadns pig leaous aed I suppe jo sisisuos isn a1 7
acid. The acid denatures and agglutinates the mucin. The quality of the mucin clot is graded as
follows:
a. The test is considered good/normal when a tight, ropey clot forms and the solution is clear.
b. A fair/slightly decreased clot test is when a soft clot forms and the solution is slightly cloudy
c. A poor clot test consists of a friable clot in a cloudy solution.
CYTOLOGY
353
d. The test is considered very poor if a clot does not form and flecks are present in a very
cloudy solution.
3. EDTA degrades hyaluronic acid and thus the mucin clot test should not be performed on
synovial fluid samples in EDTA.
D. Protein
1. Synovial fluid protein concentration usually is measured by refractometry but can also be
measured by biochemical assays.
2. Joint trauma and inflammatory conditions increase the protein concentration.
E. Nucleated cell count
1. Only nucleated cells are counted. Counts can be done manually or by electronic particle
counters. Manual counts use a hemocytometer that is loaded directly with synovial fluid or with
diluted synovial fluid. Acetic acid cannot be used as the diluent because it causes agglutination.
Electronic particle counters dilute the specimen in isotonic buffer.
2. Counts are usually less than or equal to 500 cells/μul in healthy animals but they may be as high
as 3,000 cells/μl in the dog.
F. Cytologic examination
1. This is the most important portion of the synovial fluid analysis. If only a drop or two of
synovial fluid is available for testing, it should be used to make a smear.
2. Initial examination of the smear should include an evaluation of cellularity (as normal or
mildly, moderately, or markedly increased), presence or absence of cell rowing as an indication of
viscosity, and number of erythrocytes.
3. Normal synovial fluid consists of large mononuclear cells, which are primarily macrophages,
and fewer small mononuclear cells or lymphocytes. Neutrophils usually constitute less than l0% of
the nucleated cells. Eosinophils are not present in health.
 4. Synovial fluid reactions are usually classified as noninflammatory/degenerative, inflammatory,
or acute hemorrhage.
5. In degenerative arthropathies (degenerative joint disease), the volume of synovial fluid varies
from normal to markedly increased and the cell count is normal to mildly increased (usually less
than 5,000 cells/μl)
a. Cells are predominantly mononuclear. Neutrophils may be slightly more numerous.
b. Protein concentration is within the reference interval or slightly increased and the fluid does
not clot.
c. The mucin clot test is usually good unless a large volume of effusion is present.
6. Inflammatory arthropathies may be infectious or noninfectious.
a. The cell count is greater than 10,000 cells/μl (and sometimes up to 100,000 cells/μul).
 b. The majority of cells are neutrophils, but mononuclear cells also are usually increased.
c. The protein concentration is increased and the fuid frequently clots if not submitted in
EDTA.
 7. Infectious arthropathies are more common in large animal species than in small animals.
Organisms usually are not observed cytologically, and confirmation of infection depends on
microbiological culture or serology (e.g., Lyme disease, ehrlichiosis).
8. Nonseptic inflammation is usually immune-mediated (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus,
rheumatoid arthritis) but nonimmune-mediated inflammatory arthropathies also occur (e.g.,
chronic hemorrhagic arthropathies, crystal-induced arthropathies). The nucleated cell count is
moderately to markedly elevated, with the range overlapping that of infectious arthropathies.
Neutrophils are the predominant cell type.
9. Avian gout may have synovial aspirates with chalky, white, particulate matter. The needle-like,
crystalline structure of uric acid is best appreciated in unstained preparations viewed
354
CHAPTER 12
staining. Heterophils also may be present.
10. Hemarthrosis (e.g., trauma, coagulopathy) is recognized by uniformly bloody fluid during
initial specimen collction, by microscopic evidence of erythrophagocytosis when the hemorrhage
is more than a few hours old, and by xanthochromia (orange discoloration) visible grossly and
hemosiderin and hematoidin visible microscopically when hemorrhage is more chronic.
a. Hemorrhage typically incites inflammation, so the cell count is increased and the number of 
neutrophils is increased.
b. Samples with iatrogenic hemorrhage transported in the mail (i.e., a delay of more than
hemorrhage because platelets degenerate in old samples and erythrophagocytosis can occur in
vitro.
11. Eosinophilic arthropathies are rare, but instances have been reported and assumed to be due to
a hypersensitivity reaction.
12. Neoplasms involving joints are very rarely diagnosed by synovial fluid analysis.
VI. CEREBROSPINAL FLUID (CSF)
Although rarely diagnostic by itself, CSF analysis, in combination with neurologic examination and
specialized diagnostie tests, is a useful adjunet in diagnosis of central nervous system diseases.
A. General considerations
1. CSF analysis must be performed as soon as possible, preferably within 30 to 60 minutes, after
collection. Because of the low protein concentration of CSF, cells undergo rapid degeneration and
lysis.
volume of 40% ethanol to a portion of the CSF Addition of autologous serum to CSF (one drop
serum/0.25 mL CSF) also has been shown to preserve cells adequately for up to 48 hours when
held at 4°C. Dilution of the CSF must be factored in when determining cell counts. A separate
portion of CSF must be reserved unpreserved/undiluted for protein determination, which is more
stable.
B. Gross appearance
1. Normal CSF is clear and colorless and it does not clot
2. Bright red or pink fluid is caused by hemorrhage into CSF Hemorrhage caused by a traumatic
tap is much more common than true hemorrhage. A traumatic tap (iatrogenic hemorhage) can be
recognized as follows:
a. During sampling, a streak of blood is seen in clear CsF with eventual clearing as more fluid
is collected.
b. Centrifugation of the CSF results in clear supernatant fluid and a red pellet at the bottom of
the tube.
c. In a smear of the fluid, platelets may be visible and erythrophagocytosis is not evident.
3. True pathologic hemorrhage into the subarachnoid space usually is associated with
xanthochromia, a yellow-orange discoloration caused by free bilirubin produced as an erythrocyte
breakdown product by approximately 48 hours after hemorrhage. Cytologically, hemorrhage is
'p aun u saed papuadsns aq pasneo si saunon no Apiqnn t
a. Cells, usually more than 500 cells/μL, cause turbid CSE Such specimens also may contain
fbrinogen and clot. They should be submitted in an EDTA tube to prevent coagulation.
b. Bacteria and fungi can contribute to increased CSF turbidity.
c. Aspirated fat can cause turbidity of CSF
CYTOLOGY
355
C. Total nucleated cell count
1. Cellularity of CSF is generally too low for use of automated cell counters.
2. Cell counts usually are done manually and the CSF is loaded undiluted onto a hemacytometer.
Erythrocytes and nucleated cells are each counted in all nine large squares and the numbers are
multiplied by l.l to determine the number of cells/μL.
3. Normal CSF contains fewer than nine nucleated cells/μL. An increased CSF cell count is termed
pleocytosis.
4. Erythrocytes are not normally present in CSF!
a. The presence of erythrocytes indicates blood contamination during collection or pathologic
hemorrhage, which must be differentiated to interpret nucleated cell counts and protein content
correctly.
b. Low levels of blood contamination (RBC count less than or equal to 13,200/uL) do not
significantly alter CSF nucleated cell count or protein concentration.
c. Formulas for correcting cell count and protein concentration for blood contamination are
unreliable.
D. Protein
1. The majority of protein in CSF is albumin
2. The methods used to determine serum protein concentration (e.g., refractometry or chemical
methods) are too insensitive to measure the low protein concentration of CSF
3. Various sensitive methods are available to measure very low protein concentrations. However,
these tests vary in their ability to detect albumin and globulins. Therefore, reference intervals differ
depending on the particular test used to measure proteins. Thus, reference intervals for one
laboratory may not be valid for tests performed at another laboratory.
4. Urine protein dipsticks (reagent strips) measure protein at concentrations typically present in
CSF and can be useful as an initial screening or semiquantitative test of CSF protein. Both false-
positive and false-negative tests occur at dipstick readings of trace or l+, but a dipstick reading of
2+ or greater reliably indicates increased CsF protein concentration.
test) cause precipitation of globulins, which is graded subjectively. Precipitation does not occur in
normal CSF
increased permeability of the blood-brain or blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier, increased protein
synthesis within the CSF, or tissue degeneration.
a. CSF protein concentration is increased in inflammation, hemorrhage, and tissue
degeneration.
b. The increased CSF protein is accompanied by an increased CSF cell count in inflammation
and hemorrhage.
c. Increased CSF protein concentration may not be associated with an increase in cellularity
(albuminocytologic dissociation) in degenerative or neoplastic diseases and occasionally in viral
infections.
7. CSF albumin concentration, usually determined by electrophoresis, can be used to evaluate the
 integrity of the blood-brain barrier because albumin in CSF is derived from plasma.
a. Because CSF albumin concentration varies with serum albumin concentration, the albumin
quotient (AQ) eliminates the variable of the serum albumin in assessing blood-brain barrier
function.
b. AQ = (CsF albumin + serum albumin) x 100.
c. AQ greater than 2.35 is increased and suggests an altered blood-brain barrier.
E.Cytologic examination
1. Cytologic examination should be performed on all CSF specimens because CSF samples with
 normal cell counts can have abnormalities in cell type or morphology.
356
CHAPTER 12
2. The cellularity of most CSF specimens is very low, necessitating the use of some type of
concentration technique to increase cellularity. Cytocentrifugation is the most common technique
used in laboratories. Other methods include slow-speed centrifugation with resuspension of the
cellular pellet with a drop or two of autologous serum prior to preparing smears, sedimentation
using glass or plastic cylinders (e.g., syringe barrel attached to glass slide), and membrane filtration.
3. Normal CSF is comprised almost exclusively of mononuclear cells. Small lymphocytes
predominate; monocytoid cells are less numerous. With the newer concentration methods, a few
neutrophils are accepted as normal.
4. Neutrophilic pleocytosis occurs with most bacterial infections, certain viral infections (e.g,
feline infectious peritonitis [FIPl, eastern equine encephalitis [EEE]), some tumors (particularly
meningioma), mycotic infections, steroid-responsive meningitis, and occasionally in granulomatous
meningoencephalomyelitis.
5. Lymphocytic/monocytic pleocytosis suggests viral infection, degenerative CNS diseases,
listeriosis, or necrotizing meningoencephalitis of Pugs and Maltese dogs. Lymphocytes predominate
in most cases of granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis. Mononuclear cells predominate
infrequently in cases of bacterial meningoencephalomyelitis.
6. Eosinophils have been observed in CSF in association with parasitic infection, some fungal
infections (e.g., cryptococcosis), and idiopathic steroid-responsive conditions.
7. Neoplastic cells are seen rarely in CSF except in cases of neural lymphoma. Most cases of CNS
neoplasia have a mild increase in CSF protein concentration. The nucleated cell count is within the
reference interval or increased slightly. In some cases, the CSF is completely normal.
8. With the exception of Cryptococcus neoformans, fungi are rarely seen in CSF in mycotic
infections.
F. Special tests
1. The activities of creatine kinase (CK), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) have been measured as indicators of CNS disease. None has been found to
be sensitive, specifc, or of prognostic value. Contamination of CSF with epidural fat or dura can
contribute to increased CK activity in CSF
2. CSF electrolyte concentration and osmolality should be measured concurrently with blood
levels. Comparison of CSF to blood values is useful in identifying salt poisoning and other
disorders involving electrolyte imbalances
3. Culture, serology, fluorescent antibody examination, and other techniques to detect and identify
infectious agents can be performed on CSF samples to confirm the diagnosis of CNS infection.
Vll. respiratorY systeM
Cytology is a useful ancillary test for diagnosis of respiratory tract disorders, particularly when used in
conjunction with history, physical examination, radiography, and rhinoscopy or bronchoscopy
A.Nasal exudates and masses
1. Except for collection of nasal exudates, examination of the nasal cavity and collection of
specimens require general anesthesia and endotracheal intubation with an inflated cuff to prevent
aspiration of exudates, washing fluid, or blood.
2. Sampling techniques include collection of discharges with cotton swabs, flushing with sterile
saline, and aspiration. Swabbing is of limited usefulness unless etiologic agents or tumor cells are
within surface material, which is not typically the case.
3. Direct smears may be made from flush fluid if abundant material is obtained. If the fluid is only
slightly turbid or contains scant particulate material, smears should be made from centrifuged
sediment. Tissue fragments obtained from flushing may be used for imprints, squash preparations,
or histopathology if they are large enough.
CYTOLOGY
357
4. Normal cytologic findings
a. Normal cells include squamous epithelial cells (outer nasal cavity and oropharynx) and
ciliated columnar epithelial cells.
b. A mixed bacterial population is present and bacteria frequently are adherent to squamous
cells. Simonsiella sp., a large stacked, rod-shaped organism specific to the oropharynx, is
commonly seen in smears.
5. Inflammation
a. Purulent inflammation is usually associated with bacterial or fungal infections. The presence
of a monomorphic population of bacteria and bacteria phagocytosed by neutrophils is suggestive
of bacterial infection. Oronasal fistulas caused by tooth root abscesses can cause primary
bacterial rhinitis; however, most bacterial infections are secondary to deeper lesions such as
tumors and foreign body reactions, or to viral infections such as canine distemper, FeLV, and
FIV.
b. Fungal infections usually are associated with pyogranulomatous to granulomatous
inflammation.
(1) The fungal infection most often diagnosed by cytology of nasal exudate is cryptococcosis.
(2) The most common hyphal fungi that cause nasal infections are Aspergillus sp. and
 Penicillium sp. They produce characteristic fuzzy white to green growths on the nasal
mucosa. In cytologic smears, the hyphae of both organisms are 4 to 6μm wide with parallel
sides, septa, and branching.
c. Rhinosporidiosis is an infection with Rhinosporidium seeberi, an organism of uncertain
classification (i.e., fungus vs. protozoa vs. alga).
(1) This organism causes development of unilateral, red-brown, polypoid nasal masses with
characteristic yellow-white stippling.
(2) The organisms are seen in varying numbers within an exudate comprised primarily of
neutrophils. These organisms appear as round to oval spores that are 5 to 10 μm in diameter
with a thin, slightly refractile wall and red-pink, spherical, internal, globular structures.
 Rarely, large sporangia (more than l00μm in diameter) containing numerous endospores are
present in cytologic preparations.
d. Eosinophilic inflammation usually is attributed to hypersensitivity reactions or parasitic
 conditions but also may be associated with fungal infections and neoplasia.
6. Nasal masses
a. Nasal tumors occur more commonly in dogs and cats than in large animals. The majority of
these neoplasms are malignant.
b. The diagnosis of nasal tumors frequently is complicated by secondary inflammation,
 infection, and necrosis. Thus, surface material may not be representative of the underlying
neoplasm.
c. Carcinomas are more common than sarcomas. These include adenocarcinomas, squamous
cell carcinomas, and undifferentiated carcinomas. Cytologically, they consist of clusters or sheets
 of round or polyhedral cells with a variable nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio, anisocytosis, and
anisokaryosis.
d. The most common connective tissue tumors of the nasal cavity are fbrosarcoma,
osteosarcoma, and chondrosarcoma. Except for round cell tumors, mesenchymal tumors do not
exfoliate readily. The cells tend to be distributed singly or in small clumps and they vary in
appearance. They may be oval, stellate, or spindle-shaped. In addition, neoplastic cells are
frequently diffcult to differentiate cytologically from reactive fibroblasts. Therefore,
histopathology is usually required for a definitive diagnosis.
e. Round cell tumors of the nasal cavity include lymphoma, mast cell tumor, and transmissible
venereal tumor (TVT).
(1) Lymphoma is characterized by a monomorphic population of medium- to large-sized
lymphocytes.
358
CHAPTER 12
(2) Mast cell tumors consist of numerous mast cells admixed with variable numbers of
eosinophils.
(3) TVT is a tumor of genital tissues and is spread by transplantation of intact tumor cells
 Because of the social habits of dogs, this genital tumor may occur in the nose.
f. Ethmoid hematomas (hemorrhagic nasal polyps) of horses are comprised of erythrocytes,
leukocytes, macrophages containing phagocytosed erythrocytes and/or hemosiderin, and
hematoidin crystals.
g. Nasal polyps consist of fibrovascular tissue lined by epithelium. Because they are comprised
of a mixture of tissues arranged in a characteristic architectural pattern, histopathology is
required for diagnosis
B. Tracheo-bronchoalveolar cytology
 1. Bronchoalveolar cytology is a useful test in the diagnostic evaluation of an animal with
unexplained chronic cough or bronchoalveolar disease.
 2. Disorders confined to the interstitium cannot be diagnosed by tracheal/bronchoalveolar washes,
which collect material from airways only.
3. Transtracheal/endotracheal wash
a. Warm, sterile saline (l to 2 mL/lolb body weight) devoid of bacteriostatic agents is infused via
a catheter inserted through an endotracheal tube or between tracheal rings until the animal starts
 to cough or until the entire fluid volume is injected.
 b. Gentle, negative pressure is applied to the syringe immediately to recover a portion of the
fluid.
4. Bronchoalveolar lavage is collected through a fiberoptic bronchoscope inserted into a small
bronchus.
 5. Bronchial brushings are collected by brushing the bronchial mucosa or focal lesions with an
endoscopic brush.
 6. If the sample will not be processed within 30 to 60 minutes of collection, smears should be
made because cells lyse rapidly in protein-poor fluids.
a. Direct smears can be made if the fluid is turbid or contains abundant particulate material
from which blood-type and squash preparations can be made, respectively.
b. If the fluid is clear or contains only fine particulate material, smears should be made from
centrifuged sediment. Because of the low protein content of the fluid, cell preservation is
improved if the sediment material is resuspended in 1 or 2 drops of serum rather than saline.
7. Normal constituents
S            s  s
spirals are twisted strands of mucin that represent casts of small bronchioles and occur in any
condition that causes chronic over-production of mucin.
b. Epithelial cells
(1) Ciliated epithelial cells are usually columnar but may also be cuboidal. Cilia resemble a
pink fringe at one end of the cell. The nucleus is located at the opposite end of the cell.
(2) Nonciliated cuboidal cells are seen less frequently.
(3) Goblet cells are mucus-producing columnar cells with numerous bright pink, mucin-
flled, cytoplasmic granules. They are not seen commonly but may be increased in chronic
conditions associated with increased mucus production.
C. Alveolar macrophages have a round or oval nucleus and moderate to abundant, blue-gray
cytoplasm. Along with epithelial cells, they are the most common cells seen in samples from
clinically healthy animals. Alveolar macrophages increase in number in most inflammatory
conditions. Their cytoplasm becomes more abundant and vacuolated and may contain
 phagocytosed cell debris when inflammation is present.
 8. Pharyngeal contamination is indicated by the presence of squamous epithelial cells, frequently
 in association with adherent mixed bacteria.
CYTOLOGY
359
a. Nearly incontrovertible evidence of oropharyngeal contamination is the presence of
Simonsiella sp. organisms, which are specifc to the oropharynx.
b. Pharymgeal contamination occurs when the catheter is misdirected upward or when
excessive coughing drives the wash fluid up into the pharynx, after which it is reaspirated.
c. In rare instances, squamous cells and mixed bacteria, including Simonsiella sp., are seen in
smears from cases of aspiration pneumonia.
9. Purulent inflammation
a. Purulent inflammation occurs most commonly with infectious diseases, but noninfectious
diseases that cause tissue necrosis (e.g., neoplasms) also can produce purulent inflammation.
b. Increased amounts of mucin and macrophages also are usually present.
c. Infectious agents may be observed; however, their absence does not exclude the possibility
of infection. Specimens with many neutrophils should be cultured to eliminate the possibility
of infection more definitively.
d. Neutrophil degeneration is difficult to evaluate in these washes because the low protein
content of wash fluid results in cellular degeneration, even in nonseptic conditions.
e. Bacterial infections in animals are most commonly caused by Gram-negative rods.
 In true bacterial infections, as compared to pharyngeal contamination, the bacteria are usually
a single population and are phagocytosed by neutrophils as well as free in the background of
the smear.
10. A variety of fungi cause pulmonary lesions (see section on masses, lesions, and tissues for
more detailed morphologic descriptions of these organisms).
a.  The inflammatory infltrate typically consists of neutrophils and variable numbers of
 macrophages (pyogranulomatous inflammation). Multinucleated giant cels also may
be present.
b. The lung is the primary site of infection with Blastomyces dermatitidis. Blastomycosis is
most common in the dog.
C.(
 of pneumonia.
d. Various hyphal fungi cause lower respiratory tract infection, with the most common being
Aspergillus sp.
11. Eosinophilic inflammation usually is associated with hypersensitivity reactions and parasitic
by various infectious agents and neoplasms
a. Eosinophil granules frequently appear muddy rust-brown in tracheal/bronchoalveolar wash
specimens and may be difficult to identify except in thin portions of smears.
b. Several studies of clinically normal cats found eosinophils to be a significant component of
the cell population in tracheopulmonary washes (approximately 20% to 25% eosinophils).
Consequently, the presence of eosinophils in specimens from cats must be interpreted with
respect to clinical signs and radiographic findings.
12. Chronic hemorrhage occurs in many conditions, including trauma, infectious diseases, cardiac
disease, exercise-induced pulmonary hemorrhage, and neoplasia. It is recognized by the presence of
alveolar macrophages containing phagocytosed erythrocytes, hemosiderin, and hematoidin.
13. Neoplastic cells are observed infrequently in tracheopulmonary washes.
a. In most cases, metastatic tumors are confined to the interstitium and are not collectable by
wash procedures until they have invaded airways
b. Neoplasms that have invaded airways and primary carcinomas of the bronchopulmonary
tree may exfoliate tumor cells into the wash solution.
(1) Carcinomas are typically comprised of large, basophilic, polyhedral cells that usually
have a high nuclear:cytoplasmic ratio. The cells are distributed singly and in clusters.
washes. Biopsy or fine-needle aspiration usually is required for diagnosis.
360
CHAPTER 12
Vlll. VAGINal CYTOLOGY
      n            
in diagnosis of some inflammatory and neoplastic disorders of the reproductive tract.
A. Collection of cells
1. Cells are obtained by swabbing the caudal vagina with a moist cotton swab. The swab is directed
craniodorsally when entering the vaginal vault to avoid the clitoral fossa, which usually contains
    e  s
2. The smear is prepared by gently rolling the swab on a slide.
B. Normal cells
1. Basal cells comprise the deepest layer of the epithelium and, thus, are rarely seen in vaginal
smears.
      s a n     n s 
uniformly sized cells with a round nucleus and small amount of cytoplasm. They may exfoliate in
sheets in prepubertal dogs.
3. Intermediate cells are approximately twice the size of parabasal cels. Their nuclei are
similar to those of parabasal cells. As intermediate cells enlarge, their cell margins become angular
and folded.
    r      n      t
 cornified cells have angular or folded margins.
C. Cytologic characteristics of the estrous cycle
1. Proestrus
a. This is the beginning of the estrous cycle. As the concentration of estradiol increases
epithelial cells proliferate and erythrocyte diapedesis occurs.
b. In early proestrus, all types of epithelial cells as well as erythrocytes and neutrophils are
present.
C. At late proestrus, neutrophils decrease in number and intermediate and superficial cells
become predominant.
d. Bacteria may be present throughout the cycle and are adherent to epithelial cells.
2. Estrus
a. Superficial/keratinized cells comprise 90% or more of the cell population. Many of these cells
are anucleate.
b. Neutrophils are absent. Erythrocytes may be present in variable numbers.
C. Bacteria, both free and adherent to epithelial cells, may be present.
d. The background of the smear usually is clear of debris.
3. Diestrus
a. The number of superficial cells abruptly decreases. Intermediate and parabasal cells increase,
often constituting more than 50% of the cell population.
b. Neutrophils increase in number and erythrocytes may be present again.
C. Usually it is not possible to distinguish proestrus from diestrus on a single vaginal smear.
4. Anestrus
a. Parabasal and intermediate cells predominate.
b. Neutrophils and bacteria may be present in small numbers.
D. Reproductive diseases
1. Vaginitis and metritis
  d e on s ku
CYTOLOGY
361
b. Metritis usually follows parturition. The bitch is usually febrile and has a malodorous uterine
discharge.
c. Smears contain large numbers of neutrophils (often degenerate) that may contain
phagocytosed bacteria within their cytoplasm.
d. Inflammation may be diffcult to differentiate from proestrus or diestrus, but neutrophils
decrease during normal cycling, whereas they remain constant with inflammation.
2. Macrophages and lymphocytes may be numerous in chronic inflammation.
2. Subinvolution of placental sites
             s 
supply is maintained to the tissue tags.
b. It occurs most commonly in young bitches after the frst whelping and consists of a bright
red, bloody discharge that persists for weeks to months after parturition.
c. The cytologic smear consists of blood cells.
3. Neoplasia
a. Some vaginal neoplasms may be diagnosed by vaginal smears.
b. Transmissible venereal tumor, squamous cell carcinoma, lymphoma, and transitional cell
carcinoma that has invaded the vagina are the most common tumors that can be diagnosed
cytologically.
IX. EQUINE ENDOMETRIAL CYTOLOGY
Endometrial cytology is used to determine whether inflammation or infection is present to evaluate
breeding soundness.
A. Method of collection
1. A sterile collection device (swab or flushing catheter) is guarded by a gloved hand, guided
through the vulva and vagina, and advanced through the cervix into the uterus.
Tg lursng 'snn an oun adnd unu as e hunn aq op si aal pi 7
the syringe to collect a sample of fluid (usually l to 5 mL).
3. Preparation of smears depends on the method of collection.
a. Swabs are rolled onto a slide to make direct smears.
b. Flush samples must be centrifuged and smears are prepared from the sediment material.
B. Cytologic examination
1. Endometrial epithelial cells are ciliated or nonciliated, columnar cells distributed singly, in
 clusters, or in large sheets. They have small dark oval nuclei located at the basal aspect of the cell
opposite the cilia.
2. Erythrocytes are present postpartum, following endometrial biopsy, in acute inflammatory
conditions, and following intrauterine trauma.
3. The presence of squamous cells in endometrial smears indicates vaginal contamination.
4. Inflammatory cells are not normally present in endometrial smears.
a. Neutrophils in numbers greater than 2% of the nucleated cell population or in a ratio greater
than one neutrophil/40 endometrial cells indicates active inflammation.
b. Lymphocytes and macrophages may be seen in chronic inflammation.
C. The presence of eosinophils has been associated with pneumovagina and pneumouterus.
d. In barren mares, endometrial specimens occasionally may exhibit inflammation, but
 infectious agents are infrequent to rare.
5. Infectious agents
a. Infectious agents rarely are observed in most equine endometrial cytology specimens.
b. Bacteria, yeasts (Candida sp.), and fungus (Aspergillus sp.) have been observed in a small
 percentage of endometrial specimens.
362
CHAPTER 12
REFERENCES
and 48 hours of storage. J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1761-1764.
Bouvy BM, Bjorling DE: 199l. Pericardial effusion in dogs and cats. Part I. Normal pericardium and
causes and pathophysiology of pericardial effusion. Compend Contin Eaur Prart Vet 13:417-42l, 424.
Campbell TW: 1995. Avian Hematology and Cytology, 2nd ed. Ames, IA, Iowa State University Press.
Cowell RL, Tyler RD (eds): 2002. Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology of the Horse, 2nd ed. St. Louis.
Mosby, Inc.
Cowell RL, Tyler RD, Meinkoth JH (eds): 1999. Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and
Cat, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, Inc.
Fossum TW: 1993. Feline chylothorax. Compend Contin Educ Prart Vet 15:549-567.
Fossum TW, Wellman M, Relford RL, et al: 1993. Eosinophilic pleural or peritoneal effusions in dogs
and cats: 14 cases (19861992). J Am Vet Med Assoc 202:18731876.
Furr MO, Tyler RD: 1990. Cerebrospinal fluid creatine kinase activity in horses with central nervous
system disease: 69 cases (1984-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:245-248.
Green EM, Constantinescu GM, Kroll RA: 1993. Equine cerebrospinal fluid: Analysis. Compend Contin
Educ Pract Vet 15:288-302.
evaluation in the diagnosis of neoplasia in body fluids from dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 28:142-146.
Hurtt AE, Smith MO: 1997. Effects of iatrogenic blood contamination on results of cerebrospinal fluid
analysis in clinically normal dogs and dogs with neurologic disease. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2ll:866-867.
Jackson C, de Lahunta A, Divers T, et al: 1996. The diagnostic utility of cerebrospinal fluid creatine
kinase activity in the horse. J Vet Intern Med 10:246-251.
Jacobs RM, Cochrane SM, Lumsden JH, et al: 1990. Relationship of cerebrospinal fluid protein
concentration determined by dye-binding and urinary dipstick methodologies. Can Vet J 3l:587-588.
Malark JA, Peyton LC, Galvin MJ: 1992. Effects of blood contamination on equine peritoneal fluid
analysis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1545-1548.
Munana KR, Luttgen PJ: 1998. Prognostic factors for dogs with granulomatous
meningoencephalomyelitis: 42 cases (1982-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1902-1906.
Padrid PA, Feldman BF, Funk K, et al: 199l. Cytologic, microbiologic, and biochemical analysis of
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid obtained from 24 healthy cats. Am J Vet Res 52:1300-1307.
Radaelli ST, Platt SR: 2002. Bacterial meningoencephalomyelitis in dogs: A retrospective study of 23
cases (1990-1999). J Vet Intern Med 16:159-163
peritonitis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:35-40.
Stalis IH, Chadwick B, Dayrell-Hart B, et al: 1995. Necrotizing meningoencephalitis of Maltese dogs
Vet Pathol 32:230-235.
Sweeney CR, Russell GE: 2oo0. Differences in total protein concentration, nucleated cell count, and
red blood cell count among sequential samples of cerebrospinal fluid from horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc
217:54-57.
CYTOLOGY
363
Welles EG, Pugh DG, Wenzel JG, et al: 1994. Composition of cerebrospinal fluid in healthy adult
llamas. Am J Vet Res 55:1075-1079.
Welles EG, Tyler JW, Sorjonen DC, et al: 1992. Composition and analysis of cerebrospinal fluid in
clinically normal adult cattle. Am J Vet Res 53:2050-2057.
Whitney MS, Roussel AJ, Cole DJ: 1999. Cytology in bovine practice: Solid tissue, pleural fluid, and
peritoneal fluid specimens. Vet Med 94:277-278, 280-281, 283-286, 288-289.
CHAPTER13
GENERATINGANDINTERPRETING
TESTRESULTS: TESTVALIDITV,QUALITV
CONTROL,REFERENCEVALUES,AND
BASICEPIDEMIOLOGY
Paula M. Krimer, DVM, DVSc, DACVP
1. MEDICAL DECISIONS ARE MADE BASED ON THE COMPARISON OF PATIENT LABORATORY
VALUES WITH THOSE OF A REFERENCE GROUP. FOR ALL VALUES tO BE CLINICALLY USEFUL
FOUR DISTINCT CRITERIA MUST BE MET.
A. Test validity. The test itself must be valid and measure the analyte of interest over a range of values
with minimal interference from other substances. Sources of error should be minimized.
B. Quality control. The test must be run correctly. The laboratory must maintain stringent quality
control to constantly ensure the test is run correctly and report the best possible measure of the
analyte.
C. Reference intervals. The test result is compared to known values from healthy patients. The
n rn id dde p i as e sn i si n
 and must be created using the same test methodology.
D. Basic epidemiology. The selected analyte must have a strong association with a medical condition
such that the test will have few false-positive and false-negative results. Test selection is critical and
should vary with the pre-test probability of disease.
Il. TeSt ValidItY
A. The test should measure the analyte of interest over a range of values with minimal interference
from other substances.
B. Because reagents and instruments used to perform laboratory tests on animal specimens often are
marketed solely for testing human specimens, one cannot assume that a procedure will produce valid
results on samples from other species.
1. Laboratories in human settings do not have equipment calibrated for animal samples and do not
validate tests for animals, and reference intervals cannot be applied to animals. Do not use human
laboratoriesfor analysis ofveterinary specimens.
2. Test validation, especially those involving antibodies, can be challenging in non-domestic species
because reagents may not cross react.
365
366
CHAPTER 13
C. Protocols to validate an assay are described in most clinical chemistry textbooks. Typical
components of the validation procedure include assessment of the following:
1. Analytical specificity. This is the ability of the assay to measure the analyte in question in the
known or suspected interfering substances to the sample or by using samples from patients with a
known condition (e.g., lipemia, hemolysis, bilirubinemia).
2. Lower limit of detection or analytical sensitivity. This is the smallest amount of an analyte that
the test can detect. The lower limit of detection often is assessed by running a series of dilutions of
a known standard.
3. Upper limit of detection. This is the greatest amount of the analyte that the test can reliably
measure or after which the results are no longer reliable.
4. Linearity. A test which yields results directly proportional to the concentration of the analyte has
good linearity. Most tests are linear over a specific reportable range of values, which are bound by
the reportable upper and lower limits of detection. Those which are not linear can sometimes be
modified by mathematical transformation and become suitable for laboratory use
5. Accuracy. The accuracy of a laboratory result is how close the test result is to the ‘true value' of
known value.
a. For most common analytes, accuracy is determined using a designated analytical reference
method and calibration materials (reagents). For other analytes, such values may not exist
because of the lack of agreement among laboratories on a suitable analytical reference method.
 d  aa  a  a  a  d e si s
non-domestic species.
b. During the validation process, analytical accuracy is determined by running known amounts
of the analyte and comparing the results to expected values, performing recovery studies, or
using split samples and comparing a new test method to an existing test method of known
accuracy.
6. Precision. The precision of a laboratory method is its reproducibility. A test can have a high
degree of precision (always gives the same value), but a low degree of accuracy (the value is
incorrect)
a. Laboratory tests vary greatly in their precision. Pre-analytical factors (see section D, 1 below)
as well as analytic factors such as interfering substances, assay method, instrumentation, and
skill of the technician influence precision.
b. A common means to measure and report the precision of a quantitative laboratory method is
the coeffcient of variation (CV). The CV is expressed as a percentage and can be determined by
   i    n       s
a CV. The mean and standard deviation of the set of results is calculated, and the CV is
expressed by the following formula:
CV = 1o0 x (standard deviation + mean).
c. With appropriate testing, CVs can be calculated separately for variation within a single set of
smples (within run variation) and within sets of samples analyzed from day to day (between-
run variation).
d. An ideal test has a CV of less than 5%, with a CV of less than 10% being acceptable for many
tests. For some tests, the best CV that can be practically achieved is closer to 20%.
D. Sources of test error can be pre-analytical, analytical, or post-analytical.
1. Pre-analytical errors are caused prior to analysis. These are the most common errors made by
practitioners and also the easiest to prevent or rectify.
2. Common pre-analytic errors include the following:
(s po rn soa 'a ieae ia) nd ads jo as ns 1
367
b. Incorrect or poor sampling technique (e.g., traumatic venipuncture for coagulation assays,
blood clotting inside syringe)
C.
Incorrect sample container or anticoagulant (e.g., EDTA tube for a biochemistry panel)
d. Incorrect anticoagulant-to-blood ratio or insufficient sample volume (e.g., under-filling tube
for coagulation assays or flling tube with too little blood from small species of animals)
2. Inadequate processing prior to submission (e.g., sending serum on the clot to the laboratory
without centrifuging, not making blood and fluid smears)
f.  1
 Poor packaging (e.g., sample breaking in transit, exposing blood smears to formalin fumes)
81
h. Incorrect test identification (e.g., marking an incorrect test on the submission form)
i.
 Sample degradation (e.g., storing the sample too long prior to analysis)
j. Temperature fluctuations (e.g., freezing in winter or excessive heating in summer)
3. Analytical errors arise during analysis of the sample in the commercial laboratory or when using
in-clinic machines. These errors can be random (occurring only once) or systematic (due to a
 general problem). Laboratories must validate a test and maintain strict quality control to minimize
analytical errors. Practitioners are responsible for properly calibrating, maintaining, and performing
quality control when using in-house analyzers.
4. Post-analytical errors are generally associated with incorrect data entry and generation of
reports.
M. QUALITY CONTROL AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
A. The test must be run correctly The external laboratory or in-clinic laboratory must maintain
stringent quality control to constantly ensure the test is run correctly and to report the best possible
 measure of the analyte.
B. Commercial and institutional laboratories
1. Quality control. Large laboratories should have systematic programs to ensure that test results
are valid. These programs often are complex and have numerous components intended to detect
 potential sources of error in laboratory values.
2. A critical concept of a quality control and quality assurance program is that it is a central part of
the daily operation of a laboratory and that detailed records of the quality control system are
maintained. Larger laboratories often employ individuals whose sole purpose is to monitor all
quality control operations.
3. A laboratory that does not maintain a quality control program cannot ensure its test results are
valid and should not be used.
4. Discussion of the details of a quality control program is largely outside the scope of this text;
however, a typical program includes the following:
spectrophotometers, electronic cell counters, flow cytometers, centrifuges, refrigerators, and
B sd pi aq ss nd n ap p p pa a su snadid
the original equipment manufacturer.
b. A system to monitor reagent inventory, storage, and handling. This system ensures that
reagents are within their expiration dates; reagents do not degrade, expire, or lose sterility, and
water quality is maintained.
 laboratory to monitor ongoing test accuracy and precision. Controls are assayed along with
 patient samples to ensure that the instruments, technicians, and reagents are functioning
properly.
d. Graphic plots such as Levey-Jennings charts (Figure 13.l) allow visualization of variation in
daily controls for violation of rule-based algorithms (e.g., Westgard Rules or Six Sigma) and are
368
CHAPTER 13
(Glucose Control (mg/dl)
105
100
95
85
7.
70
65
G
9101112131415
Day
FGURE 13.l. Example of a Levey-Jennings chart showing a glucose control over a 15-day period. The expected
value of S0mg/dl is indicated by the thick central solid line. Ihe dotted lines are one standard deviation away
 a a  a s    a  a  a   
entered into statistical programs to evaluate the accuracy and precision of control data over
time. If the control is statistically outside of a specified interval or a series of controls violates
the statistical rules or shows a distinct trend (multi-rule violations based on bias and coefficient
 of variance), patient values in that test run(s) may be invalid or a general equipment or reagent
problem may exist.
e. Maintenance of detailed written records to monitor each of the above components and to
document that quality control tasks are being done.
5. Quality Assurance
 a. Laboratories often paricipate in third-party accreditation and/or proficiency programs that
verify their adherence to and maintenance of a quality control program and also evaluate the
quality of their test results.
b. Accreditation involves a combination of laboratory audits, inspections, and site visits t0
endorse the quality control system. Selected examples of agencies that administer accreditation
programs include the American Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD),
COLA (previously the Commission on Office Laboratory Accreditation), and the American
Association for Laboratory Accreditation (AALA).
c. Profciency programs are distinet from accreditation programs; they measure the quality of
laboratory results. The laboratory periodically receives blinded samples of unknown composition
to be assayed and test results are submitted to the agency administering the proficiency program.
The laboratory subsequently receives a report comparing its test results to those of other
 laboratories. Agencies that administer profciency programs include the Veterinary Laboratory
Association (VLA), National Veterinary Service, and National Animal Health Laboratory
Network (NAHLN).
d. Selection of a good veterinary laboratory should be based on its internal quality control
methods, accreditation by outside agencies, and participation in laboratory proficiency programs.
Asking your laboratory about its quality control and quality assurance practices is recommended.
C. In-clinic testing
1. The main advantage of in-clinic testing is to obtain rapid test results, rather than to decrease
costs or increase test accuracy. However, inaccurate but rapid test results are not useful and
potentiallyharmful to the patient.
GENERATING AND INTERPRETING TEST RESULTS
369
2. Laboratory analyses performed in private veterinary practices are not performed in an optimal
setting as outlined above and the likelihood of serious error is much higher. Therefore, it is even
more critical that a rigorous quality control program be implemented and maintained.
3. The absence of a quality control program or dedicated quality control personnel for in-clinic
analyzers or point-of-care instruments will lead to erroneous results and poor medical decisions fon
which the veterinarian is legally liable.
4. Newer in-clinic analyzers for some routine hematological and biochemical tests can be quite
accurate and reliable in domestic species if properly maintained and supported. Many analyzers
have built-in quality control systems that automatically run controls and monitor sensors and
fluid-levels.
5. Some analyzers and point-of-care instruments provide results, even when instrumentation
 indicates that controls have failed. It is improper and potentially harmful to the patient to accept a
test result or make medical decisions based on dubious test results that fail internal controls or are
assayed with expired reagents.
6. A good in-clinic analyzer is fully supported by the manufacturer with excellent customer
service. This process includes the following:
a. Assistance to establish and maintain a quality control program for a given analyzer
 b. Appropriate control amples and calibration standards
C.
Assistance in validating or transferring reference intervals
d. Trouble-shooting assistance or an assistance hotline
2. A long-term service contract with routine equipment maintenance, repair, or replacement as
needed
7. Quality control is a significant but necessary monetary and labor expenditure if in-clinic
analyzers are to be used. In a practice setting where the costs of seldom-used reagents and quality
control procedures cannot be amorized over a large volume of samples, a modest quality control
program can double the average cost-per-patient test result.
8. When veterinarians consider purchasing equipment for in-house laboratory analyses, it is
aias pue oddns sanu n 'uond pon ainenb e jo siso ai apnoui on uod
contract, and required personnel to perform the equipment maintenance, laboratory testing, and
quality control.
9. Reference intervals should ideally be established for each individual in-clinic analyzer; those
provided by the manufacturer may not be applicable without transfer validation studies. In
addition, test results and reference intervals between species and for non-domestic species should
 never be considered accurate without proper test validation and creation of species-specifc
reference intervals. See section IV, F for a more thorough discussion on transfer of reference
intervals.
IV. REFERENCE INTERVALS
A. To make medical decisions, patient test results are compared to known values from healthy
patients. The reference intervals must represent a suficiently large and appropriate demographic for
comparison, and must be created using the same test methodology.
1. The term reference value is preferred over the term 'normal value' because of the difficulty in
defining normality.
2. The term reference range is incorrect because it refers to the difference between the upper and
lower limits of a reference interval and is a single whole number. For example, if the reference
interval for glucose in adult dogs is 76 to 1l9 mg/dL, the range of the reference interval is 43 mg/dL
(i.e., 119 - 76 = 43).
3. Reference intervals are specific to the test method and reference group. They cannot be transferred
between laboratories without validation, even when the equipment and test method are the same.
370
CHAPTER 13
The use of published reference intervals for diagnostic decisions is not advised, especially if measured
with a different instrument or different reagents, or the reference group is not the same as that of
the patient.
B. The best reference interval for a patient is calculated from a similar group of healthy animals,
known as the reference group. Clearly defined demographic, environmental, and physiological
 parameters are used to select appropriate reference individuals in the group.
1. Demographic parameters for the reference group include:
a. Species (e.g., hematocrit and MCV are higher in dogs than cats). This is difficult for rare or
uncommon exotic or wildlife species.
b. Breed (e.g., active breeds have higher hematocrit)
C. Age (e.g., younger animals have lower hematocrit percentage and protein concentration and
higher lymphocyte counts)
d. Sex (e.g., male dogs have higher hematocrit values than females)
2. Environmental and physiological conditions for the reference group include the following:
a. Diet (e.g., animals on a high-protein diet have a higher BUN concentration)
b. Fasted or unfasted (e.g., blood glucose and bile acid concentrations are lower following
fasting)
an eapsp du u pasp a sis  o aanda s
in nursing mares, decreased calcium in lactating cattle)
d. Level of excitement (e.g., increased hematocrit percentage and lymphocyte count in excited
cats)
2. Body condition (e.g., creatinine concentration is higher in well-muscled animals)
f. Altitude (e.g., RBC count is increased at high altitudes)
g. Medications (e.g., corticosteroids increase the neutrophil count and ALP activity)
h. Season of the year (e.g., some analytes change with the length of day, mating season, external
temperature, etc., especially in non-domestic species)
C. Reference intervals apply only to mmples collected, handled, and analyzed using a similar test
methodology This includes all aspects of the sample and the analytic method of the test.
1. Specimen collection parameters include the following:
a. Collection site (e.g., WBC count is higher in capillary than venous blood)
b. Anticoagulant used (e.g., platelets usually vary with anticoagulants; many biochemical
parameters are different in citrated plasma than serum and vary by species)
C. Sampling time (e.g., time of day, postprandial sampling time for bile acids, post-ACTH
administration time)
2. Specimen handling parameters include:
a. Post-collection interval before testing (e.g., sorbitol dehydrogenase is only stable a few hours)
b. Storage conditions, including heating, freezing, and thawing (e.g., freezing whole blood
 causes hemolysis and heating ruins cell morphology)
3. Analytical method parameters include
a. The type of machine or instrument, specific reagents, specific test method, biochemical
reactions, temperature, and calibration methods must be the same for reference intervals to be
valid (e.g., hematocrit and platelet counts of the same blood specimen varied on seven different
analyzers, some ALT assays add pyridoxal 5-phosphate to convert the inactive apoenzyme to a
functional holoenzyme, whereas some do not).
b. Values should be compared only with the same units or should be converted with appropriate
conversion factors (e.g., metric international standard units vs. empirical units).
D. Methods to calculate the reference intervals vary with the number of individuals and normality of
the patient data, but usually represent the central 95% of the reference group. A variety of statistical
methods can be used.
GENERATING AND INTERPRETING TEST RESULTS
371
1. Ideally, at least 120 individuals should be used to calculate the reference interval. In veterinary
medicine, this number often is not reached.
2. If more than 40 individuals are in the slected reference group and the values are normally
(Gaussian) distributed, the reference interval is calculated using a mean ± 2 standard deviations.
This should include 95% of the values.
3. If there are more than 40 individuals and the values are not normally distributed, the non-
parametric central 95% is calculated using the rank-percentile method. In this simple calculation
the bottom 2.5% and the top 2.5% of the values are excluded. The advantage of this method is that
it is impossible for values not actually measured or non-physiological values to be included in the
reference interval.
4. When using either of these techniques, values from 95% of the animals are included; however,
values from 5% of the clinically healthy animals are expected to fall outside of the reference
interval.
a. Statistically, this means that even for a healthy animal, one test out of 20 can be expected to
be outside the reference intervals.
5. If there are less than 40 reference individuals, the highest and lowest values observed should be
used as the high and low reference interval limits.
6. Reference intervals used for the case studies in this text are listed in Tables 13.1, 13.2, and 13.3.
E. The more diverse the reference group parameters, the wider the reference intervals, whereas the
1. Wide reference intervals for any test parameter are expected when sampling a population of
dogs of various age, sex, breed, and health status with an unknown period of fasting, unknown
medication status, and an unkno wn delay in sample analysis
2. Much narrower reference intervals for any test parameter are expected when sampling a
population of non-medicated, fasted, adult, male, healthy beagles with immediate laboratory
analysis of the specimens.
3. The narrower reference intervals that are derived from a relatively homogeneous population
have greater diagnostic sensitivity in detecting disease (i.e., they facilitate detection of minor
 deviations from health). However, there are two main disadvantages:
a. If the reference interval is applied to animals that do not have the same population
parameters, incorrect conclusions may be drawn regarding the meaning of the test results. For
example, puppies are born with a lower hematocrit and have higher ALP associated with bone
growth relative to adults. A puppy may be misdiagnosed with anemia or liver disease if its
   s   p  d  
b. Though ideal, it is logistically impossible to determine separate reference intervals for every
subpopulation of animals that a typical veterinary laboratory encounters. Awareness of the
characteristics of the reference group is paramount in comparing the reference intervals with
subpopulations with different demographic, environmental, or physiological parameters.
4. Reference values previously determined on an individual animal produce the narrowest reference
intervals
a. The patient's previous laboratory values, obtained in a state of health, serve as reference
points for the interpretation of future laboratory test results.
b. This method often is used in studies in which pretest reference intervals are determined on
each individual animal before the start of the study.
F.Reference intervals should not be transferred between laboratories unless the analytical method
(including instruments and reagents) is the same.
1. Transfer of reference intervals requires specifc validation steps. This is usually a comparison of
split sample results between an established instrument and a new instrument. Reference intervals
may be transferable or require mathematical manipulation after linear regression to correlate the
two machines.
TABLE 13.1
HEMATOLOGY REFERENCEINTERVALS.*
Conversion
Test
Dog
Cat
Horse
Cow
Units
factor
 SI units
Hematocrit (Hct)
35-57
30-45
27-43
24-46
%
0.01
L/L
Hemoglobin (Hb)
11.9-18.9
9.8-15.4
10.1-16.1
8.0-15.0
g/dL
10
g/L
Red blood cell count (RBC)
4.95-7.87
5.0-10.0
6.0-10.4
5.0-10.0
x10°μL
1
X10'²/L
 Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
66-77
39-55
37-49
40-60
fL
Same
Mean corpuscular Hb (MCH)
21.0-26.2
13-17
13.7-18.2
11-17
pg
Same
 Mean corpuscular Hb concentration (MCHC)
32.0-36.3
30-36
35.3-39.3
30-36
%(g/dL)
10
g/L
Reticulocytes
0.0-1.0
0.0-0.6
0.0-0.0
0.0-0.0
%
Absolute reticulocyte count
<80
<60
x10/μL
1
X10%/L
Platelet count
211-621
300-800
117-256
100-800
×10²/μL
1
X10/L
Mean platelet volume (MPV)
6.1-10.1
12-18
4.0-6.0
3.5-6.5
fL
same
fL
White blood cell count (WBC)
5.0-14.1
5.5-19.5
5.6-12.1
4.0-12.0
x10/μL
X10/L
Segmented neutrophils (Seg)
2.9-12.0
2.5-12.5
2.9-8.5
0.6-4.0
x10/μL
1
x10/L
 Band neutrophils (Band)
0.0-0.45
0.0-0.3
0.0-0.1
0.0-0.1
x10'/μL
1
x10/L
Lymphocytes
0.4-2.9
1.5-7.0
1.16-5.1
2.5-7.5
x10/μL
1
x10%/L
Monocytes
0.1-1.4
0.0-0.9
0.0-0.7
0.0-0.9
x10²/μL
1
x10/L
Eosinophils
0.0-1.3
0.0-0.8
0.0-0.78
0.0-2.4
x10/μL
1
X10%/L
Basophils
0.0-0.14
0.0-0.2
0.0-0.3
0.0-0.2
x10/μL
1
x10/L
Myeloid/erythroid ratio (M/E)
0.752.5
0.6-3.9
0.5-1.5
0.3-1.8
* These reference intervals have been derived from healthy adult animals at the University of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine and are to be
 used with the study cases in this textbook (unless otherwise indicated). These reference intervals are not appropriate for interpretation of data from
other laboratories.
GENERATING AND INTERPRETING TEST RESULTS
373
TABLE 13.2
HEMOSTASIS REFERENCE INTERVALS.*
Test
Dog
Cat
Horse
Cow
Units
Bleeding time (BT)
1-5
1-5
1-5
1-5
Minutes
Activated clotting time (ACT)
60-100
665
120-190
90-120
Seconds
One-step prothrombin time (OSPT)
5.8-7.9
7.1-10.9
8.2-11.0
Seconds
 Activated partial thromboplastin
13.1-17.4
11.5-19.9
30-50
一
Seconds
time (APTT)
Thrombin clotting time (TCT)
4.2-7.0
4.0-8.7
11.0-20.0
一
Seconds
Fibrin degradation products (FDP)
0-32
810
0-16
一
μg/mL
Fibrinogen
150-300
150-300
100-400
100-600
mg/dL
Platelet count
211-621
117-256
100-800
× 10/μL
Factor VIII activity
50-200
一
% of normal
von Willebrand's factor antigen
60-172
[IOU J0 %
(vWF:Ag)
* These reference intervals are from the University of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine and are to
be used with the study cases in this textbook (unless otherwise indicated). Ihese reference intervals are
not appropriate for interpretation of data from other laboratories.
2. Transfer of reference intervals occurs more frequently with some laboratory tests (e.g., WBC
differential count, BUN concentration, total protein concentration) because the methods of analysis
are similar or standardized.
3. Transfer of reference intervals with other tests may be difficult or impossible because of
differences in equipment, substrate, ionic strength of buffer solutions, and reaction temperatures
(e.g., most enzymatic tests)
G. A frequent conundrum in veterinary medicine is that clinicians sometimes are forced to interpret
laboratory data in the absence of appropriate reference intervals, including such appropriate basic
reference group parameters as species. The use of reference intervals from related species is sometimes
used in these instances, but this should be avoided. At minimum, blood from one or several healthy
animals of the same species should be submitted for comparison if possible.
V. BASIC EPIDEMlOLOGY
A. To be clinically useful, an abnormal test value must have a high degree of association with the
disease condition.
B. Many tests such as biochemistry and serology are continuous values rather than dichotomous
outcomes.
1. Usually, the higher the test value, the stronger the association with the disease.
2. A medical decision limit is the abnormal test value at which a clinician makes a diagnosis or
therapeutic choice, or at which the prognosis changes.
3. The upper limit of the reference interval may be used as a medical decision limit, but often the
chosen value is higher than the upper reference limit (e.g., ALP for cholestasis), or occasionally
lower than the lower reference limit (e.g., RBC for anemia).
C. An important concept is that the medical decision limit is selected.
1. The value chosen as the medical decision limit is referred to as the cut-off.
37
TABLE 13.3
CHEMISIRY REFERENCE INTERVALS. *
Conversion
Test
Dog
Cat
Horse
Cow
Units
factor
SI units
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
10-109
25-97
一
U/L
Same
Albumin
2.3-3.1
2.8-3.9
2.6-4.1
2.5-3.8
g/dL
10
g/L
Albumin/globulin ratio (A/G)
0.6-1.1
0.6-1.1
0.6-1.4
0.6-0.9
 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
1-114 
0-45
-
U/L
same
Ammonia
19-120
06-0
一
μg/dL
0.5872
μmol/L
Amylase
226-1063
550-1458
U/L
same
Anion gap
5-17
7-17
6-0
6-14
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
13-15
7-38
160-412
60-125
U/L
same
Bile acids (fasting)
8-0
S-0
0-20
μmol/L
same
 Bile acids (2-hour postprandial)
0-30
0-15
一
Bilirubin, total
0.0-0.3
0.0-0.1
0.0-3.2
0.0-1.6
mg/dL
17.10
μmol/L
 Bilinubin, direct (conjugated)
0.0-0.3
0.0-0.1
0.0-0.4
0.0-0.2
mg/dL
17.10
μmol/L
Blood gases
Hd
7.31-7.42
7.24-7.40
7.32-7.44
7.35-7.50
HCO-
17-24
17-24
24-30
20-30
mEq/L
1.0
μmol/L
PCO2
29-42
29-42
36-46
35-44
mmHg
0.1333
kPa
PO2
85-95
85-95
94
92
mmHg
0.1333
kPa
Bromosulfophthalein (BSP) (small animals)
0-5
-0
% retention
Bromosulfophthalein (BsP) (large animals)
-
2.4-4.1
2.0-3.7
T1/2 (min)
Cobalamin
200-400
ng/L
same
Calcium
9.1-11.7
8.7-11.7
10.2-13.4
8.0-11.4
mg/dL
0.2495
mmol/L
Chloride
110-124
115-130
98-109
99-107
mEq/L
1.0
mmol/L
Cholesterol
135-278
71-156
mg/dL
一
0.02586
mmol/L
Cortisol, baseline
0.5-3.0
0.5-4.0
3.0-6.0
μg/dL
27.59
nmol/L
Creatine kinase (CK)
52-368
69-214
60-330
0-350
U/L
same
Creatinine
0.5-1.7
0.9-2.2
0.4-2.2
0.5-2.2
mg/dL
88.40
μmol/L
Fibrinogen
150-300
150-300
100-400
100-600
mg/dL
0.01
g/L
Folate
4.8-13.0
μg/L
same
Gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT)
6-32
6-17.4
U/L
same
Globulin, total
2.7-4.4
2.6-5.1
2.6-4.0
3.0-3.5
g/dL
10
g/L
0
0.2-0.5
0.3-0.9
0.1-0.7
0.7-0.9
TP/8
10
g/L
CX2
0.3-1.1
0.3-0.9
0.1-0.7
g/dL
10
g/L
β
0.6-1.2
0.4-0.9
0.4-1.6
0.8-1.2
g/dL
10
g/L
β2
0.3-0.6
0.3-0.9
g/dL
10
g/L
Y
0.5-1.8
1.7-2.7
0.6-1.9
1.7-2.3
g/dL
10
g/L
Glucose
76-119
60-120
62-134
40-100
mg/dL
0.0555
mmol/L
Iron (serum, SI)
94-122
68-215
73-140
57-162
mg/dL
0.1791
μmol/L
Iron-binding capacity, total (TIBC)
165-418
173-420
273-402
120-348
mg/dL
0.1791
μmol/L
Lactic dehydrogenase (LDH)
0-236
58-120
112-456
一
U/L
same
Lipase
60-330
0-76
U/L
same
Magnesium
1.6-2.4
1.7-2.6
1.4-2.3
1.5-2.9
mg/dL
0.4114
mmol/L
Osmolality
288-305
280-305
270-300
270-300
mOsmol/kg
same
Phosphorus
2.9-5.3
3.0-6.1
1.5-4.7
5.6-8.0
mg/dL
0.3229
mmol/L
Potassium
3.9-5.1
3.7-6.1
2.9-4.6
3.6-4.9
mEq/L
1.0
mmol/L
Protein, total (serum)
5.4-7.5
6.0-7.9
5.6-7.6
6.7-7.5
g/dL
10
g/L
Protein, total (plasma)
6.0-7.5
6.0-7.5
6.0-8.5
6.0-8.0
g/dL
10
g/L
Sodium
142-152
146-156
128-142
136-144
mEq/L
1.0
mmol/L
Sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH)
1-8
4.3-15.3
U/L
same
ICO2
14-26
13-21
22-33
22-34
mEq/L
1.0
mmol/L
Thyroxine (T4), baseline
1.5-4.0
0.8-4.0
1.0-4.0
mg/dL
12.87
nmol/L
Thyroid stimulating hormone (IsH)
0.02-0.32
一
ng/mL
μg/L
Iriglycerides
40-169
27-94
6-54
一
mg/dL
0.0113
mmol/L
Irypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLl)
5.2-35
μg/L
same
Urea nitrogen (BUN)
8-28
19-34
11-27
10-25
mg/dL
0.3570
mmol ure a/L
Urine protein/urine creatinine ratio
<0.5
<0.5
Yooqixal sul ul saseo Apns aul uiim pasn aq ol ane pue auoia Aneuaia jo aaao eraioa jo Asiaaun aui oi ane saial aouanajai asauI s
(umless otherwise indicated). These reference intervals are not appropriate for interpretation of data from other laboratories.
376
CHAPTER 13
351
30
est Negative!Test Positive
Healthy
als
25
Diseased
an1
Test Cut-Off
ent
15
20
40
60
80
100
Test Value
FIGURE 13.2a. Histogram of a theoretically perfect laboratory test, in which healthy and diseased animals have
test values that do not overlap. ln a perfect scenario, the cut-off differentiates between both groups; all animals that
sas ae aad ian i se ie ue auea ae aau i
35 
30
Test Pos
25-
Healthy
20-
Diseased
Test Cut-Off
15-
True
True
Negatives
Positi ves
10-
False
False
Negatives: Positives
：
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
FIGURE 13.2b. Most tests have overlapping values for healthy and diseased populations of patients. With a
central cut-off value, most healthy animals test negative and most diseased animals test positive, but some have
false-positive or false-negative test results.
2. The choice of a cut-off depends on the purpose of the test and the consequences of the test result.
3. In an ideal test, the range of values in healthy animals does not overlap with the range of values in
diseased animals (Figure 13.2a). All healthy animals test negative and all diseased animals test positive
at the selected cut-off.
4. With most tests, the ranges of values in healthy and diseased animals overlap (Figure 13.2b).
Therefore, as the cut-off changes, all other epidemiological variables change.
 D. To quantify and characterize epidemiological variables at the selected cut-off, a 2 x 2 contingency
table is used (Table 13.4).
1. In the table, the disease status is placed in columns and the test status is in rows.
a. The true disease status of animals is not based on the test being currently evaluated, but on
 another more defnitive test called a gold standard. Common gold standards include biopsy,
necropsy, PCR, etc.
GENERATING AND INTERPRETING TEST RESULTS
377
TABLE 13.4
EPIDEMIOLOGY2X2CONTINGENCYTABLE
Actual Disease Status
Positive (D+)
Negative (D-)
Test Result
Positive (T+)
a (TP)
b (FP)
Negative (T-)
c (FN)
d (TN)
Parameter
Formula
Formula
 Disease prevalence
(TP+FN)/n
(a+c)/(a+b+c+d)
Sensitivity
TP/(TP+FN)
a/(a+c)
Specificity
TN/(TN+FP)
d/(b+d)
Positive likelihood ratio
TP/FP
a/c
 Negative likelihood ratio
FN/TN
b/d
Odds ratio
(TP+FN)/(TN+FP)
(a+c)/(b+d)
 Positive predictive value
TP/(TP+FP)
a/(a+b)
Negative predictive value
TN/(TN+FN)
d/(c+d)
b. Disease-positive patients (as determined by the gold standard) are placed in the left column.
C. Disease-negative patients (as determined by the gold standard) are placed in the right
column.
d. Test values that fall above the selected cut-off are considered abnormal and called positive for
the disease or condition. These are placed in the top row.
e. Test values that fall below the selected test cut-off are considered negative and are in the
bottom row.
2. Each quadrant of the table represents a different group of patients classified by their true disease
status and their test result.
a. Those in the top left quadrant (a) both have the disease and tested positive. These are the
true-positives (TP).
b. Those in the bottom right quadrant (d) are both disease-free and tested negative. These are
the true-negatives (IN).
c. Those in the top right quadrant (b) are disease-free but tested positive. These are the
false-positives (FP).
d. Those in the bottom left quadrant (e) have the disease but tested negative. These are the
false-negatives (FN).
E. Laboratory tests vary in their FP and FN rates for various diseases and are defined by their
sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios.
1. Sensitivity (Se) is a measure of the ability of the test to identify potentially diseased individuals.
The higher the sensitivity, the more likely a diseased patient will test positive.
a. Sensitivity is defined as the frequency of a positive or abnormal test result when a disease is
present (i.e., the percentage of diseased animals that test positive).
b. Sensitivity = [TP +(TP +FN)]x 100 =[a÷(a +c)]x100
c. A screening test is used primarily to detect the possible presence of a disease. High sensitivity
is necessary for a screening test, because few diseased patients will incorrectly test negative. A
positive result for a test with high sensitivity does not confirm the presence of the disease
condition, but a negative result effectively eliminates that disease.
378
CHAPTER 13
2. Specificity is the ability of a laboratory test to identify patients that do not have disease, or
alternatively stated, to identify only patients with disease. The higher the specificity, the more likely a
non-diseased patient will test negative.
a. Specificity is defined as the frequency of a negative or normal test result when disease is
absent (i.e., the percentage of disease-free patients that test negative).
b. Specificity = [TN+(IN+ FP)]x 100 = [d ÷(b+ d)]x100
C. A confrmatory or diagnostic test confirms the presence of disease, and is especially
 as  d  e n  ad s a an  
necessary for a confirmatory or diagnostic test because few non-diseased patients will incorrectly
test positive. A positive result for a test with high specificity effectively rules in that condition,
whereas a negative result does not confirm the absence of disease.
F. Laboratory tests are seldom highly sensitive and highly specific at the same time.
1. There is usually a trade-off between sensitivity and specificity, when sensitivity increases, specificity
decreases. Therefore, the selection ofa cut-off value varies with the purpose of the test and the consequences
of a test result.
2. If the selected cut-off is decreased (Figure l3.2c), more animals test positive, the sensitivity of
the test increases, and the specificity decreases. As a result, there are fewer false-negatives (FN), but
more flse-positives (FP). The lower the cut-off, the more likely a diseased patient will correctly
test positive, but more non-diseased patients will incorrectly test positive.
3. If the selected cut-off is increased (Figure 13.2d), fewer animals test positive, the sensitivity
decreases, and the specificity increases. As a result, there are fewer false-positives (FP), but more
false-negatives (FN). The higher the cut-off fewer non-diseased patients will incorrectly test
B     l sd  ae   
diagnostic tests tend to have high cut-offs.
4. In most cases, a screening test is followed by a confirmatory test, especially when treatment is
 potentially harmful.
G. The inverse relationship between sensitivity and specifcity can be graphically represented with a
     o i I    ( o)    
select a cut-off.
1. A ROC curve graphs the sensitivity (or true-positive rate) on the y-axis and l-specifcity (or
false-positive rate) on the x-axis.
35 
30
25
Healthy
20
Diseased
False
Test Cut-Off
15 
IPositives
True
10
Positives
'True
'Negative
C
10
20
30
40)
5)
60
70
FIGURE 13.2c. lf the test cut-off value is decreased, all ciseased animals are detected. This is a good screening test.
There are no false-negatives, but there are many false-positives. Not all animals that test positive are diseased, and a
follow-up confirmatory or ciagnostic testis necessary to identify the ruly diseased animals.
GENERATING AND INTERPRETING TEST RESULTS
379
35
30
Test Positive
25
Healthy
20
Diseased
Test Cut-Off
15
True
False
'Negatives
/Negatives
10
True
iPositive
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
      n       i e   s
are healthy but all positives can be treated with confidence.
100
90
80
70
10
10
20
30405060708090100
100-Specificity (%)
-Perfecttest
← Non-discriminatory test +- Typical test
FIGURE 13.3. Example of a receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve. Io identify a good medical decision
Sensitivity and specificity are inversely related and vary depending on the selected cut-off. A perfect test contacts
the top left corner, whereas a non-discrirminatory test goes frorm the axis intersect to the top right corner. Most
typical clinical tests approach but do not reach the top left corner.
2. The ROC curve of a perfect test with 100% sensitivity (no false-negatives) and 100% specificity
(no false-positives) goes up the y-axis and then extends at a 90° angle parallel to the x-axis with a
point in the upper left corner or coordinate (0,1).
3. The ROC curve of a useless test equivalent to chance (i.e., one with 50% sensitivity and 50%
specificity) would create a diagonal line (or line of no-discrimination) from the bottom left to the
top right corner.
4. Most laboratory tests yield an ROC curve that approaches the top left corner.
5. If the consequences of a false-positive or false-negative test result are equal for the patient, the
best cut-off value is one with the greatest area under the curve. However, usually the cut-off is
lowered when used as a screening test, or increased when used as a diagnostic test.
089
CHAPTER 13
H. Likelihood ratios are a useful measure of a test. They indicate the probability of disease actually
being present if the test is positive or of actually being absent if the test is negative. They are
independent of the true prevalence and are based only on the test sensitivity and specificity at the
chosen cut-off.
1. The positive likelihood ratio (LR+) indicates the power of a positive test and ranges from l to
infinity. It is the likelihood of ruling in disease with a positive test. The higher the LR+, the more
useful the test is in confirming disease. It is not the likelihood of the animal having disease
a. The LR+ quantifies how much more likely the patient is to have the disease if the test is
positive. A good confirmatory or diagnostic test has a high LR+.
b. LR+= [sensitivity ÷(1 -specificity)]x100.
2. The negative likelihood ratio (LR-) indicates the power of a negative test and ranges from O t0
1. It is the likelihood of ruling out disease with a negative test. The lower the LR-, the more useful
it is to confirm a negative disease status. It is not the likelihood of the animal being disease-free.
a. The LR- quantifies how much less likely the patient is to be have disease if the test is
negative. A good screening test has a low LR-.
b. LR-= [(1 -sensitivity)+(specificity)]x100.
I. Sensitivity, specificity, and likelihood ratios are inherent to the test and fixed. However, the
interpretation of a test result for an individual patient varies with the pre-test probability of disease or
disease prevalence. The most common measures are odds ratio, positive predictive value, and negative
predictive value.
1. Odds ratio. The probability of disease can be expressed as an odds ratio (OR). The OR is the
 proportion of diseased to non-diseased animals.
a.OR =(TP+FN)÷(TN+FP)=(a +c)÷(b+d).
b. The OR changes with the prevalence of disease in the group. This varies with patient
parameters such as signalment, history, and clinical signs. For example, the OR for heart disease
is higher if the patient has a heart murmur because many patients with heart murmurs have
heart disease. Conversely, the OR for ruptured cruciate ligament among patients with heart
murmurs is low because heart murmurs are uncommon in animals with ruptured cruciates
(heart murmurs are more common in small dogs and dogs with heart disease, whereas cruciate
 ruptures are more common in young, large-breed dogs, which do not often have heart
(smnu
     i s  e s    n a 
(see section H, above)
d. If the pre-test odds are different from the post-test odds, the test selection is appropriate. If
the pre- and post-test odds are similar, the test does not provide any useful information.
2. Positive predictive value. The positive predictive value (PPV) is an indicator of the probability of
having the disease if the patient tests positive. A test with a high positive predictive value is one in
which most positive patients have disease.
a. PPV is defined as the percentage of diseased patients among patients that test positive.
b.PPV=[TP÷(TP+FP)]x100=[a÷(a+b)]x100
3. Negative predictive value. The negative predictive value (NPV) is an indicator of the probability
 of being disease free if the patient tests negative. A test with a high negative predictive value is in
which most negative patients are disease free.
a. NPV is defined as the percentage of non-diseased patients among patients that test negative.
b. NPV =[TN+(TN+ FN)]x100 =[d÷(c+d)]×100.
4. Predictive values highly depend on the actual, but often unknowable, true disease prevalence
a. As prevalence increases, the positive predictive value (PPV) and false-negatives (FN) increase.
The more common a disease, the more likely a patient is to have the disease, regardless of the
test result. A positive test is more likely to be correct if the prevalence is high, for example, if a
test is used for animals with clinical signs suggestive of the disease.
381
b. The negative predictive value and false-positive rate both increase as prevalence decreases
The rarer the disease, the more likely the patient is non-diseased, regardless of the test result. A
negative test is more likely to be correct if the prevalence is already low.
c. When a disease is common, false-negatives are reduced by using a test with high sensitivity,
though false-positives will occur.
d. When a disease is uncommon, false-positives are reduced with a highly specific test. Because
the disease is rare, false-negatives are rare and not a concern.
5. If a laboratory screening test is useful, its sensitivity is high and PPV will be much greater than
poor screening test when the prevalence of the disease is low.
6. The use of multiple tests changes the predictive values.
a. Performing laboratory tests in series (e.g., a second laboratory test is done if the frst
laboratory test is positive; the algorithmic approach) increases the PPV. Patients that test
positive to a series of tests are more likely to be truly diseased. Test specificity is increased at
the expense of test sensitivity when compared to using only a single test. Series of tests are
used when a high degree of certainty is required in a diagnosis, such as when the treatment
could harm a non-diseased patient.
b. Performing multiple laboratory tests in parallel (e.g., biochemical profles or batteries of
tests) increases the NPV. Test sensitivity is increased at the expense of test specificity. Patients
with disease are unlikely to be missed when compared to using only a single test. The greater
the number of tests in the profile, the greater the chance for FP test results. Biochemical profiles
are best used to exclude diseases with a high degree of confidence. Thus, they are used as
screening tests.
REFERENCES
[dns 1I lor p f sisn osoue jo aouad pue noe jo sansea o  zieqo
1:S33-40.
Farver TB: 1997. Concepts of Normality in Clinical Biochemistry In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss M
(eds): Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. Academic Press, San Diego.
Gardner IA, Greiner M: 2006. Receiver-operating characteristic curves and likelihood ratios:
Improvements over traditional methods for the evaluation and application of veterinary clinical
pathology tests. Vet Clin Pathol 35:8-17.
Harvey JW, Pate MG, Kivipelto J, et al: 2005. Clinical biochemistry of pregnant and nursing mares. Vet
Clin Pathol 34:248-254.
International Federation of Clinical Chemistry, Scientific Committee, Clinical Section. Expert Panel on
Theory of Reference Values (EPTRV): 1984. The theory of reference values. Part 5. Statistical treatment
of collected reference values. Determination of reference limits. Clin Chim Acta 137:97F-114F
Jensen AL: 2000. Validation of Diagnostic Tests in Hematology Laboratories. In: Feldman BV, Zinkl JG,
Jain NC, Schalm OW (eds): Schalms Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
Philadelphia.
Kramer JW, Hoffmann WE: 1997. Clinical Enzymology In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss M (eds):
Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 5th ed. Academic Press, San Diego.
Lumsden JH: 2000. Quality Control. In: Feldman BV, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, Schalm OW (eds): Schalms
Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Wiliams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA
Lumsden JH: 2000. Reference Values. In: Feldman BV, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, Schalm OW (eds): Schalms
Veterinary Hematology, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia.
382
CHAPTER 13
Mahaffey EA: 2003. Quality Control, Test Validity, and Reference Values. In: Latimer KS, Mahaffey EA,
Prasse KW (eds): Duncan and Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical Pathology 4th ed. Iowa
State University Press, Ames, IA.
Solberg HE: 1993. A guide to IFCC recommendations on reference values. J Int Fed Clin Chem
5:162-165.
Solberg HE: 1999. Establishment and Use of Reference Values. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, Tietz NW
(eds): Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry, 3rd ed. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Westgard JO: 1999. Quality Management. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, Tietz NW (eds): Tietz Textbook
of Clinical Chemistry, 3rd ed. WB. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Young DS, Bermes EW: 1999. Specimen Collection and Processing: Sources of Biological Variation. In:
Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, Tietz NW (eds): Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry, 3rd ed. WB. Saunders,
Philadelphia.
CASE STUDIES
 reader an opportunity to practice the
interpretation of laboratory data, using the principle:
and concepts presented in the various chapters
of this textbook. When reading a particular chapte
textbook, the reader is referred to these
illustrative cases by number. Each case study includes
ignalment and presenting complaint(s).
To rapidly discern abnormalities in the laboratory data, an H (high or above the reference interval) or
L (low or below the reference interval) is placed adjacent to the abnormal test value. These data have
been largely derived from actual clinical cases; however, minor alterations or additions have been made
to the data sets to simplify or clarify the points being illustrated by each case. Therefore, these study
cases should be used only to practice laboratory data interpretation and should not be referenced as
actual clinical cases. Tables 13.l, 13.2, and 13.3 contain the reference intervals that have been derived
for use at the University of Georgia College of Veterinary Medicine; they may not be appropriate to
identify test abnormalities in data sets from other clinical laboratories (see Chapter 13). The reference
interval tables should be used for interpretation of the laboratory data in these study cases, unless
otherwise indicated.
CASE
DISEASE
SPECIES
Hemorrhagic anemia (ancylostomiasis)
dog
2
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia
dog
3
Acute intravascular hemolytic anemia (red maple toxicosis)
horse
4
Estrogen-induced pancytopenia (Sertoli cell tumor)
dog
5
Chronic hemorrhagic anemia (iron-lack anemia)
dog
6
Acute salmonellosis
horse
7
 Feline infectious peritonitis
cat
8
Pyometra
dog
9
Feline infectious panleukopenia (parvovirus infection)
cat
10
Multicentric lymphoma
dog
11
Renal abscess and secondary disseminated intravascular coagulation
dog
12
Hepatic encephalopathy (hepatic fibrosis)
horse
13
 Portosystemic venous shunt with hepatic atrophy
Bop
14
Acute pancreatic necrosis
dog
15
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, and chronic renal failure
dog
16
dog
17
Muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis
horse
18
Acute renal failure (ethylene glycol toxicosis)
dog
383
384
CASE STUDIES
CASE
DISEASE
SPECIES
19
Renal amyloidosis (nephrotic syndrome)
dog
20
 Feline lower urinary tract disease (feline urologic syndrome)
cat
21
Acute septic mastitis
COw
22
Nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage
COw
23
Right abomasal displacement
cOw
24
Acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute Paraquat? toxicosis)
dog
25
Rodenticide (coumarin) toxicosis
dog
26
 Hyperadrenocorticism
dog
27
Hyperthyroidism
cat
28
von Willebrand's disease
dog
29
Urea toxicosis
cow
30
End stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis
dog
31
Early primary hypothyroidism
dog
32
Possible glucocorticoid suppression of thyroid function
dog
33
Primary hypothyroidism (and phenobarbital administration)
dog
34
Hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis,
dog
hyperosmolality, necrotizing pancreatitis, and urinary tract infection
35
Artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample handling
dog
CASE 1
HEMORRHAGICANEMIA
(ANCYLOSTOMIASIS)
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Pointer, male, & weeks old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS:Melena and mucous membrane pallor for several days
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Seg
Hct
13
13.650 (78%)
x10'/μL
L
%
Hb
3.9
g/dL
Band
0.0
x10'/μL
L
RBC
1.59
x10%/μL
Lymph
2.625 (15%)
x10'/μL
L
Mono
0.525 (3%)
MCV
x10/μL
81
H
fL
Eos
MCH
24.5
0.700 (4%)
x10/μL
Pg
Baso
MCHC
30.0
%
0.0
x10/μL
L
WBC morphology: normal
 Retic
16.6
H
%
Abs retic
264
H
x10/μL
Senum Chemistry
NRBC
3
H
/100
Total protein
3.8
L
g/dL
WBC
Albumin
1.8
L
g/dL
 RBC morphology: anisocytosis, polychromasia
A/G ratio
0.90
Platelets
653
H
x10/μL
Other Tests
WBC
17.5
H
x10/μL
Fecal: Ancylostoma sp. ova
PROBLEMS:
1. Hemorrhagic anemia.
a. Regenerative anemia accompanied by hypoproteinemia, an A/G ratio within the reference
interval (panhypoproteinemia), and clinical signs of hemorrhage indicate blood loss.
b. Hypoalbuminemia and calculated hypoglobulinemia are present. Because all components of
plasma are lost during external hemorrhage, the A/G ratio remains within the reference interval.
c. The increased MCV (macrocytosis) and low MCHC (hypochromia) are due to reticulocytosis.
 Reticulocytes are large, young, anucleate erythrocytes that lack their full concentration of
hemoglobin.
d. Metarubricyte release may accompany intense erythrocytic regeneration.
2. Thrombocytosis. Thrombocytosis is frequently observed in chronic hemorrhage, particularly with
 ancylostomiasis. The mechanisms of thrombocytosis may include mobilization of splenic platelet
reserves and increased thrombocytopoiesis following partial loss of total platelet mass via hemorrhage.
3. Neutrophilic leukocytosis. A mature neutrophilia frequently is associated with hemorrhage. In this
 puppy, neutrophilia may have resulted from a combination of hemorrhage (the precise molecular
mechanism responsible for neutrophilia in this instance is poorly understood) and release of
chemotactic factors at the sites of mucosal damage by hookworms.
SUMMARY: The dog responded to a blood transfusion and administration of anthelmintics.
385
CASE 2
AUTOIMMUNEHEMOLYTIC
ANEMIAANDTHROMBOCYTOPENIA
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Old English Sheepdog, male, 2 years old
MEDICAL HISTORY: Previous corticosteroid administration
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Lethargy, weakness, pale mucous membranes, icterus
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
12H
15.0
%
Hb
4.4
g/dL
RBC
1.79
L
x10%/μL
MCV
84
H
fl
MCH
24.6
Pg
MCHC
29.3
%
Re tic
24
H
%
Abs retic
430
H
×10²/μL
NRBC
6
H
/100WBC
 RBC morphology: anisocytosis, polychromasia, spherocytes
Platelets
88
L
x10'/μL
MPV
15
H
fL
WBC
44.7
H
x10'/μL
Seg
35.760 (80%)
H
x10'/μL
Band
4.470 (10%)
H
x10'/μL
Lymph
0.447 (1%)
x10/μL
Mono
4.023 (9%)
H
×10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10'/μL
Bas0
0.0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Other Tests
Direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test
positive
Rocky Mt spotted fever titer
negative
Ehrlichia spp. titers
negative
386
CASE STUDIES
387
Senum Chemistry
BUN
18
mg/dL
Creatinine
0.5
mg/dL
Total protein
6.5
g/dL
Albumin
2.9
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.81
ALP
625
H
U/L
ALP (post-levam) 575HU/L
 Levamisole resistance
92
%
ALT
536
H
U/L
Glucose
93
mg/dl
Sodium
146
mmol/L
Potassium
4.6
mmol/L
Chloride
115
mmol/L
Total CO2
20
mmol/L
Anion gap
15.6
mmol/L
Calcium
9.9
mg/dL
Total bilirubin
9.8
H
 mg/dL
Conj. bilinubin
4.3
H
1P/8u
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
yellow
Turbidity
hazy
15 ds
1.007
pH
7.5
Protein
negative
Glucose
negative
Ketone
negative
Bilinubin
2+
Blood
negative
Sediment
fat droplets
PROBLEMS:
 Macrocytic, hypochromic, regenerative anemia (immune-mediated hemolytic ane mia).
a. Regenerative anemia with icterus, hyperbilirubinemia, and a predominance of unconjugated
(indirect) bilirubin indicates hemolysis.
b. Extravascular hemolysis is present; intravascular hemolysis is excluded based on the absence of
 hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria (negative occult blood test on the urine specimen).
c. Antibody-mediated extravascular hemolysis is supported by spherocytosis and a positive direct
antiglobulin (Coombs') test.
d. Reticulocytosis of this magnitude also suggests hemolysis because iron from lysed erythrocytes
is readily reused. In contrast, iron is lost from the body in hemorrhagic anemia and mobilization of
storage iron is accomplished more slowly, reticulocytosis is of lower magnitude.
 The anemia is macrocytic because of numerous reticulocytes, which are larger cells.
 s   '  nn e e e  s
土.
 Metarubricytosis (nRBCs) may accompany intense erythrocytic regeneration or may be
 prematurely released from the bone marrow following anemia-induced hypoxia.
388
CASE STUDIES
2. Neutrophilic leukocytosis with a left shift, monocytosis, and lymphopenia. These changes in the
leukogram can be attributed to both hemolysis and corticosteroids. Extravascular hemolysis is
 characterized by neutrophilia. A left shift may occur, particularly when the hemolysis is immune-
mediated. Exogenous corticosteroid administration or endogenous cortisol release (stress) can cause
neutrophilia (usually without a left shift), lymphopenia, and monocytosis in the dog. The bone
marrow does not contain a storage pool of monocytes; these cells are released into the blood at a
relatively young age.
3. Thrombocytopenia. The cause is most likely extramarrow destruction because the increased MPV
destruction of platelets is the most likely mechanism because other common causes of
thrombocytopenia such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever and ehrlichiosis have been eliminated by
venipuncture, but platelet aggregates were not present. Immune-mediated anemia and immune-
mediated thrombocytopenia can occur concurrently. This condition is called Evan's syndrome.
4. Hepatocellular injury. Anemia-induced hypoxic injury to centrilobular hepatocytes can cause
enzyme leakage (increased ALT activity) with minimal cholestasis. Cholestasis induces increased
activity of the levamisole-sensitive, hepatic isoenzyme of ALP, which is minimal in this case. ALT
(steroid hepatopathy).
5. Increased ALP activity. ALP activity that is resistant to levamisole treatment is due to the steroidal
 n d n rd s m n   ad p s a
signs suggestive of anemia and /or liver disease.
 6. Bilirubinuria. The urine test for bilirubin detects conjugated (direct) bilirubin. Bilirubinuria
precedes the development of hyperbilirubinemia. Conjugated bilirubin is water soluble and is rapidly
fltered into the urine by the kidneys.
SUMMARY: The dog responded to the corticosteroid therapy with an increasing hematocrit.
CASE 3
ACUTEINTRAVASCULAR
HEMOLYTICANEMIA(REDMAPLE
TOXICOSIS)
SIGNALMENT: Equine, Appaloosa, gelding (castrated male), 12 years old
HISToRY: Observed eating leaves from a red maple tree that had fallen from the fence line into the
pasture during a thunderstorm
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Depression, dehydration, icterus, chocolate-colored blood, dark brown urine,
 orange-red plasma
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
12H
25.2
L
%
Hb
11.2
g/dl
RBC
5.50
L
x10%μL
MCV
45
fL
MCH
20
H
Pg
MCHC
44
H
%
 RBC morphology: Heinz bodies, eccentrocytes
 Platelets: adequate
WBC
14.8
H
x10/μL
Seg
13.764 (93%)
H
x10'/μL
Band
0.0
x10'/μL
Lymph
0.592 (4%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.444 (3%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Fibrinogen
500
H
mg/dL
Senum Chemistry
Cre atinine
5.6
H
mg/dL
 Total protein
8.5
H
g/dL
Albumin
3.9
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.85
AST
518
H
U/L
I. Bilinubin
11.6
H
mg/dL
 D. Bilirubin
1.8
H
mg/dL
 Methemoglobin
208
H
μmol/L
contimued
389
065
CASE STUDIES
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
brown
Turbidity
cloudy
15 ds
1.015
pH
8.0
Protein
3+
Glucose
negative
Ketone
negative
Bilirubin
1+
Blood
4+
Sediment
CaCO; crystals, mucus
PROBLEMS:
1. Hemolytic anemia. Anemia associated with hyperbilirubinemia, hemoglobinemia, and
hemoglobinuria indicates intravascular hemolysis. Red plasma and an increased MCHC indicate free
hemoglobin or hemoglobinemia. Heinz bodies and eccentrocytes indicate oxidative damage to
erythrocytes from ingestion of red maple leaves. Heinz bodies can interfere with measurement of the
hemoglobin, which will alter both the MCH and MCHC. In contrast to other animals, horses do not
exhibit reticulocytosis during anemia. Therefore, all equine anemias appear nonregenerative.
2. Methemoglobinemia. Methemoglobin formation occurs when heme iron is oxidized from the
ferrous (2+) to the ferric (3t) form, presumably by the same oxidant that denatures the globin chains
forming Heinz bodies. In health, methemoglobin is constantly being formed, but it is reduced to
hemoglobin by the methemoglobin reductase pathway, therefore, <l% of the total hemoglobin is in the
methemoglobin form. Marked oxidant exposure may promote the formation of methemoglobin. The
blood and mucous membranes may appear brown when >l0% of the total hemoglobin has been
converted to methemoglobin. Methemoglobin values >60% to 65% of the total hemoglobin are
incompatible with life. Methemoglobinemia may or may not accompany oxidative hemolysis.
3. Neutrophilic leukocytosis and lymphopenia. Neutrophilia is observed commonly in hemolytic
anemias. Destruction of erythrocytes, like destruction of other tissues, may incite a tissue demand for
neutrophils. Endogenous cortisol release also may contribute to the neutrophilia and cause
lymphopenia. Lymphopenia probably has resulted from temporary redistribution of recirculating
lymphocytes
4. Hyperfibrinogenemia. Fibrinogen is an acute phase reactant whose concentration increases during
inflammation. Hyperfbrinogenemia may be the earliest indicator of inflammation and may precede
changes in the leukogram of horses.
5. Azotemia. Azotemia (increased creatinine concentration) may be of prerenal, renal, or post-renal
origin. Because the specimen is voided, post-renal azotemia is excluded. Dehydration may contribute
to prerenal azotemia because the glomerular filtration rate decreases. Renal azotemia from renal failure
intravascular hemolysis, hemoglobinuria can lead to renal tubular degeneration and necrosis
(hemoglobinuric nephrosis).
6. Hyperproteinemia. Hyperproteinemia with a normal A/G ratio in a dehydrated animal suggests a
relative increase in protein concentration. Hemoglobinemia also may have contributed to the
hyperproteinemia.
CASE STUDIES
391
 a  i    n       
erythrocytes. Increased AST activity in the serum of this horse is probably secondary to intravascular
hemolysis; however, liver and muscle are significant sources of enzymatic activity in disease.
 Evaluation of SDH and CK activities could exclude or confrm hepatic and muscle damage,
respectively.
8. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Hyperbilirubinemia with a preponderance of unconjugated
(indirect) bilirubin in most species suggests hemolysis to the extent that the hepatic uptake and
conjugation is overwhelmed. However, in the horse, unconjugated bilirubin predominates in all types
of icterus. Hyperbilirubinemia also may accompany anorexia in horses.
9. Brown urine with low specific gravity, proteinuria, bilirubinuria, and positive occult blood test.
Brown discoloration of the urine can occur with hematuria, hemoglobinuria, and myoglobinuria. The
 presence of hemoglobinemia, positive occult blood test, and lack of erythrocytes in the urinary
 sediment suggest hemoglobinuria. Hemoglobinuria may be confirmed by ammonium sulfate
precipitation of hemoglobin from the urine. The low urine specific gravity could indicate impending
 s    e   a s a  n   s
Hd a aag d ae e po asd a  r a m d   ds n
of the urine is alkaline, an acid precipitation test should be done to confirm proteinuria. The source of
 protein is probably filtered hemoglobin, but glomerular or tubular lesions also are possible, especially
the horse, some of the excess bilirubin may be conjugated. Bilirubin in the urine is conjugated, water
soluble, and rapidly fltered from the plasma by the glomerulus. Bilirubinuria precedes detectable
hyperbilirubinemia.
SUMMARY: Hemoglobinuric nephrosis secondary to red maple leaf toxicosis was determined as the
cause of death at necropsy.
CASE 4
ESTROGEN-INDUCED
PANCYTOPENIA (SERTOLI CELL TUMOR)
SIGNALMENT: Canine, American Eskimo Dog, castrated male, l0 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Bilateral cryptorchid, enlarged prostate, frequent attempts to urinate, drib-
bling urine
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
12H
15.1
%
Hb
5.3
g/dL
RBC
2.21
x10/μL
MCV
68
fL
MCH
24.0
Pg
MCHC
35.1
%
Retic
0.3
%
Abs re tic
6.63
x10/μL
RBC morphology: normal
Platelets
x10/μL
6
MPV
7.5
fL
WBC
1.6
x10'/μL
Seg
0.464 (29%)
x10'/μL
Band
0.176 (11%)
×10/μL
Lymph
0.928 (58%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.016 (1%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.016 (1%)
x10'/μL
Bas0
0.0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
catheterized
Color
yellow
Turbidity
cloudy
Sp Gr
1.035
pH
8.0
Protein
1+
392
CASE STUDIES
393
Glucose
negative
Ketone
 ne gative
Bilinubin
1+
Blood
ne gative
Sediment
an snonbs Auu jdusoaM aqeaumuu jdusa m-0
Other Tests
Bone marrow aspirate: small, fatty, hypocellular particles composed mostly of stromal cells
Opinion: aplastic anemia
PROBLEMS:
1. Aplastic anemia (pancytopenia). Nonregenerative anemia with normal erythrocytic indices,
neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia indicate aplastic anemia and suggest a multipotential stem cell
disorder. Cytologic evaluation of the bone marrow confirmed bone marrow aplasia. Neutropenia from
  sn   n    r e s an d n s
indicates an increased tissue demand for neutrophils (prostatic inflammation) as well as depletion of
bone marrow storage reserves of mature neutrophils (segmenters). Bone marrow examination also
revealed a lack of megakaryocytes and failure of thrombocytopoiesis. The MPV is within the reference
interval, suggesting that excessive platelet turnover is not occurring. Estrogen toxicosis is a cause of
myelosuppresion in the dog. This condition also may result from a paraneoplastic syndrome (Sertoli
 cell tumor that produces estrogen) or administration of an estrogen-based drug.
urinary tract inflammation. Squamous epithelial cells in the catheterized urine specimen of this dog
suggest squamous metaplasia of the prostatic epithelium secondary to estrogens. The allkaline pH of
the urine will cause the protein pad of the reagent strip to change color nonspecifically. Therefore,
proteinuria must be confrmed by another test such as acid precipitation (Robert's test). Mild
proteinuria associated with leukocytes in the urine, in the absence of occult blood and erythrocytes,
suggests urinary tract infammation. Further diagnostic testing is indicated to confirm or exclude the
 possibilities of prostatitis and infection.
SUMlMARY: Exploratory laparotomy revealed a unilateral testicular mass. Castration was performed
  e s s s s rn an in  s p d a p
generalized myelosuppression and aplastic anemia as well as prostatic squamous metaplasia. The
purulent prostatitis occurred secondary to the squamous metaplasia. Neutropenia may predispose this
dog to infection.
CASE 5
CHRONIC HEMORRHAGIC
ANEMIA（IRON-LACKANEMIA)
SIGNALMENT: Canine, mixed breed, spayed female, 5 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Lethargy, weakness, pale mucous membranes, melena (dark-colored feces)
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Het
12.8
%
Hb
4.0
L
g/dL
RBC
2.25
L
x10°μL
MCV
56.9
L
fL
MCH
17.8
L
pg
MCHC
31.3
L
%
Retic
3.6
H
%
Abs retic
81
H
x10'/μL
NRBC
2
H
/100 WBC
 RBC morphology: anisocytosis, polychromasia
Platelets
771
H
x10/μL
WBC
40.1
H
x10'/μL
Seg
35.689 (89%)
H
x10'/μL
Band
0.401 (1%)
H
x10'/μL
Lymph
1.203 (3%)
x10/μL
Mono
2.807 (7%)
x10'/μL
Eos
0.0
x10'/μL
Baso
0.0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
catheterized
Color
straw
Turbidity
clear
Sp Gr
1.036
pH
7.5
Protein
negative
Glucose
negative
Ketone
negative
Bilirubin
negative
Blood
negative
Sediment
 amorphous crystals
394
CASE STUDIES
395
Senum Chemistry
BUN
15
mg/dL
Cre atinine
0.9
mg/dL
 Total protein
6.5
g/dL
Albumin
2.5
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.63
ALP
64
U/L
ALT
214
H
U/L
Glucose
115
mg/dL
Sodium
147
mmol/L
Potassium
4.3
mmol/L
Chloride
125
mmol/L
Total CO2
11
mmol/L
Anion gap
11
mmol/L
Calcium
9.5
mg/dL
Other Tests
Serum iron
42
μg/dL
 Total iron binding capacity (TIBC)
380
μg/dL
uonemes %
11.1
%
Fecal occult blood
positive
 Bone marrow aspirate:
hypercellular particles
increased megakaryocytes
high-normal M/E ratio
 increased late rubricytes and metarubricytes absence of macrophage iron
Opinion:
erythroid hyperplasia and delayed maturation
granulocytic hyperplasia
 megakaryocytic hyperplasia iron lack
PROBLEMS:
1. Iron-lack anemia. A microcytic, hypochromic, regenerative ane mia suggests early iron-lack anemia
from blood loss. With continued iron loss, the anemia will eventually become nonregenerative. The
lack of stainable macrophage iron, low serum iron concentration, and decreased saturation of
transferrin confirm iron deficiency. Serum ferritin concentration provides a more accurate assessment
of total body iron status, but the assay is species-specific.
2. Neutrophilic leukocytosis. Neutrophilia occurs commonly with regenerative anemia, which may
result in increased production of all cell lines within the bone marrow. Although a clinically important
left shift has not yet occurred, sequential leukograms should be considered to detect a developing left
shift and identify early infection.
3. Thrombocytosis. Increased platelet production commonly accompanies hemorrhagic anemia
4. Hepatocellular injury. Mildly increased ALT activity is probably the result of hypoxia-induced
enzymatic leakage from centrilobular hepatocytes. In the hepatic lobules, oxygenated blood flows from
the portal triads to the central veins. Therefore, the centrilobular hepatocytes are more susceptible to
hypoxia.
396
CASE STUDIES
5. Nor moproteinemia and normoalbuminemia. Hemorrhagic anemias often have hypoproteinemia
with a normal A/G ratio because albumin and globulin are lost concurrently. This patient may have
been dewormed prior to presentation, in which case the protein concentration will normalize faster
 than changes in the erythroid parameters. Alternatively, the patient may be slightly hypoproteinemic
and hypoalbuminemic but dehydrated, elevating the protein and albumin concentrations into the
reference interval.
6. Bone marrow hyperplasia. An increase in the granulocytic series of the marrow (high M/E ratio) is
expected with neutrophilia. Megakaryocytic hyperplasia may occur with thrombocytosis, unless the
 platelets are being mobilized from splenic reserves. With iron deficiency, a critical intracellular
concentration of hemoglobin necessary to stop cell division is not reached. Therefore, an extracellular
division occurs, causing microcytosis and increasing the number of late rubricytes and metarubricytes
 in the bone marrow. Ineffective erythropoiesis accompanies the iron depletion.
SUMMARY: A bleeding intestinal mass was observed during surgery. The mass was resected and an
anastomosis was performed. The histological diagnosis of the mass was intestinal leiomyosarcoma with
hemorrhage.
CASE 6
ACUTESALMONELLOSIS
SIGNALMENT: Equine, Thoroughbred, gelding (castrated male), 10 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Diarrhea of 24 hours duration, anorexia, weakness, pyrexia, dehydration 
estimated to be 7%,hyperpnea
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
51.5
H
%
Hb
17.1
H
g/dL
RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
4.2
1
x10/μL
Seg
0.882 (21%)
x10/μL
Band
2.310 (55%)
H
x10/μL
Lymph
0.126 (3%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.882 (21%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: cytoplasmic basophilia and vacuolation
Fibrinogen
1100
mg/dL
Senum Chemistry
BUN
51
H
mg/dL
 Total protein
7.8
H
g/dL
Albumin
3.6
H
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.86
 Plasma protein
8.5
H
g/dL
Sodium
112
mmol/L
Potassium
3.0
mmol/L
Chloride
100
mmol/L
Total CO2
<
mmol/L
Anion gap
8
mmol/L
Blood Gas Analysis
HCO;
6.1
mEq/L
PCO2
20.5
mmHg
pH
7.10
397
865
CASE STUDIES
PROBLEMS:
1.Polycythemia.Polycythemia (hemoconcentration) can result from relative or absolute increases in
red cell mass. Relative polycythemia is more common and may be caused by dehydration and splenic
contraction from excitement, fear, or strenuous short-term exercise (epinephrine responses). In this
horse, polycythemia is the result of dehydration (the effects of which are also reflected by
hyperproteinemia with a normal A/G ratio).
2. Leukopenia, neutropenia, degenerative left shift, toxic change of neutrophils, and lymphopenia
oau anoe ue isaslns pue sisouoid nood oi paprena e isaaans weioynal an ul saaueu asau
and/or endotoxemia.
a. Leukopenia. Neutrophils are the predominant circulating leukocyte in horses in health.
Therefore, severe neutropenia may result in leukopenia.
b. Neutropenia. Neutropenia indicates a guarded to poor prognosis. Neutropenia suggests an
overwhelming tissue demand for neutrophils. With severe diarrhea, the intestine may be the site of
neutrophil demand. If endotoxemia is present, neutrophils may be rapidly transitioning into the
marginal neutrophil pool (where they cannot be enumerated by the WBC count) and emigrating
into the tissues.
 od    s o        s
           n  
depleted of segmented neutrophils and that the bone marrow apparently is unable to meet tissue
demands for these phagocytes.
d. Toxic changes of neutrophils. The presence of toxic changes (cytoplasmic basophilia and
 oe sonnu sin m q a u uo r pqsp sisns na
have some derangements of cell function that make them less effective as phagocytes. Toxic changes
are associated with marked to severe inflammation or infection.
2. Lymphopenia. Severe lymphopenia also contributes to the leukopenia. This change suggests
marked stress with redistribution of recirculating lymphocytes. However, destruction of lymphoid
tissue by infectious agents cannot be discounted.
3. Hyperfibrinogenemia. Extreme hyperfibrinogenemia also substantiates the inflammatory character
but calculation of the protein/fibrinogen ratio (8.5 / 1.1 = 7.7) indicates that true hyperfibrinogenemia
exists. In some individuals, hyperfibrinogenemia may precede changes in the leukogram.
prerenal azotemia; however, a urinalysis and other clinical information are needed to exclude renal and
post-renal causes of azotemia.
5. Hyperproteinemia, hyperalbuminemia, and normal A/G ratio.
.
Hyperproteinemia. Hyperproteinemia can be relative or absolute. The former is usually caused
by dehydration, whereas the latter often is associated with immunoglobulin production.
Hyperfbrinogenemia is excluded because serum protein is quantified in the biochemical profle
(fibrinogen is present only in plasma).
b. Hyperalbuminemia. The body does not produce excessive quantities of albumin. Therefore, this
change is due to a relative increase in albumin concentration from dehydration.
c. Normal A/G ratio. The presence of a normal A/G ratio indicates albumin and globulin
concentrations have increased together as a result of dehydration.
greater sodium loss than water loss. This laboratory finding is typical of acute diarrhea in horses.
Although the serum chloride concentration is within the reference interval, total body chloride content
CASE STUDIES
399
is low (serum chloride x decreased ECF volume). Unless otherwise measured, the osmolality is
 presumed to be low because of the severity of the hyponatremia. A loss of Kt with diarrhea and an
internal shift of K+ from ICF to ECF caused by acidemia depletes total body K', although the serum K'
concentration is within the reference interval at this time.
7. Metabolic acidosis. Severe metabolic acidosis is present. Although respiratory compensation is
 indicated by the low PCO2, the blood pH is dangerously low (acidemia). Loss of HCO; -rich intestinal
fluid is indicated by the normal anion gap and normal Cl concentration in face of severe
hyponatremia (relative hypochloridemia). Acidosis causing ICFk+ → ECFk+ is balanced by the loss of
ECFk+ in diarrheal fluids at this sampling time. The normal anion gap excludes titration of HCO as a
cause of the acidosis.
SUMMARY: Salmonellosis was confirmed at necropsy.
CASE 7
FELINE INFECTIOUS PERITQNITIS
SIGNALMENT: Feline, Siamese, castrated male, 4 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Anorexia, emaciation, abdominal enlargement of l to 2 weeks duration,
lethargy, iridal hemorrhage
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Het
26
%
Hb
8.8
g/dL
RBC
5.23
x10/μL
MCV
49.7
fL
MCH
16.8
Pg
MCHC
33.8
%
Retic
0.1
%
Abs retic
52
x10/μL
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
20.6
H
x10/μL
Seg
15.769 (76.5%)
H
x10/μL
Band
1.236 (6.0%)
H
x10/μL
Lymph
3.090 (15.0%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.515 (2.5%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Senum Chemistry
Total protein
9.3
H
g/dL
Albumin
1.9
L
g/dL
C-globulin
0.5
L
g/dL
β-globulin
0.5
L
g/dL
Y-globulin
6.4
H
TP/8
A/G ratio
0.26
L
 Electrophoretic patterm: polyclonal gammopathy
Other Tests
Abdominal flhuid analysis:
yellow-green, cloudy, viscid nucleated cell count = 5,008 cells/μl nondegenerative 
neutrophils, macrophages, gramular proteinic background
400
CASE STUDIES
401
 Protein
6.0
H
TP/8
Albumin
1.5
g/dL
C-globulin
0.2
g/dL
β-globulin
0.3
g/dL
Y-globulin
4.0
H
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.33
Opinion: purulent exudate consistent with feline infectious peritonitis virus infection
PROBLEMS:
1. Anemia of chronic disorders. A normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia with normal
erythrocyte morphology is associated with chronic inflammation. The lack of neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia exclude aplastic anemia. Erythrocytes do not have any morphologic changes, and a
specific etiology of the anemia is not indicated. These findings are typical of the anemia of chronic
disorders (anemia of chronic disease, anemia of chronic inflammation).
2. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and left shift. These changes indicate an infammatory leukogram.
s e in si e q i  s s  ni e  id
demand for neutrophils. A left shift is considered the hallmark of marked inflammation or infection.
 Peritonitis is probably responsible for the tissue demand for phagocytes.
3. Hyperproteinemia. The high serum protein concentration due to polyclonal increases in gamma-
globulin (polyclonal gammopathy due to immunoglobulins) is characteristic of chronic antigenic
stimulation such as that occurring with FIP viral infection. Causes of hypoalbuminemia could include
loss by high-protein exudation into the peritoneal cavity, decreased production during inflammation
(albumin is a negative acute phase reactant), diminished production with cachexia, or renal loss via
proteinuria.
does not produce local conditions that are conducive to degenerative changes in neutrophils. FIP
causes a hypocellular, high-protein exudate. A/G ratios of <0.8l in abdominal fluid are reported to be
strongly suggestive of FIP The fluid A/G ratio in this case is very low (0.33). The granular
background precipitate on smears of the exudate is indicative of its high protein content.
SUMMARY: The clinical diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis was confirmed at necropsy.
CASE 8
PYOMETRA
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Staffordshire Bull Terrier (pit bull terrier), female, 5 years old
HIsToRY: In estrus l month ago
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Anorexia, distended abdomen, vomiting, fever, PU/PD, dehydration
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
12H
30.5
%
Hb
10.5
g/dL
RBC
4.34
x10/μL
MCV
70
fL
MCH
24.2
pg
MCHC
34.4
%
Retic
0.2
Abs retic
9
x10/μL
RBC morphology: normal
Platelets
260
×10/μL
MPV
8.1
fL
WBC
30.8
H
x10/μL
Seg
5.852(19%)
H
x10/μL
 Band
18.172 (59%)
H
x10/μL
Metamyel
0.924 (3%)
H
x10/μL
Lymph
1.540 (5%)
x10/μL
Mono
4.312 (14%)
H
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: cytoplasmic basophilia and vacuolation
Senum Chemistry
BUN
41
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
1.9
H
mg/dL
Total protein
9.2
H
g/dL
Albumin
2.3
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.33
L
ALP
97
U/L
402
CASE STUDIES
403
ALT
16
U/L
Glucose
74
mg/dL
Sodium
128
mmol/L
Potassium
4.4
mmol/L
Chloride
97
mmol/L
Total CO2
19
mmol/L
Anion gap
12
mmol/L
Calcium
9.7
mg/dL
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
yellow
Turbidity
 slightly turbid
15 ds
1.020
pH
6.5
Protein
2+
Glucose
negative
Ketone
negative
 Bilirubin
negative
Blood
2+
Sediment
20-30 RBC/hpf
30-40WBC/hpf
PROBLEMS:
1. Anemia of chronic disorders. A normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia with
evidence of granulopoiesis and thrombopoiesis indicates a selective erythroid problem in the bone
marrow. Given the evidence of chronic inflammation, the anemia of chronic disorders is most likely
2. Leukocytosis, neutropenia, degenerative left shift, toxic changes of neutrophils, and monocytosis.
absolute counts of the various leukocyte subtypes identify the offending leukocyte(s) responsible
for the leukocytosis. In this patient, neutrophilia is largely responsible for the leukocytosis
although, monocytosis also is present.
b. Neutrophilia with a degenerative left shift. Neutrophilia with a degenerative left shift suggests
severe inflammation (infammatory leukogram) or infection. The fact that immature neutrophils
outnumber the segmenters indicates that the storage pool of neutrophils is depleted and suggests a
guarded prognosis.
c. Toxic changes of neutrophils. Neutrophil cytoplasmic basophilia and vacuolation are toxic
changes that suggest bacterial infection or severe inflammation, and also call for a guarded
prognosis. Toxic changes are an indication of disturbed maturation of neutrophils in the bone
marrow.
d. Monocytosis may occur in either acute or chronic disease. Monocytosis may be observed with
chronic inflammation, tissue necrosis, or severe stress. Severe stress (with endogenous cortisol
release) is unlikely in this patient because lymphopenia is not present.
3. Azotemia. The mild azotemia (increased BUN and creatinine concentrations) may be prerenal or
 renal in origin; because the urine specimen is voided, postrenal azotemia is excluded. Prerenal
azotemia may be due to dehydration from vomiting and insensible water loss with fever. However, the
404
CASE STUDIES
 decreased urine specifc gravity is inappropriate because the kidneys should be attempting to conserve
body water by concentrating the urine. Renal function should be evaluated more critically
4. Hyperproteinemia, normoalbuminemia, and decreased A/G ratio.
production).
b. Because normoalbumine mia is present, the hyperproteinemia may be due to hyperglobulinemia.
Alternatively, proteinuria could indicate renal loss of albumin and hypoalbuminemia may be
masked by concurrent dehydration.
c. A decreased A/G ratio in serum can occur from selective albumin loss, increased globulin
production, or both. In this patient, hyperglobulinemia is probably due to antigenic stimulation
associated with pyometra. Serum protein electrophoresis probably would reveal a broad-based or
polyclonal gammopathy, perhaps with increased concentration of acute-phase proteins (α-and
B-globulins). Dehydration may have contributed to the hyperproteinemia but would not have
altered the A/G ratio. Proteinuria, especially of glomerular origin, may cause selective albumin loss,
which also would tend to decrease the A/G ratio.
6. Hyponatremic dehydration and hypochloridemia. Excessive diuresis and vomiting are
responsible for these laboratory abnormalities. Osmolality is estimated to be 283 mOsm/
x a 5    5  5 1 + ) + ( + N) + ( + )] 
but an internal shift of Kt ions is not likely at this time.
7. Low urine specific gravity, pyuria, hematuria, proteinuria.
a. The low urine Sp Gr in the presence of dehydration indicates the inability of the kidneys to
concentrate urine and conserve body water. This observation may be the result of endotoxin
production in pyometra. The endotoxin prevents the collecting tubular epithelial cells from
responding to ADH to conserve water, resulting in polyuria. However, primary renal disease cannot
be excluded.
b. A voided urine specimen may be contaminated by uterine exudate, resulting in potential
pyuria, hematuria, and proteinuria. A urine specimen obtained by catheterization or cystocentesis
may confirm or refute urinary tract inflammation or infection as a cause of these abnormalities.
c. Proteinuria could be caused by contamination of the urine specimen with genital exudates,
urinary tract inflammation, or a renal lesion involving the glomerulus or tubules. Further diagnostic
testing may be necessary to identify the source of the proteinuria
SUMMARY: This patient had pyometra. Ovariohysterectomy removed the cause and source of
inflammation and infection. The left shift diminished initially, but the neutrophilia intensified for l to
2 days before returning to the reference interval over the next several days. Following surgical
extirpation of the site of tissue demand for neutrophils, the blood neutrophil count will escalate until
granulopoiesis is down-regulated.
CASE 9
FELINE INFECTIOUS
PANLEUKOPENIACPARVOVRUS
INFECTION)
SIGNALMENT: Feline, domestic shorthair, male, l0 months old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Vomiting and profuse diarrhea for 18 hours, dehydration estimated at 7%.
pyrexia, anorexia, gingivitis, enlarged peripheral lymph nodes
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
49
H
%
Hb
15.8
H
g/dL
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
1.9
×10/μL
Seg
0.038 (2%)
x10/μL
Band
0.057 (3%)
×10/μL
Lymph
0.513 (24%)
L
x10/μL
Mono
1.349 (71%)
H
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10'/μL
Baso
0.0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine
cystocentesis
source
Color
yellow
Turbidity
clear
Sp Gr
1.065
pH
6.0
Chemistries
normal
Sediment
none
Senum Chemistry
BUN
46
H
mg/dL
 Total protein
8.0
H
g/dL
Albumin
3.4
H
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.74
continued
405
406
CASE STUDIES
Sodium
148
mmol/L
Potassium
4.2
mmol/L
Chloride
126
mmol/L
Total CO2
10
mmol/L
Anion gap
12.2
mmol/L
Other Tests
FeLV
ne gative
Bone marrow aspirate: hypocellular particles, low M/E ratio, normal erythroid maturation, only early
stages in myeloid series, adequate megakaryocytes.
Lymph node aspirate: mostly small lymphocytes, many plasma cells, some large lymphocytes.
Opinion: lymphoid hyperplasia
PROBLEMS:
1. Leukopenia, neutropenia with a degenerative left shift, and granulocytic hypoplasia of the bone
marro w.
a. Leukopenia in monogastric animals may be caused by severe neutropenia.
b. Neutropenia can be caused by decreased production of neutrophils, overwhelming tissue
consumption of neutrophils, or a transient shift of neutrophils from the circulating neutrophil pool
(where they are enumerated by the WBC count) to the marginal neutrophil pool (where they
cannot be counted). Neutropenia is probably multifactorial, including decreased neutrophil
production from viral destruction of hematopoietic cells, an intense tissue demand for neutrophils
because of viral enteritis, and endotoxemia from enteritis with a shift of neutrophils from the
circulating neutrophil pool to the marginal neutrophil pool.
C.
 The degenerative left shift indicates that the bone marrow maturation and storage pool of
neutrophils is depleted of segmenters and that the bone marrow granulopoiesis is failing to meet
tissue demands for neutrophils.
d. The low M/E ratio in the bone marrow aspirate, in conjunction with leukopenia, neutropenia,
and hematocrit within the reference interval, indicates granulocytic hypoplasia with decreased
production of neutrophils
2. Lymphopenia. Lymphopenia is a common finding in acute systemic infections, especially viral
disease. Parvovirus infects and destroys rapidly dividing cell populations including lymphocytes,
hematopoietic cell, and intestinal crypt epithelial cells. Lymphopenia also may be due to stress and
transient redistrubution of lymphocytes. Recirculating lymphocytes may be entrapped within lymph
3. Monocytosis. Monocytosis can occur in acute or chronic disease. Monocytosis also may herald the
resolution of neutropenia because monocytes are released from the bone marrow into the blood at a
relatively young stage of development. In contrast, neutrophils will mature for a variable time period
before being released from the bone marrow.
4. Prerenal azotemia. An increased BUN concentration with dehydration and very concentrated
 urine suggests decreased renal perfusion with a decreased glomerular filtration rate. When dehydration
is present, the kidneys are maximally stimulated to conserve body water.
5. Hyperproteinemia, hyperalbuminemia, hyperglobulinemia, and normal A/G ratio.
a. Hyperproteinemia is probably a relative increase in protein concentration because of plasma
water loss from dehydration.
CASE STUDIES
407
b. Hyperalbuminemia occurs with dehydration; the body does not overproduce albumin.
c. The normal A/G ratio indicates that both globulin and albumin concentrations are increased in
the same proportion (panhyperproteinemia). This change occurs only with dehydration.
6. Normonatremic dehydration, normokalemia, and acidosis.
a. The degree of dehydration, determined on clinical examination, is severe enough to have caused
has been lost in proportion to body water, leading to isotonic dehydration.
b. Despite normokalemia, a negative potassium balance probably exists. Negative external K+
balance is due to losses of body fluids. In addition, an internal shift of K+ from ICF to ECF is
suspected because of severe acidosis. An estimate of total body Kt cannot be made from these data,
but K+ deficit is likely in cases of vomiting, diarrhea, and acidemia.
c. Low HCOs with a normal anion gap and Cl concentration denotes loss of bicarbonate-
(HCO; ) rich intestinal fluid.
7. Lymph node hyperplasia. Fine-needle aspiration can determine the relative distribution of cell
types within the lymph node. In this patient, fine-needle aspiration revealed lymphoid hyperplasia that
probably occurred secondary to infection or some other form of antigenic stimulation. Lymphoid
hyperplasia rarely is associated with lymphocytosis in the blood. Lymph node enlargement also can
occur with edema and concurrent lymphocellular depletion.
SUMMARY: The diagnosis of parvovirus infection (feline infectious panleukopenia) was based on
 clinical signs and laboratory findings. This virus causes destruction of all hematopoietic precursors
approximately 3 to 4 days after viral infection. Neutropenia usually is present when clinical signs of
disease appear. Because of the short circulating half life of neutrophils and an increased demand for
these cells in the presence of enteritis, neutropenia occurs more consistently than anemia or
thrombocytopenia. Anemia, if present, may be masked by concurrent dehydration from vomiting and/
or diarrhea. Persistent neutropenia may be a consequence of viral enteritis, endotoxemia, and/or
destruction of granulopoietic precursor cells.
CASE 10
MULTICENTRICLYMPHOMA
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Saint Bernard, male, 4 years old
 PRESENTING PROBLEMs: Bilateral enlargement of submandibular, prescapular, and popliteal lymph
nodes
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
31
%
Hb
10.0
g/dL
RBC
4.22
x10/μL
MCV
73.4
fL
MCH
23.6
pg
MCHC
32.2
%
Retic
0
%
Abs retic
x10/μL
 RBC morphology: normal
 Platelets: adequate
WBC
23.4
H
x10/μL
Seg
19.539 (83.5%)
H
x10/μL
Band
0.0
x10/μL
Lymph
1.053 (4.5%)
x10/μL
Mono
2.691 (11.5%)
H
x10/μL
Eos
0.117 (0.5%)
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: lymphoblasts
Other tests
 Bone marrow aspirate: normocellular particles adequate megakaryocytes slightly increased M/E ratio
normal erythroid and myeloid maturation approximately 7% small lymphocytes
Opinion: granulocytic hyperplasia equivocal erythroid hypoplasia absence of neoplastic involvement
siselqoudusl jo uondod sudiououou :aeidse apou qdu]
Opinion: lymphoma
Senum Chemistry
BUN
61
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
6.9
H
mg/dL
 Total protein
6.9
g/dL
408
CASE STUDIES
60t
Albumin
3.2
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.87
ALP
84
U/L
ALT
46
U/L
Glucose
86
mg/dL
Sodium
153
 mmol/L
Potassium
4.5
mmol/L
Chloride
117
mmol/L
Total CO2
22
mmol/L
Anion gap
18.2
mmol/L
Calcium
19.1
H
mg/dL
 Phosphorus
4.5
mg/dL
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
yellow
Turbidity
cloudy
Sp Gr
1.011
pH
6.0
Protein
trace
Other chemistries
negative
Sediment
1 to 2 granular casts/hpf
0 to 2 WBC/hpf
PROBLEMS:
 and the presence of lymphoblasts in the blood and in lymph node aspirates. Neoplastic lymphocytes
 are not evident in bone marrow aspirates. Peripheral lymphadenopathy and a leukemic profle indicate
dlissemination of lymphoma.
2. Anemia of chronic disorders. Normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia with an
absence of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia suggests erythroid hypoplasia, which was confrmed by
 i e  i  ( n    
of dogs with lymphoma and is associated with bone resorption.
4. Renal failure. Renal failure is identifed by azotemia that is associated with isosthenuria. The
 presence of granular casts indicates a renal tubular lesion of unknown severity. Renal failure in this
 dog is probably the result of nephrocalcinosis from prolonged hypercalcemia.
SUMMARY: Multicentric lymphoma is the primary disease; the other problems are secondary
conditions or paraneoplastic syndromes.
CASE 11
RENALABSCESSAND
SECONDARYDISSEMINATED
INTRAVASCULAR COAGULATION
SIGNALMENT: Canine, English Bulldog, spayed female, 2 years old
HISTORY: Dexamethasone administered within the past 24 hours
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Epistaxis, oral ecchymotic hemorrhages, palpable abdominal mass, abdominal
pain
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
25
%
Hb
8.3
g/dL
RBC
3.88
x10/μL
MCV
64
fL
MCH
21
Pg
MCHC
33
%
Retic
0.8
%
Abs retic
31
x10/μL
 RBC morphology: schistocytes
Platelets
83
L
x10/μL
MPV
12
H
fL
WBC
35.3
x10/μL
Seg
23.827 (67.5%)
H
x10/μL
Band
7.060 (20.0%)
H
x10/μL
Metamyel
0.529 (1.5%)
H
x10/μL
Lymph
0.709 ( 2.0%)
x10/μL
Mono
3.001 ( 8.5%)
H
x10/μL
Eos
0.179 ( 0.5%)
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
410
CASE STUDIES
411
Senum Chemistry
BUN
10
mg/dL
Cre atinine
0.8
mg/dL
 Total protein
8.3
g/dL
Albumin
2.6
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.46
L
ALP
96
U/L
ALT
62
U/L
Glucose
83
TP/Bu
Other Tests
Modifed Knott's test:negative
BMBT
11.0
H
min
APTT
42.2
H
sec
PT
19.1
H
sec
TT
18.2
H
sec
FDP
>40
H
μg/mL
PROBLEMS:
1. Anemia of chronic disorders. Normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia associated with
adequate numbers of neutrophils suggests a selective erythrocytic disorder affecting the bone marrow.
The anemia of chronic disease is most likely because of selective erythroid depression in the face of an
 inflammatory leukogram and hyperglobulinemia. Serum iron levels would be expected to be low and
bone marrow macrophage iron increased. Although the anemia is nonregenerative, the presence of
schistocytes suggests a hemolytic component due to fragmentation of erythrocytes.
2.1
Inflammatory leukogram
a. Neutrophilia with prominent left shift (metamyelocytes in circulation) suggests inflammation
and excessive demand for neutrophils.
b. Monocytosis is consistent with inflammation or may be a response to corticosteroids.
Monocytosis occurs frequently in dogs after corticosteroid administration.
 The lymphocyte count appears slightly decreased but is still within the reference interval. The
lymphocyte count usually returns to the reference interval within 24 hours after administration of a
single dose of a short-acting corticosteroid
3. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DlC)
a. Thrombocytopenia can occur from lack of platelet production, increased platelet consumption,
or immune-mediated platelet destruction.
 Consumptive thrombocytopenia is observed in
uncompensated DlC. if thrombocytopenia was the only hemostatic abnormality in this dog, it
would probably be insufficient to cause hemorrhage.
b. The increased mean platelet volume (MPV) indicates increased platelet turnover. Younger
platelets generally are larger than older platelets
c. Prolonged buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) may be a consequence of thrombocytopenia,
but also may reflect platelet dysfunction caused by FDPs coating platelet surfaces.
d. In uncompensated DlC, consumption of the nonenzymatic clotting factors occurs. These include
factor V, factor Vlll, and fibrinogen (factor I). Consumption of these factors will result in a
prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin time (PT), and thrombin
time (TT)
412
CASE STUDIES
2. Hypofibrinogenemia is indicated by prolongation of the APTT, PT, and TT, above. A prolonged
TT is the most sensitive measure of decreased fbrinogen concentration. The heat precipitation
technique will detect hyperfibrinogenemia, but is too insensitive to accurately detect
hypofibrinogenemia.
f. Increased concentration of fibrin(ogen) degradation products (FDPs) indicates excessive fibrin
clot lysis and degradation of fbrinogen. Excessive FDPs may interfere with platelet function
(prolonged BMBT) and the TT test.
g. Fibrin strands that are formed in the microvasculature will shred and otherwise damage
erythrocytes, resulting in the formation of schistocytes.
4. Hyperglobulinemia. Prolonged antigenic stimulation associated with inflammation can cause a
polyclonal increase in immunoglobulins. Hyperproteinemia with a low A/G ratio indicates
nature of the increase.
SUMMARY: A unilateral renal abscess was the cause of the inflammation and subsequent
uncompensated DIC. A lesion affecting only one kidney is insufficient to cause signs of renal failure
(e.g., azotemia).
CASE 12
HEPATICENCEPHALOPATHY
(HEPATICFIBROSIS)
SIGNALMENT: Equine, Tennessee Walking Horse, mare (female), 20 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Anorexia, circling, ataxia, yawning, head pressing (pushing against objects),
muscle fasciculation, icterus
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
35.4
%
qH
13.6
g/dL
RBC
7.64
x10/μL
MCV
46
fL
MCH
17.8
pg
MCHC
38.4
%
 RBC morphology: normal
 Platelets: adequate
WBC
20.6
H
x10/μL
Seg
16.686 (81%)
H
x10/μL
 Band
1.854 (9%)
H
x10'/μL
Lymph
1.648 (8%)
x10'/μL
Mono
0.206 (1%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.206 (1%)
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Fibrinogen
800
H
IP/8U
Senum Chemistry
BUN
2
mg/dL
Cre atinine
0.6
mg/dL
Total protein
7.0
g/dL
Albumin
2.9
g/dL
 continued
413
414
CASE STUDIES
A/G ratio
0.70
GGT
251
H
U/L
AST
580
H
U/L
SDH
54
H
U/L
Glucose
110
mg/dL
Sodium
132
mmol/L
Potassium
3.2
mmol/L
Chloride
101
mmol/L
Total CO2
24
mmol/L
Anion gap
10.2
H
mmol/L
Calcium
10.8
mg/dL
I. bilirubin
28.2
H
mg/dL
D. bilinubin
5.6
H
mg/dL
 Bile acids
202
H
μmol/L
NH;
79
H
μg/dL
PROBLEMS:
1. Hepatic disease.
a. Increased SDH and AST activities indicate hepatocellular disease with leakage of cytosolic
 enzymes into the plasma. Although AST activity is increased in muscle disease, the association with
increased SDH activity suggests hepatic origin. Muscle involvement could be refuted or confrmed
by CK analysis.
b. Hyperbilirubinemia and increased GGT activity indicate cholestasis. Unconjugated (indirect)
bilirubin predominates in all cases of hyperbilirubinemia in the horse. In the absence of anemia,
horse, but hyperbilirubinemia of this magnitude is not caused by anorexia alone.
C.
 The increased bile acids suggest cholestasis or decreased hepatic functional mass.
d. Hyperammonemia and decreased BUN concentration also suggest decreased hepatic functional
mass with failure to convert ammonia to urea via the hepatic urea cycle. However, the decrease in
hepatic functional mass has not affected albumin synthesis.
2. Infammatory leukogram. Neutrophilia with a left shift suggests inflammation and an intense
tissue demand for neutrophils.
3. Hyperfibrinogenemia is a marker of inflammation, especially in large animals. Inflammation may
provoke hyperfibrinogenemia before changes in the leukogram are apparent.
SUMIMARY: Necropsy and histopathology disclosed discrete hepatocellular necrosis with periportal to
bridging fibrosis and biliary hyperplasia. In horses, plant toxicosis may cause these hepatic lesions.
Purulent colitis also was present.
CASE 13
3PORTOSYSTEMICVENOUS
SHUNT WITHHEPATICATROPHV
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Lhasa Apso, spayed female, 5 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Depression, lethargy, seizures, ataxia, anorexia, PU/PD
RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS: Decreased hepatic shadow
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
39.1
%
Hb
13.7
g/dL
RBC
6.90
x10/μL
MCV
57
fL
MCH
19.9
Pg
MCHC
35.0
%
Re tic
ND
 RBC morphology: codocytes (target cells)
Platelets
237
x10/μL
WBC
9.8
x10/μL
Seg
7.548 (77%)
x10/μL
Band
0.588 (5%)
x10/μL
Lymph
1.176 (12%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.098 (1%)
x10'/μL
Eos
0.392 (4%)
x10/μL
Baso
0.098 (1%)
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Senum Chemistry
BUN
2
mg/dL
Cre atinine
0.4
mg/dL
Total protein
3.7
g/dL
Albumin
1.1
L
TP/8
A/G ratio
0.43
L
ALP
181
H
U/L
ALT
122
H
U/L
Glucose
52
L
mg/dL
Sodium
145
mmol/L
continued
415
416
CASE STUDIES
Potassim
4.1
mmol/L
Chloride
118
mmol/L
Total CO2
21
mmol/L
Anion gap
5
mmol/L
Calcium
8.2
mg/dL
Phosphorus
4.1
mg/dL
I. bilirubin
0.9
H
IP/Bu
Bile acids (fast)
18.6
H
μmol/L
Bile acids (post)
246.1
H
μmol/L
NH, (fast)
438
H
μg/dL
Cholesterol
45
L
mg/dL
Urinalysis
Urine source
cystocentesis
Color
straw
Turbidity
clear
Sp Gr
1.006
pH
8.0
Protein
1+
Glucose
negative
Ketone
negative
Bilirubin
3+
Blood
negative
Sediment
ammonium biurate crystals
PROBLEMS:
1. Hepatic failure.
a. Increased bile acid concentrations (fasting and postprandial). Increased bile acid
 concentrations suggest hepatic failure and/or portosystemic shunting of blood. In health, 95% of
bile acids are removed from portal blood and recycled by the liver.
b. Fasting hyperammonemia and decreased BUN concentration. Both liver failure and
portosystemic shunts result in decreased ammonia uptake and conversion to urea by hepatocytes.
Hyperammonemia may cause CNS signs (hepatic encephalopathy) including depression, ataxia, and
seizures. The toxicity of ammonia (NHs) is increased in alkalosis, and decreased in acidosis (NH.+
is relatively nondiffusable and nontoxic).
c.1
Hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and decreased A/G ratio. These findings indicate
decreased hepatic synthesis of albumin. However, l+ proteinuria in dilute urine may represent
significant renal loss of albumin in this patient.
d. Hypoglycemia. Fasting hypoglycemia suggests hyperinsulinism (e.g., B-cell tumor of the
pancreas) or decreased hepatic glycogen stores needed to maintain glucose homeostasis. Other
biochemical abnormalities suggest that the hypoglycemia is due to hepatic dysfunction. Because the
liver is the primary depot of glycogen storage, animals with hepatic insufficiency often have
prolonged post-prandial hyperglycemia followed by hypoglycemia during periods of fasting.
synthesis of cholesterol may occur with decreased hepatic functional mass.
2. Increased ALT activity. Mildly elevated ALT activity indicates hepatocellular injury with enzyme
leakage from the cytosol of hepatocytes into the blood. The magnitude of ALT activity does not
indicate the severity or duration of the hepatic lesion.
CASE STUDIES
417
3. Hyperbilirubinemia. Hyperbilirubinemia indicates hepatobiliary disease. Hemolysis probably can
 be excluded as the cause of the hyperbilirubinemia because the hematocrit is within the reference
interval and reticulocytosis is not observed.
4. Mildly increased ALP activity. Increased ALP activity probably indicates cholestasis. The activity
of this enzyme may be induced by stasis of bile flow. In dogs, ALP activity also may increase following
endogenous cortisol release or corticosteroid treatment.
 reduction in protein-bound calcium. The correction formula for hypoproteinemia places the calcium
value within the reference interval: (8.2 - 0.4[3.7] + 3.3 = 10.02). Determination of the ionized
calcium concentration would provide more accurate information on calcium status.
6. Microcytosis. This finding is common in portosystemic venous shunts, but the cause is unknown.
Microcytosis may be observed in health in some Asian breeds of dogs including Akita, Chow Chow,
Shar Pei, and Shiba Inu.
7. Hyposthenuria. Dilute urine is probably due to lack of medullary tonicity from the decreased BUN
concentration and medullary washout from polyuria.
 8. Ammonium biurate crystalluria. Hyperammonemia may lead to precipitation of ammonium
biurate crystals in alkaline urine.
9. Bilirubinuria. Urine reagent strips (dipsticks) are very sensitive in detecting conjugated bilirubin
 in the urine. Bilirubinuria suggests cholestasis because laboratory evidence of hemolysis and hepatic
insuffciency is not present. Bilirubinuria usually is detected before hyperbilirubinemia in cholestasis
 because of the low renal threshold for conjugated bilirubin in dogs.
10. Proteinuria. A l+ proteinuria in dilute urine is clinically significant. Proteinuria in the absence of
hematuria or pyuria suggests renal protein loss from either a glomerular or tubular lesion. Reagent
strip protein pads may give a false positive reaction in alkaline urine; therefore, the suspected
 proteinuria should be verifed by another test such as acid precipitation (Robert's reagent test).
Determination of the urine protein/urine creatinine ratio may further substantiate renal proteinuria and
may indicate whether the protein loss is glomerular or tubular in origin.
SUMMARY: An extrahepatic portovenous shunt was observed during exploratory laparotomy. A liver
of livers from animals with portovenous shunts.
CASE 14 
ACUTE PANCREATIC
NECROSIS
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Labrador Retriever, castrated male, l0 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Obese, distended abdomen, abdominal pain, depression, vomiting, PU/PD,
dehydration
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
51.4
%
Hb
16.1
g/dL
RBC
7.21
x10%/μL
MCV
71.3
fL
MCH
22.3
Pg
MCHC
31.3
%
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
24.6
H
x10/μL
Seg
20.910 (85%)
H
x10/μL
Band
0.738 ( 3%)
H
x10/μL
Lymph
1.230 ( 5%)
x10/μL
Mono
1.722 ( 7%)
H
×10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Ba50
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: cytoplasmic basophilia and vacuolation
Senum Chemistry
BUN
88
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
3.8
H
mg/dL
Total protein
8.9
H
g/dL
Albumin
4.0
H
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.82
ALP
616
H
U/L
ALT
112
H
U/L
Glucose
185
H
mg/dL
418
CASE STUDIES
419
Sodium
148
mmol/L
Potassium
4.2
mmol/L
Chloride
115
mmol/L
Calcium
8.3
mg/dL
Total CO2
21
mmol/L
 Anion gap
16.2
mmol/L
Amylase
6021
H
U/L
Lipase
1400
H
U/L
Urinalysis
Urine source
cystocentesis
Color
yellow
Turbidity
clear
15 ds
1.045
pH
7.0
Protein
negative
Glucose
1+
Ketone
negative
Bilinubin
1+
Blood
negative
Sediment
amorphous crystals
PROBLEMS:
1. Inflammatory leukogram.
a. The neutrophilia and mild left shift reflect a tissue demand for phagocytes. Purulent
 inflammation is occurring in response to pancreatic inflammation and necrosis, peritonitis, and
 mesenteric steatitis caused by the spillage of pancreatic enzymes.
b. The toxic changes in neutrophils indicates systemic toxemia caused by the pancreatitis with
subsequent disturbances of neutrophil maturation within the bone marrow.
c. Monocytosis may be a response to tissue necrosis and a demand for phagocytes.
2. Prerenal azotemia. Azotemia associated with an increased urine Sp Gr and the presence of clinical
dehydration suggests decreased renal perfusion and decreased glomerular filtration of urea.
   (       s
 increase in activity) of this magnitude suggest a pancreatic origin of the increased serum enzymatic
activity. The decreased glomerular filtration rate, as suggested by the prerenal azotemia, may be
partially responsible for the increased activity of these enzymes because of delayed renal inactivation
and excretion.
4. Cholestasis and hepatocellular injury. In dogs, the common bile duct of the liver and the main
pancreatic duct enter the duodenum in close proximity. Pancreatitis can be associated with
inflammation and partial obstruction of the common bile duct.
a. Increased ALP activity is induced by cholestasis.
b. Increased ALT activity indicates hepatocellular injury Because retained bile in the canaliculi
exerts a detergent effect on cell membranes, hepatoceulluar cytosolic enzymes will leak into the
sinusoidal blood. In addition, enzyme release from the pancreas into the peritoneal cavity also can
damage the liver and other viscera on contact.
5. Mild bilirubinuria also reflects cholestasis. Bilirubinuria is detected before hyperbilirubinemia is
apparent.
420
CASE STUDIES
relative increase in the concentration of albumin and globulins; the A/G ratio remains within the
reference interval. The hematocrit percentage, hemoglobin concentration, and red blood cell count are
 probably increased slightly but remain within reference intervals.
7. Hyperglycemia with mild glucosuria. Hyperglucagonemia, which is associated with pancreatic
necrosis, is the most likely cause of the hyperglycemia. Other contributing factors could include a
failure of the residual pancreas to synthesize adequate quantities of insulin, and catecholamine release
from the adrenal gland. The renal threshold for glucose in the dog is l80 mg/dl; therefore, this
threshold has been exceeded, leading to glucosuria. Diabetes mellitus could be excluded definitively by
measuring serum fructosamine concentration and/or glycated hemoglobin concentration.
8. Hypocalcemia. Glucagon released from the necrotic pancreas can stimulate thyrocalcitonin
Secretion, which reduces blood calcium concentration. The precipitation of calcium during
saponification of fat may have a minor role in the development of hypocalcemia
SUMMARY: Extensive pancreatic necrosis was observed at necropsy.
CASE15 EXOCRINE PANCREATIC
INSUFFICIENCY,DIABETESMELLITUS
AND CHRONICRENALFAILURE
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Poodle, female, 5 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Vomiting, weight loss, PU/PD, dehydration, acholic feces (gray-colored feces
that lack bile pigments)
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
29.0
L
Hb
9.6
L
g/dL
RBC
4.12
x10%μL
MCV
70.4
fL
MCH
23.3
pg
MCHC
33.1
%
Retic
0
%
Abs re tic
x10/μL
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
13.8
x10/μL
Seg
12.144 (86%)
x10/μL
Band
0.0
x10/μL
Lymph
1.242 ( 9%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.690 ( 5%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10'/μL
Baso
0.0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
yellow
Turbidity
slightly cloudy
Sp Gr
1.012
pH
5.5
continued
421
422
CASE STUDIES
Protein
negative
Glucose
4+
Ketone
moderate
Bilirubin
1+
Blood
negative
Sediment
2 to 4 RBC/hpf
2 to 3 WBC/hpf
transitional cells
Senum Chemistry
BUN
135
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
3.0
H
mg/dL
Total protein
7.3
g/dL
Albumin
3.3
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.83
ALP
990
H
U/L
ALT
118
H
U/L
Glucose
740
H
IP/Bu
Sodium
136
L
mmol/L
Potassium
3.6
mmol/L
Chloride
91
L
mmol/L
Total CO2
14
mmol/L
Anion gap
34.6
H
mmol/L
Calcium
9.0
mg/dL
 Phosphorus
9.2
H
mg/dL
Total bilirbin
0.3
mg/dL
Other Tests
Feces:
Irypsin
absent
Fat (direct) 3+
TLI
1.6
L
μg/L
Folate
17.5
H
Hg/L
Cobalamin
180
L
ng/L
BT-PABA
(peak conc.)
0.8
μmol/L
PROBLEIMS:
1. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
a. Fecal screening tests for the presence of fat and trypsin activity suggest a deficiency in lipase
and trypsin (protease), respectively. Fecal trypsin digestion test results may be negative with
pancreatic exocrine insufficieney, during inactivity of a healthy pancreas (trypsin production may be
intermittent), or when trypsin is inactivated in the intestine or in the feces by bacterial proteases
diagnostic tests have been introduced
b. Decreased serum TLI and BT-PABA cleavage (<26.2 μmol/L) indicate a deficiency in trypsinogen
and chymotrypsin, respectively.
c. High folate and low cobalamin concentrations could reflect intestinal bacterial overgrowth
secondary to a lack of the bacteriostatic effect of pancreatic enzymes.
CASE STUDIES
423
2. Diabetes mellitus. Hyperglycemia, glucosuria, and ketonuria are laboratory indicators of insulin
 deficiency. Ketonuria is detected more easily than ketonemia and indicates a negative energy balance
3. Hepatocellular disease
a. Increased ALP activity suggests intrahepatic cholestasis due to compression of bile canaliculi by
swollen hepatocytes; however, some dogs with diabetes also have increased ALP activity due to the
induction of the steroid isoenzyme. In diabetes mellitus, a negative energy balance can promote
both hepatocellular glycogen loading and hepatic lipidosis as glucose is produced from amino acids
(gluconeogenesis) and lipids are consumed for energy (β-oxidation of lipids).
b. Increased ALT activity indicates increased hepatocellular membrane permeability.
c. Bilirubinuria reflects the cholestasis and precedes the development of hyperbilirubinemia.
4. Renal failure.
a. Isosthenuria is characterized by a urine Sp Gr that ranges from l.008 to l.0l2. The kidney is
neither diluting (Sp Gr < 1.008) nor concentrating (Sp Gr > 1.012) the urine. The presence of
clinical dehydration and fixed urine Sp Gr indicate renal failure. During dehydration, the kidney
should be stimulated to conserve body water by concentrating the urine.
b. Azotemia results from a decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Azotemia may occur from
prerenal, renal, or post-renal origin. Post-renal azotemia is excluded because the urine specimen is
voided. Prerenal azotemia is possible with dehydration; however, lack of concentration of the urine
also indicatesrenal azotemia.
c. Hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia are associated with renal disease. These changes may be
due to decreased production of 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol by the diseased kidney. The Ca x P
product is high (9.0 × 9.2 = 82.8), suggesting a propensity for soft tissue mineralization that may
include nephrocalcinosis.
5. Anemia of chronic renal disease. Normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia suggests a
deficiency of erythropoietin due to chronic renal disease.
 i   i        e  
 gap indicate a titration acidosis. In this case uremic acids and ketoacids are titrating plasma
bicarbonate. The increased concentration of unmeasured anions from uremia and ketoacidosis have
elevated the anion gap.
diuresis caused by glucosuria and renal disease. K loss is occurring, but the internal shift of
 ICFk+ → ECFk+, induced by acidosis, is maintaining normokalemia. Chloride also may be lost via
vomiting.
SUMMARY: The dog responded to oral supplementation with pancreatic enzymes and insulin
CASE 16
INFLAMMATORYBOWEL
DISEASE(MALABSORPTIONWITH
PROTEIN-LOSINGENTEROPATHY
SIGNALMENT: Canine, German Shepherd, spayed female, 5 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Diarrhea of 2 months duration, weight loss, good appetite
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Het
39.0
RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
11.34
x10'/μL
Seg
9.571 (88%)
x10/μL
Lymph
0.339 ( 3%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.678 ( 6%)
x10'/μL
Eos
0.339 ( 3%)
x10/μL
Baso
0.113 ( 1%)
x10²/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
yellow
Turbidity
clear
Sp Gr
1.033
pH
6.5
Protein
negative
Other chemistries
negative
Sediment
 none
Senum Chemistry
BUN
14
mg/dL
Creatinine
1.2
mg/dL
Total protein
3.21
g/dL
Albumin
1.4
TP/8
A/G ratio
0.78
424
CASE STUDIES
425
ALP
102
U/L
ALT
42
U/L
Glucose
70
mg/dL
Sodium
145
mmol/L
Potassium
4.5
mmol/L
Chloride
121
mmol/L
Total CO2
19
mmol/L
Anion gap
9.5
mmol/L
Calcium
8.4
mg/dL
Other Tests
TLI
15.5
μg/L
Feces:
Irypsin
present
Fat (direct)
1+
Fat (acid + heat)
3+
Parasites
negative
 Fat absorption:
Prefeeding
plasma clear
 2-hour postfeding
plasma clear
3-hour postfeding
plasma clear
 D-xylose absorption:
Fasting
1.2
mg/dL
30min
18.2
mg/dL
60 min
23.4
mg/dL
90min
29.1
mg/dL
120min
30.2
mg/dL
180min
27.1
mg/dL
PROBLEMS:
1. Malabsorption.
a. The fecal fat screening tests suggest the presence of steatorrhea composed predominately of split
fats. With the addition of acetic acid and heat, the free fatty acids and glycerol are recombined into
triglyceride that can be identified as red-orange droplets with Sudan Ill stain.
b. Absence of fat absorption suggests malabsorption because the predominance of split fats in the
feces suggests that pancreatic lipase is being produced.
 s         
 is a simple sugar that should be readily absorbed and appear in the blood.
d. The presence of protease activity in fecal screening tests and a serum TLI concentration within
the reference interval indicates a functional exocrine pancreas. Therefore, the laboratory
 abnormalities are due to an absorptive problem rather than digestive problem.
2. Hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and A/G ratio within the reference interval. The
hypoproteinemia is characterized by hypoalbumine mia, a calculated hypoglobulinemia, and an A/G
ratio within the reference interval. Loss of albumin and globulins concurrently indicate
 panhypoproteinemia. Clinical evidence of hemorrhage, liver disease, and proteinuria are not present to
 explain the hypoproteinemia. Therefore, signs of intestinal disease suggest malabsorption of protein
and/or enteric protein loss.
426
CASE STUDIES
3. Hypoglycemia. Malabsorption of carbohydrate may lead to decreased blood glucose concentration.
 ( =   5t         s
 the calcium concentration into the reference interval, indicating that hypoalbuminemia is responsible
for the decreased serum calcium concentration. In health, approximately 40% of serum calcium is
bound to proteins, especially albumin. Measurement of total calcium via a colorimetric method will
because the ionized (biologically active) fraction of calcium is most likely within the reference interval.
5. Lymphopenia. Loss of intestinal lymph, which is lymphocyte-rich afferent lymph, into the lumen of
 the intestine can lead to lymphopenia concomitant with intestinal protein loss.
SUMMARY: Intestinal biopsies revealed inflammatory bowel disease. Severe inflammatory bowel
 disease may be associated with protein-losing enteropathy, lymphocyte loss into the intestinal lumen,
and malabsorption of fat. Another mechanism, such as intestinal bacterial overgrowth, apparently is
responsible for the abnormal d-xylose absorption because simple sugars are absorbed into the portal
blood rather than into lymphatics.
CASE 17
MUSCLEDISEASE
MYOGLOBINURICNEPHROSIS
SIGNALMENT: Equine, Quarterhorse, mare (female), 5 years old
 PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Profuse sweating, pyrexia, stiffness, pain on palpation of frm gluteal muscles,
oliguria
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Plasma color: light yellow
Hct
37
%
Hb
13
g/dL
 RBC morphology: normal
 Platelets: adequate
WBC
16.1
H
x10/μL
Seg
11.916 (74%)
H
x10/μL
Band
0.483 (3%)
H
x10/μL
Lymph
2.415 (15%)
x10/μL
Mono
1.288 (8%)
H
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Fibrinogen
850
H
mg/dL
Senum Chemistry
BUN
70
H
mg/dL
Cre atinine
4.7
H
mg/dL
 Total protein
6.6
g/dL
Albumin
2.9
TP/8
A/G ratio
0.78
AST
960
H
U/L
CK
640
U/L
Glucose
90
mg/dL
Calcium
11.2
mg/dL
Phosphorus
5.4
mg/dL
continued
427
428
CASE STUDIES
Urinalysis
Urine source
cathe terization
Color
brown
Turbidity
cloudy
Sp Gr
1.020
pH
7.5
Protein
2+
Glucose
negative
Ketone
negative
Bilinubin
negative
Occult blood
4+
Sediment
0 to 1 RBC/HPF
4 to 5 WBC/HPF
2 to 3 granular casts/HPF
CaCO; crystals
PROBLEMS:
1. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, left shift, and monocytosis are consistent with an infammatory
leukogram.
a. Neutrophilia indicates a tissue demand for phagocytes.
 b. Left shifts are more subtle in large animals and indicate that the maturation and storage pool of
neutrophils in the bone marrow is being depleted of segmenters. Neutrophil release from the bone
 marrow into the blood is an age-ordered process.
c. Monocytosis may occur in acute and chronic disease. In this horse, monocytosis probably
indicates a tissue demand for phagocytosis. Blood monocytes provide a replacement pool for tissue
phagocytes.
2. Hyperfibrinogenemia. Fibrinogen is a positive acute-phase reactant because its concentration
increases during inflammation. Fibrinogen is commonly determined as part of the CBC count in large
 animals because it may be an early indicator of inflammation, even when changes in the leukogram are
not observed.
3. Myoglobinuria.
a. Brown to red-brown discoloration of urine can occur with hematuria, hemoglobinuria, and
myoglobinuria. Hematuria is excluded because significant numbers of erythrocytes are not present
in the urine sediment. Hemoglobinuria may be accompanied by red discoloration of the plasma.
The light yellow color of the plasma in this horse is probably due to β-carotenes from ingested
forage. Myoglobinuria is unassociated with discoloration of the plasma. Myoglobin is one-fourth the
size of hemoglobin and is rapidly filtered from the plasma into the urine. An absence of
erythrocytes in urine sediment and lack of red discoloration of plasma suggest that myoglobinuria
is present.
b. Positive reaction for occult blood on urine reagent strips may occur with intact erythrocytes,
hemoglobin, and myoglobin, all of which have peroxidase activity.
c. Proteinuria is present. A positive protein test on urine reagent strips can be observed with
excess renal loss of albumin, as well as with inflammation, hemoglobinuria, or myoglobinuria.
Urinary sediment findings exclude hematuria and pyuria (inflammation). The probability of
hemoglobinuria is excluded above.
CASE STUDIES
429
4. Muscle disease.
a. Increased AST activity. AST is a cytosolic enzyme that is present in many cell types. Increased
AST activity often accompanies liver disease, muscle disease, and in vivo or in vitro hemolysis.
Hemolysis is excluded largely by the lack of red discoloration of the plasma and, presumably, in the
serum specimen submitted for biochemical testing. Hepatocellular injury can be excluded by SDH
testing. Myolysis or myonecrosis is a distinct possibility for increased AST activity in this horse.
b. Increased CK activity indicates muscle damage. CK activity in serum is relatively specific for
striated muscle injury in adult animals. Sequential determination of CK activity will reveal if the
 muscle disorder is persistent, progressive, or resolving.
5. Renal failure.
a. Azotemia can result from prerenal, renal, and post-renal causes. If sweating is extreme and water
intake is restricted, this horse could be dehydrated. However, dehydration was not observed during
the physical examination. The urine specimen was obtained by catheterization and post-renal
obstruction was excluded. Therefore, the azotemia is probably of renal origin.
b. Low urine Sp Gr is present, but has not reached the isosthenuric range (1.008 to l.012).
c. Hyperphosphatemia suggests a decreased glomerular filtration rate, probably a consequence of
renal failure. However, muscle necrosis also can be associated with hyperphosphatemia.
d. Granular casts indicate tubular disease of undetermined severity.
SUMMARY: The history, clinical signs, and laboratory fndings support a diagnosis of primary muscle
disease with rhabdomyolysis, secondary myoglobinuric nephrosis, and renal failure.
CASE 18
ACUTERENALFAILURE
(ETHYLENE GLYCOL TOXICOSIS)
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Labrador Retriever, female, l year old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Lethargy, depression, ataxia, vomiting, dehydration, oliguria
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
12H
56.5
H
%
qH
18.6
H
g/dL
RBC
7.93
H
x10%μL
MCV
71.3
fL
MCH
23.5
Pg
MCHC
32.9
%
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets
357
x10/μL
WBC
29.7
H
x10/μL
Seg
26.433 (89%)
H
x10/μL
Band
2.079 (7%)
H
x10/L1
Lymph
0.594 (2%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.594 (2%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
cystocentesis
Color
light yellow
Turbidity
cle ar
15 ds
1.011
pH
6.0
430
CASE STUDIES
431
 Protein
1+
Glucose
1+
Ketone
negative
 Bilinubin
negative
Blood
negative
Sediment
calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals
Senum Chemistry
BUN
75
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
5.7
H
mg/dL
Total protein
8.2
H
g/dL
Albumin
3.1
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.61
ALP
83
U/L
ALT
28
U/L
Glucose
141
H
mg/dL
Sodium
143
mmol/L
 Potassium
5.5
H
mmol/L
Chloride
99
L
mmol/L
Total CO2
5
L
mmol/L
Anion gap
39
H
mmol/L
Calcium
8.6
L
mg/dL
 Phosphorus
10.2
H
mg/dL
Blood Gases
pH
7.237
HCO;
11.5
mmol/L
PCO2
27.1
mmHg
PROBLEMS:
1. Renal failure. Isosthenuria in the presence of azotemia indicates renal failure. Hyperphosphatemia
reflects the decreased glomerular filtration rate. The rust inhibitor in antifreeze also is a source of
phosphate.
2. Metabolic acidosis with partial respiratory compensation. This problem is indicated by a
decreased blood pH (acidemia), decreased bicarbonate concentration, and decreased pCO. The high
 for the increased anion gap.
3. Polycythemia and hyperproteinemia. Dehydration causes a relative hyperproteinemia and the A/G
ratio remains within the reference interval. The high-normal hematocrit also may be due to
dehydration.
4. Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystalluria. This finding is highly suggestive of ethylene glycol
toxicosis.
 5. Proteinuria. Mild proteinuria, in the absence of hematuria or pyuria, indicates renal origin. Mild
proteinuria can occur in tubular disease.
6. Mild hyperglycemia. Catecholamine release is probably responsible for the hyperglycemia. Previous
blood glucose values would have to exceed 180 mg/dl to produce glucosuria. In addition, massive renal
432
CASE STUDIES
tubular nephrosis from crystal deposition could cause acute renal disease with subsequent mild
glucosuria. If many renal tubular epithelial cells are destroyed in acute ethylene glycol toxicosis.
glucose will not be reclaimed from the glomerular filtrate and mild glucosuria will occur in the
 presence of normoglycemia or mild hyperglycemia that does not exceed the renal threshold.
 7. Normonatremic dehydration, hypochloridemia, and hyperkalemia. There is a balanced loss of
water and Na+ ions. Hypochloridemia may be the result of vomiting. Acidemia is causing a shift of K
to the extracellular fluid in exchange for hydrogen ions. Oliguria is preventing excretion of excess Kt,
 although Kt loss in vomitus is likely. The balance of these changes has resulted in hyperkalemia at this
time.
8. Hypocalcemia. Renal failure can cause hypocalcemia via several mechanisms, serum calcium
concentration also may be decreased in this dog because of formation of calcium oxalate crystals.
9. Infammatory leukogram. Neutrophilia with a left shift suggests clinically important inflammation.
SUMMARY: Oxalate nephrosis was diagnosed at necropsy. Ethylene glycol toxicosis may cause renal
upon the degree of renal tubular nephrosis, mild glucosuria may occur in the presence of
normoglycemia or mild hyperglycemia. A plasma test is available that will confirm early ethylene
glycol toxicosis so treatment can be instituted before nephrosis and crystalluria develop. Propylene
glycol (a food preservative) or glycerol can cause a false positive test result with this assay. A false
negative test result may occur if blood samples are obtained >l2 hours after ingestion of ethylene
glycol because it will have been converted into other toxic metabolites
CASE 19
RENALAMYLOIDOSIS
(NEPHROTICSYNDROME)
SIGNALMENT: Dog, Pointer, male, 6 years old
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
18
%
Hb
6.3
g/dL
RBC
2.51
x10/μL
MCV
71
fL
MCH
20.6
Pg
MCHC
35.0
%
Retic
0
%
 Abs retic
0
x10/μL
RBC morphology: normal
 Platelets: adequate
WBC
20.1
H
x10'/μL
Seg
18.894 (94.0%)
H
x10/μL
Band
0.0
x10/μL
Lymph
0.704 (3.5%)
×10/μL
Mono
0.301 (1.5%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.201 (1.0%)
x10/μL
Bas0
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
yellow
Turbidity
cloudy
Sp Gr
1.016
pH
7.0
Protein
4+
Glucose
ne gative
Ketone
ne gative
continued
433
434
CASE STUDIES
Bilirubin
negative
Blood
negative
Sediment
1 to 2 RBC/hpf
 2 to 5 WBC/hpf
 granular casts
amorphous crystals
Chemistry
BUN
133
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
4.1
H
mg/dL
Total protein
3.3
g/dL
Albumin
0.7
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.28
ALP
43
U/L
ALT
21
U/L
Glucose
112
mg/dL
Sodium
151
mmol/L
Potassium
5.1
mmol/L
Chloride
124
mmol/L
Total CO2
17
mmol/L
Anion gap
15.1
mmol/L
Calcium
8.4
L
mg/dL
 Phosphorus
6.9
H
mg/dL
Cholesterol
530
H
mg/dL
Other Tests
Abdominal fluid analysis:
Clear and colorless
Nucleated cell count = 200 cells/μl
 Nonde generate neutrophils, macrophages, mesothelial cells
Protein = < 2.5 g/dL
Opinion: transudate
Urine protein/urine creatinine ratio = 12.2
PROBLEMIS:
1. Anemia of chronic renal disease. Normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia
accompanying the azotemia is usually a consequence of chronic renal disease (see below) with the loss
of erythropoietin-secreting peritubular cells.
2. Stress leukogram. A neutrophilia without a left shift and a low-normal lymphocyte count suggest
systemic stress. Similar changes in the leukogram also may be seen in chronic inflammation.
3. Possible early renal failure. Azotemia and a low urine Sp Gr are suggestive of decreased renal
concentrating ability or possible early renal failure. Marked proteinuria also is present (see below)
a. Azotemia can be of prerenal, renal, or postrenal origin. Postrenal azotemia is excluded because
the urine specimen is voided. Vomiting may contribute to prerenal azotemia, but dehydration was
not noted in the physical findings. Therefore, azotemia is probably of renal origin.
b. Low urine Sp Gr is concomitant with polyuria and polydypsia. Lack of renal concentrating
ability results in polyuria and subsequent polydypsia. With primary glomerular lesions (e.g., renal
amyloidosis, glomerulonephritis), azotemia may precede the loss of urine concentrating ability. This
CASE STUDIE S
435
pattern has been called glomerulotubular imbalance because tubular dysfunction is usually the first
abnormality in renal failure. Fluid loss occurs with vomiting. Therefore, the urine should be more
concentrated to conserve body water unless the vomiting is of very recent onset.
occult blood (which excludes hematuria, hemoglobinuria, and myoglobinuria) denotes proteinuria of
renal origin. Marked albumin loss can be expected with this magnitude of proteinuria in dilute urine.
highest urine protein/urine creatinine ratios are observed with renal amyloidosis.
5. Hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypoglobulinemia, and decreased A/G ratio
Hypoproteinemia is primarily the result of albumin loss in the urine. A decreased A/G ratio usually
occurs with hypoalbuminemia and/or hyperglobulinemia. In this patient, hypoglobulinemia is present,
presumably from renal loss. However, a proportionally greater quantity of albumin is being lost in the
urine. Glomerular amyloid deposition initially causes selective loss of albumin, but as the disease
progresses, larger protein molecules (globulins) also may be lost via the urine.
6. Hypocalcemia. Hypocalcemia is a reflection of hypoalbuminemia. In the serum, 50% of the calcium
is in the ionized form, 40% is bound to protein, especially albumin, and 10% is complexed with anions
such as phosphate and citrate. Therefore, hypoalbuminemia can result in significant hypocalcemia if
total calcium is determined by a colorimetric spectrophotometric technique. Clinical signs of
hypocalcemia will not be apparent unless the ionized calcium concentration decreases. Using a
mathematical formula to adjust the serum calcium concentration for the effect of hypoalbuminemia
results in normocalcemia (l0.4mg/dl). Hypocalcemia occasionally may be observed with renal failure.
7. Hyperphosphatemia. Hyperphosphatemia is observed frequently in dogs with renal disease. This
laboratory abnormality reflects a decreased glomerular fltration rate.
8. Hypercholesterolemia. Cholesterol synthesis is thought to be stimulated by the reduced osmotic
pressure caused by hypoalbuminemia.
9. Low-protein ascites and edema. Severe hypoalbuminemia results in decreased plasma oncotic
pressure with development of a low-protein ascites and/or edema. The edema may be generalized
pe a an u aia nso aq on ea an n A san l iq (es)
extremities (dependent edema)
SUMMARY: Renal amyloidosis was diagnosed by renal biopsy. The tetrad of edema, hypoproteinemia.
proteinuria, and hypercholesterolemia characterizes the nephrotic syndrome, which is caused by
 primary glomerular disease.
CASE 2OFELINELOWER URINARY
TRACTDISEASE(FELINEUROLOGIC
SYNDROME)
SIGNALMENT: Cat, domestic shorthair, male, 3 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Anorexia, depression, vomiting, unable to urinate, tense, enlarged abdomen
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Het
39
%
RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
18.4
H
x10/μL
Seg
16.928 (92%)
H
x10/μL
Band
0.0
x10'/μL
Lymph
1.452 ( 8%)
×10/μL
Mono
0.0
x10'/μL
Eos
0.0
x10'/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
cystocentesis
Color
reddish-brown
Turbidity
cloudy
Sp Gr
1.031
pH
7.5
Protein
3+
Glucose
negative
Ketone
negative
Bilirubin
negative
Blood
4+
Sediment
innumerable RBC
15 to 20 WBC/hpf
 triple phosphate crystals
3+ bacterial rods
436
CASE STUDIES
437
Chemistry
BUN
169
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
13.6
H
mg/dL
Total protein
6.9
g/dL
Albumin
2.9
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.73
ALP
22
U/L
ALT
26
U/L
Glucose
175
H
mg/dL
Sodium
138
mmol/L
 Potassium
7.9
H
mmol/L
Chloride
102
L
mmol/L
Total CO2
10
L
mmol/L
 Anion gap
30.9
H
mmol/L
Calcium
10.1
mg/dL
 Phosphorus
11.2
H
mg/dL
PROBLEMS:
 Stress leukogram. Neutrophilia without a significant left shift, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia
denote endogenous corticosteroid release secondary to stres (painful disorder).
2. Hemorrhagic cystitis and urinary tract infection.
a. Positive reagent strip (dipstick) reactions for urine protein and occult blood associated with
significant erythrocytes in the sediment indicate hematuria.
b. Pyuria also is present based on urine sediment examination (15 to 20WBC/hpf). Thus, the
 proteinuria is the result of the hemorrhage and inflammation.
c. Bacteriuria. Collection of urine by cystocentesis eliminates the genital tract as the source of the
hemorrhage, leukocytes, and bacteriuria. Urinary tract infection is confirmed by the presence of
bacteria.
3. Postrenal azotemia. Clinical evidence of urinary tract obstruction is necessary to diagnose postrenal
 azotemia. Renal concentrating abnormalities may or may not occur with urinary obstruction.
4. Hyperglycemia. The hyperglycemia may be a manifestation of endogenous cortisol and/or
catecholamine release.
a. Metabolic acidosis is caused by titration of bicarbonate by uremic acids
b. The high anion gap is due to unmeasured anions. Uremic acids are probably responsible for this
change; however, lactic acid accumulation from shock also could be possible.
c. Hyponatremia with clinically normal hydration indicates low total body Na' concentration.
Vomiting will result in Cl loss, causing hypochloridemia.
d. Hyperkalemia is a sequel to anuria because excess Kt is eliminated from the body in the urine.
Acidosis also may be a factor (see below).
2. The decreased TCO concentration indicates acidosis. Acidosis is a complicating factor in
hyperkalemia because it causes a shift of K+ to the extracellular fluid in exchange for hydrogen ions
that move into the intracellular fluid.
6. Hyperphosphatemia is further evidence of reduced glomerular fltration.
SUMMARY: Catheterization dislodged a urethral calculus. The life-threatening hyperkalemia and other
laboratory abnormalities subsided with supportive treatment.
CASE 21
ACUTESEPTICMASTITIS
SIGNALMENT: Bovine, Holstein, cow (female), 6 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Hot swollen mammary gland quarter of less than l2 hours duration with
yellowish watery milk,pyrexia, anorexia
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
37
%
qH
12.2
g/dL
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
5.9
x10/μL
Seg
0.708 (12%)
L
x10/μL
Band
1.829 (31%)
H
x10/μL
Other
0.177 (3%)
H
x10/μL
Lymph
2.891 (49%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.295 (5%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: cytoplasmic basophilia and vacuolation
Fibrinogen
1400
H
mg/dL
Senum Chemistry
BUN
21
mg/dL
 Total protein
7.6
g/dL
Albumin
3.2
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.73
AST
210
H
U/L
Glucose
222
H
mg/dL
Sodium
151
mmol/L
Potassium
4.2
mmol/L
Chloride
102
 mmol/L
Total CO2
22
mmol/L
Anion gap
31.2
H
mmol/L
438
CASE STUDIES
439
PROBLEIMS:
1. Peracute purulent infammatory disease
a. Neutropenia, degenerative left shift, and toxic changes of neutrophils indicate peracute
inflammatory disease in cattle. The degenerative left shift indicates that the bone marrow is failing
to meet tissue demands for phagocytes and that the maturation and storage pool of segmented
neutrophils in the marrow is exhausted. Sequential leukograms revealing an increasing neutrophil
or intensifying neutropenia would denote a guarded to poor prognosis. Toxic changes of
neutrophils reflect severe bacterial infection and toxemia in this cow.
b. Hyperfibrinogenemia also indicates peracute inflammatory disease. The concentration of this
acute-phase reactant increases in inflammation. Hyperfibrinogenemia may indicate the presence of
inflammation in cattle before changes are apparent in the leukogram.
2. Increased AST activity. Many cell types exhibit AST activity. Increased enzymatic activity in serum
is no mention of hemolysis in the plasma (for the CBC count) or in the serum (for biochemical
analysis). Therefore, increased AST activity may indicate hepatocellular or muscle disease. Increased
SDH activity would confirm hepatic disease, while increased CK activity would confirm muscle injury.
3. Hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia probably indicates endogenous catecholamine release in this cow.
4. High anion gap. The high anion gap indicates an increased concentration of unmeasured anions.
Lactate production may occur secondary to shock. Ketosis also can result in an increased anion gap
 and may be detected by reagent strip testing during routine urinalysis. Both ketoacids and lactic acid
will decrease plasma bicarbonate (TCO) by titration. Because TCO is within the reference interval, a
 pue sisoie ooia pax e hsnno anoadns si (xnn sesoe on a) sisoee s
alkalosis. Blood gas analysis will better define the acid-base imbalance.
SUMMARY: Acute septic mastitis was diagnosed clinically. A guarded prognosis was based on the
initial laboratory data. Although electrolyte imbalance was not suspected clinically, the increased anion
gap revealed an otherwise occult acidosis.
CASE 22
NEPHROSIS AND PERIRENAL
HEMORRHAGE
SIGNALMENT: Bovine, Hereford, cow (female), 12 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Hematuria, dehydration estimated clinically at 8%
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
1H
30
%
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: increased
WBC
9.338
x10'/μL
Seg
7.740 (80%)
H
x10'/μL
Band
0.0
×10/μL
Lymph
1.307 (14%)
x10'/μL
Mono
0.373 (4%)
×10/μL
Eos
0.093 (1%)
x10'/μL
Baso
0.093 (1%)
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Fibrinogen
1800
H
mg/dL
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
red
Turbidity
cloudy
Sp Gr
1.018
pH
7.0
Protein
3+
Glucose
2+
 Ketone
ne gative
Bilinubin
negative
Blood
4+
Sediment
innumerable RBC/hpf
1 to 2 granular casts/hpf
Chemistry
BUN
161
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
10.5
H
mg/dL
440
CASE STUDIES
441
Total protein
8.2
H
TP/8
 Albumin
3.1
H
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.61
AST
97
U/L
Glucose
498
H
mg/dL
Sodium
115
L
mmol/L
Potassium
2.2
L
mmol/L
Chloride
50
L
mmol/L
Total CO2
38.3
H
mmol/L
Anion gap
28.9
H
mmol/L
Calcium
7.3
L
mg/dL
 Phosphorus
8.5
H
mg/dL
Other Tests
Blood gas analysis (venous):
HCO,
37.1
H
mmol/L
PCO2
37.7
mmHg
pH
7.483
H
PROBLEMS:
1. Systemic stress and possible inflammation. Although the leukocyte count is within the reference
interval, neutrophilia and lymphopenia are present. The neutrophilia suggests either systemic stress or
cause these changes; however, early inflammation also is a possibility
2. Hyperfibrinogenemia. Hyperfibrinogenemia indicates inflammation. Hyperfibrinogenemia is an
acute-phase reactant whose concentration in the plasma increases during inflammation. Marked
hyperfibrinogenemia, measured by the heat precipitation test, is observed commonly in bovine renal
 disease as well as inflammatory conditions. Hyperfibrinogenemia may indicate early inflammation in
cattle and precedes changes in the leukogram.
3. Thrombocytosis. Reactive thrombocytosis commonly accompanies hemorrhage. Assessment of
thrombocytosis is subjective and based on examination of the stained blood smear. More accurate
thrombocyte data can be provided by the platelet count and determination of the MPV.
4. Renal disease.
a. Azotemia may be of prerenal, renal, or post-renal origin. Because the urine specimen is voided,
post-renal azotemia is excluded. Dehydration may have contributed to azotemia; however, the urine
Sp Gr is low. Therefore, low urine Sp Gr with 8% dehydration suggests renal failure.
b. Proteinuria and hematuria may be associated with a renal lesion or lower urinary tract problem.
Granular casts indicate a tubular lesion of unknown severity.
5. Hyperproteinemia, hyperalbuminemia, A/G ratio is within the reference interval. By mathematical
calculation, hyperglobuline mia also is present. The normal A/G ratio indicates that the concentrations
of albumin and globulins are proportionally increased. This change is secondary to dehydration and
plasma water loss. The presence of 8% dehydration is important because the rumen contains a large
fluid reserve; thus, dehydration in this animal is severe.
6. Hyperglycemia with glucosuria. Hyperglycemia may be observed in extremely ill or moribund
cattle. Catecholamine and cortisol release probably play a role in development of hyperglycemia, but
 diabetes mellitus cannot be excluded with certainty. The bovine renal threshold for glucose is l00 mg/
442
CASE STUDIES
dl. Because serum glucose concentration has exceeded this threshold, glucosuria has occurred. Solute
diuresis may further enhance the dehydration.
7. Hyponatremic dehydration and hypokalemia. Bovine renal disease causes urinary loss of Na and
water in excess of fluid and electrolyte intake. Total body Na+ content is very low. Hypokalemia is
probably secondary to changes in external K+ balance (i.e., decreased oral K+ intake and kaliuresis) and
alkalosis in which K+ shifts from ECF to ICF
8. Mixed metabolic alkalosis and acidosis, hypochloridemia, and increased anion gap.
a. High plasma TCO, and HCOs concentration (metabolic alkalosis) and hypochloridemia are
common in bovine renal disease due to upper gastrointestinal stasis and functional loss of abomasal
HC1.
b. The blood gas analysis confirms alkalemia. The pCO, is within the reference interval, indicating
that respiratory compensation has not occurred.
c. The high anion gap suggests a concurrent metabolic acidosis caused by titration of plasma buffer
systems with uremic acids, phosphoric acid (high P concentration), and perhaps lactic acid (shock).
At this time, the balance between these two abnormalities has resulted in an alkalemia.
          o
disease. Hyperphosphatemia may occur with a decreased GFR from dehydration and renal disease.
SUMMARY: Following necropsy and histopathology, unilateral perirenal and renal hemorrhage and
bilateral nephrosis were diagnosed. The etiology of these lesions was not determined.
CASE 23
RIGHT ABOMASAL
DISPLACEMENT
SIGNALMENT: Bovine, Jersey, cow (female), 2 l/2 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Anorexia, decreased milk production, ruminal and intestinal atony, decreased
 respiratory rate, dehydration estimated clinically at 3%
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
36.7
%
Hb
12.6
g/dL
RBC
8.89
x10/μL
MCV
41.3
fL
MCH
13.6
Pg
MCHC
34.3
%
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets: adequate
WBC
16.8
H
x10/μL
Seg
12.264 (73%)
H
x10/μL
 Band
0.168 (1%)
x10/μL
Lymph
2.856 (17%)
x10/μL
Mono
1.512 (9%)
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10'/μL
Baso
0.0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Fibrinogen
700
H
mg/dL
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
pale yellow
Turbidity
clear
15 ds
1.012
pH
5.0
Protein
negative
Glucose
2+
continued
443
444
CASE STUDIES
Ketone
negative
 Bilirubin
negative
Blood
negative
Sediment
none
Chemistry
Creatinine
2.1
mg/dL
Glucose
231
H
mg/dL
Sodium
136
mmol/L
Potassium
3.1
L
mmol/L
Chloride
86
L
mmol/L
Total CO2
40.0
H
mmol/L
Anion gap
13.1
mmol/L
Calcium
8.6
mg/dL
Other Tests
Blood gas analysis (venous):
HCO
38.4
H
mmol/L
PCO2
52.6
H
mmHg
pH
7.492
H
PROBLEMS:
1. Neutrophilic leukocytosis. Neutrophilia without a left shift occurs in some noninflammatory
conditions such as displaced abomasum. It is probably caused by mild inflammation or endogenous
cortisol release.
2. Hyperfibrinogenemia. Hyperfbrinogenemia indicates inflammation and suggests that the changes
in the leukogram are not merely the result of stress. Hyperfibrinogenemia may indicate early
inflammation in cattle and precede changes in the leukogram.
3. Hyperglycemia and glucosuria. Hyperglycemia in cattle generally is transient and may be induced
    a n  n   s
concentration may exceed the bovine renal threshold (loomg/dL) in nondiabetic conditions and
glucosuria will occur.
4. Metabolic alkalosis, hypochloridemia, and paradoxical aciduria. Abomasal displacement causes
 sequestration and loss of gastric HCl to reabsorption with a net gain in HCO; (increased TCO, and
HCOs, alkalosis), and hypochloridemia. A decreased respiratory rate compensates for the alkalosis and
  It de =  1 r n o o  n ha   s o
case). Renal correction of metabolic alkalosis normally involves secretion of excess HCO;and
retention of Ht ions. HCO; is reabsorbed instead of Cl because of a deficiency of Cl and K+ in the
 plasma and glomerular fltrate. As the kidney reabsorbs Nat to restore total body water, Ht is secreted
instead of K'. This potentiates the alkalosis and causes paradoxical aciduria. The anion gap is within
the reference interval, excluding a complicating titration-type metabolic acidosis in this cow.
5. Hypokalemia. Anorectic herbivores often have negative Kt balance due to decreased oral electrolyte
intake and continued renal electrolyte loss. In addition, loss of gastric and intestinal fluids to
reabsorption (as in abomasal displacement) represents an additional change in external K+ balance.
Internal shift of K+ ions, in which ECF K+ is exchanged for ICF H+ during alkalosis, is thought to be a
minor cause of hypokalemia.
SUMMARY: Right-sided abomasal displacement was confirmed by laparotomy and surgically corrected.
CASE 24
1ACUTEPULMONARV
HEMORRHAGEANDEDEMA(ACUTE
PARAQUAT?TOXICOSIS)
SIGNALMENT: Canine, German Shepherd, female, 2 years old
MEDICAL HIsTORY: Known exposure to Paraquat?. Continuous intravenous lactated Ringer's solution
(4,700 ml total volume) spiked with KCl (totaling 39 mEq/L) was administered intravenously over a 20-
hour period prior to obtaining blood and urine samples for laboratory evaluation.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Severe vomiting and rapid, deep, painful (groaning) respiration
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
52.5
H
Urinalysis
Urine source
catheterization
Color
pale yellow
Turbidity
cle ar
15 ds
1.015
pH
7.5
Chemistries
negative
Sediment
none
Senum Chemistry
BUN
58
mg/dL
Glucose
120
mg/dL
Sodium
127
L
mmol/L
Potassium
2.8
L
mmol/L
Chloride
78
L
 mmol/L
Total CO2
26.8
H
 mmol/L
Anion gap
25.0
H
mmol/L
Other Tests
 Blood gas analysis (arterial):
HCO;
25.5
H
mmol/L
PCO2
32.8
mmHg
pH
7.515
H
PO2
52.0
L
mmHg
445
446
CASE STUDIES
PROBLEMS:
1. Polycythemia. Polycythemia is present even after a history of fluid therapy. Relative polycythemia is
probably the result of dehydration from severe vomiting. Vomiting animals often have decreased oral
water intake. Absolute polycythemia can be caused by chronic hypoxia from high altitude, left to right
sided cardiac shunts, lung disease, renal cysts or neoplasms (paraneoplastic syndrome), or
polycythemia vera, a neoplastic condition in which unregulated production of mature erythrocytes
occurs.
2. Possible renal failure.
fluid therapy, suggests dehydration and possible prerenal azotemia.
b. Azotemia and low urine specific gravity indicate possible renal failure. However, the low urine
Sp Gr may represent diuresis secondary to fluid therapy.
3. Hyponatremia, hypokalemia, and hypochloridemia. Because dehydration was not clinically
apparent at the time of sampling, ECF volume is presumed to be normal or increased (possible
pulmonary edema). These data indicate that the Nat content of the intravenous fluids may have been
inadequate and overhydration developed. Hypokalemia is a common sequela of prolonged fluid
therapy, especially with alkalinizing fluid. During fluid administration, the ECFk+ shifts to the ICF in
exchange for ICFh+. Diuresis may produce kaliuresis, while alkalemia potentiates the internal shift of
K+ from ECF to ICF Hypochloridemia parallels hyponatremia or may be a consequence of vomiting.
4. Hypoxemia. Low arterial PO, concomitant with rapid respiration and normal PCO, indicates a
perfusion/diffusion abnormality as with pneumonia, pulmonary edema, or pulmonary thrombosis.
 5. Uncompensated mixed metabolic alkalosis and metabolic acidosis. The marked alkalemia is due
to a combination of mild metabolic alkalosis (increased TCO and increased HCO;) and lack of
respiratory compensation (normal PCO2). The hypoxemia is maintaining the respiratory drive,
preventing hypoventilation needed to increase PCO, to compensate for the metabolic alkalosis. The
high anion gap suggests the possibility of a concomitant titration acidosis due to uremic acids or lactic
acidosis. Administration of large quantities of lactated Ringer's solution also may increase the plasma
 anp  pino uonuu auoqonq yn aui de unue an aau pue uouo aeiol
bicarbonate addition to the intravenous fluids or conversion of lactate to bicarbonate
SUMMARY: Diagnoses of nephrosis, pulmonary hemorrhage, and pulmonary edema were made
following necropsy and histopathology. Paraquat? was verified on toxicologic analysis. Paraquat? is an
herbicide that ultimately causes interstitial pneumonia, alveolar type II cell hyperplasia, and pulmonary
fbrosis that compromise normal pulmonary function. These latter lesions develop only if suffcient
time has elapsed between toxin ingestion and death.
CASE 25
5RODENTICIDE (COUMARIN)
TOXICOSIS
SIGNALMENT: Canine, German Shepherd, male, 6 months old
MEDICAL HISTORY: A female litermate died recently with pulmonary hemorrhage.
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Rear leg lameness, hyphema, and hematuria.
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
12H
30.0
%
Hb
9.9
g/dL
RBC
4.16
x10/μL
MCV
72.1
fL
MCH
23.8
Pg
MCHC
33.0
%
Retic
4.5
H
%
Abs retic
187
H
x10/μL
 RBC morphology: polychromasia
Platelets:
350
x10/μL
WBC
25.6
H
x10/μL
Seg
19.719 (77%)
H
x10/μL
Band
0.0
x10/μL
Lymph
1.792 (7%)
x10'/μL
Mono
4.096 (16%)
H
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
red
Turbidity
cloudy
45 ds
1.040
pH
6.5
Protein
4
Glucose
negative
Ketone
negative
Bilinubin
negative
continued
447
448
CASE STUDIES
Blood
4+
Sediment
inmumerable RBC/hpf
10 to 15 WBC/hpf
Serum Chemistry
BUN
21
mg/dL
Creatinine
1.3
mg/dL
 Total protein
5.2
g/dL
Albumin
2.5
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.93
ALP
100
U/L
ALT
31
U/L
Glucose
111
 mg/dL
Sodium
144
mmol/L
Potassium
4.0
mmol/L
Chloride
120
mmol/L
Total CO2
15
mmol/L
Anion gap
10
mmol/L
Other Tests
Fibrinogen
256
mg/dL
ACT
290
H
sec
APTT
35.7
H
sec
PT
30.2
H
sec
TT
5.2
sec
FDP
<10
μg/mL
Symovial fluid analysis:
red, cloudy, reduced viscosity
 poor mucin clot quality
nucleated cell count: 1.3 × 10%/μL
numerous RBCs
 20% neutrophils
80% monocytes and lymphocytes
erythrophagcytosis by macrophages
Opinion: hemarthrosis
PROBLEMS:
1. Normocytic, normochromic, regenerative ane mia. The decreased hematocrit, hemoglobin, and
RBC count indicate anemia. The erythrocyte indices reveal that the anemia is normocytic and
 changes and clinical evidence of bleeding are consistent with a hemorrhagic anemia.
2. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, monocytosis. Neutrophilia and monocytosis commonly occur after
hemorrhage.
3. Hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, borderline hypoglobulinemia, A/G ratio within the
reference interval. The hypoproteinemia is the result of concurrent loss of albumin and globulins via
hemorrhage. Because these proteins are lost together, the A/G ratio remains within the reference
interval. The calculated globulin concentration is 2.7 g/dL, which is the low end of the reference
interval. Thus, borderline hypoglobuline mia is present.
CASE STUDIES
449
4. Coagulation factor deficiency, most likely an acquired vitamin K-dependent factor deficiency.
 x  (a a  a i  (i i )  
both the APTT and PT are prolonged; only the APTT wound be prolonged in these hereditary
disorders. Von Willebrand's disease may have decreased factor Vlll activity, but rarely is it low enough
 t0 prolong the APTT. Normal platelet count, TT, and FDP concentration, concomitant with the
prolonged clotting times, tends to exclude acute uncompensated disseminated intravascular
coagulation syndrome. Prolonged ACT, APTT, and PT are consistent with acquired deficiency of the
vitamin K-dependent clotting factors (factors II, Vll, IX, and X). Coumarin rodenticide toxicosis is
highly likely. Liver disease, as a cause of acquired vitamin-K-dependent clotting factor deficiency, is
unlikely because ALT and ALP activities are within the reference interval.
5. Hematuria. Proteinuria with a positive reagent strip reaction for occult blood and erythrocytes in
the urinary sediment indicate hemorrhage.
6. Hemarthrosis. The presence of numerous erythrocytes and evidence of erythrophagocytosis by
macrophages are consistent with hemarthrosis.
SUMMARY: Possible exposure to a coumarin-type rodenticide was confrmed by the owner. The dog
was successfully treated with vitamin K, administration. Second generation rodenticides, such as
diphacinone, have largely replaced first-generation coumarin products. Diphacinone is more toxic and
persists longer; therefore, vitamin K, administration may have to be continued for 3 to 4 weeks to
prevent the recurrence of bleeding.
CASE 26
HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Boston Terrier, castrated male, 13 years old
MEDICAL HISTORY: Previous corticosteroid therapy
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Generalized alopecia, scaling, erythema, pyoderma, overweight, polyuria,
polydipsia
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
48.8
%
Hb
16.6
g/dL
RBC
6.89
x10μL
MCV
71
fL
MCH
24.1
Pg
MCHC
34.0
%
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets
468
x10'/μL
WBC
30.3
H
x10/μL
Seg
27.573 (91%)
H
x10'/μL
Band
0.0
x10'/μL
Lymph
0.303 (1%)
L
x10'/μL
Mono
2.424 (8%)
H
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
x10'/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
yellow
Turbidity
clear
Sp Gr
1.006
pH
7.0
Chemistries
ne gative
Sediment
squamous cells
450
CASE STUDIES
451
Chemistry
BUN
26
mg/dL
Creatinine
0.7
mg/dL
Total protein
6.0
g/dL
Albumin
3.0
g/dL
A/G ratio
1.0
ALP
1195
H
U/L
ALP post-levam
1102
H
U/L
ALP-levamisole resistance
92.2
%
ALT
482
H
U/L
Glucose
152
H
mg/dL
Sodium
140
mmol/L
Potassium
5.9
mmol/L
Chloride
113
mmol/L
Total CO2
20
mmol/L
Anion gap
20
mmol/L
Calcium
10.2
mg/dL
Other Tests
ACIH stimulation test:
 pre-ACTH cortisol
2.16
post-ACIH cortisol
21.14
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test:
pre-dexamethasone cortisol
2.28
 8-hour post cortisol
1.78
PROBLEMS:
1. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, lymphopenia, eosinopenia. The leukogram pattern of mature
neutrophilia (lack of a left shift), lymphopenia, and eosinopenia is consistent with corticosteroid
administration. Neutrophilia results from increased bone marrow release of neutrophils as well as a
shift in neutrophils from the marginal neutrophil pool (where they cannot be counted) to the
circulating neutrophil pool (where they are enumerated by the WBC count). Lymphopenia and
eosinopenia are due to cellular redistribution within the vasculature.
2. Increased ALP activity with resistance to levamisole inhibition. High ALP activity is induced by
endogenous and/or exogenous corticosteroids. With suffcient exposure to corticosteroids, dogs
produce a unique corticosteroid isoenzyme of ALP The presence of this corticosteroid ALP isoenzyme
is confirmed by the high resistance of ALP to levamisole inhibition (activities of both the hepatic and
bone isoenzymes of ALP are inhibited by levamisole).
3. Increased ALT activity suggests some degree of hepatocellular enzyme leakage associated with
hepatocytes that may compress bile canaliculi
and
promote cholestasis. Cholestasis causes increased
hepatocellular permeability
Decause
of the
t-like effect ofbile on plasma membranes.
4. Hyperglycemia without glucosuria.
cemia is attributed to gluconeogenesis from
endogenous corticosteroid release and exogenous corticosteroid administration.
5. Hyperadrenocorticism. Overstimulation with ACTH and failure to suppress plasma cortisol in the
low-dose dexamethasone test indicate hyperadrenocorticism but do not distinguish between pituitary-
452
CASE STUDIES
helpful in making that distinction (most cases of pituitary-dependent disease suppress). The adrenal
gland would fail to respond to ACTH stimulation with an increase in plasma cortisol concentration if
the hyperadrenocorticism were iatrogenic due to the corticosteroid therapy.
6. Very low urine Sp Gr. The very low urine Sp Gr is probably the result of medullary washout and
reduced medullary tonicity caused by the corticosteroid-induced polyuria. A gradual water deprivation
test would be needed to completely exclude renal failure as a cause of polyuria.
SUMMARY: A pituitary adenoma was discovered at necropsy.
CASE 27
HYPERTHYROIDISM
SlGNALMENT: Cat, domestic shorthair, female, 12 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Weakness, weight loss, polyphagia, tachycardia, dyspnea, pleural effusion,
enlarged thyroid glands, fleas
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
48
H
%
Hb
16.6
H
g/dL
RBC
10.2
H
x10%μL
MCV
47.1
fL
MCH
16.3
Pg
MCHC
34.6
%
 RBC morphology: normal
 Platelets: adequate
WBC
21.9
H
x10/μL
Seg
19.053 (87%)
H
x10/μL
Band
0.0
x10/μL
Lymph
0.876 ( 4%)
L
x10/μL
Mono
0.219 ( 1%)
x10/μL
Eos
1.752 ( 8%)
H
x10'/μL
Bas0
0.0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
yellow
Turbidity
clear
Sp Gr
1.060
pH
6.5
Protein
 negative
Glucose
 negative
Ketone
negative
Bilinubin
negative
Blood
2+
Sediment
30 to 50 RBC/hpf
 0 to 1 WBC/hpf
fat droplets
continued
453
454
CASE STUDIES
Serum Chemistry
BUN
39
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
0.7
mg/dL
Total protein
7.2
g/dL
Albumin
3.6
g/dL
A/G ratio
1.0
ALP
59
H
U/L
ALT
220
H
U/L
Glucose
132
H
mg/dL
Sodium
154
mmol/L
 Potassium
3.9
mmol/L
Chloride
131
mmol/L
Total CO,
13
mmol/L
Anion gap
13.9
mmol/L
Calcium
9.1
mg/dL
Other Tests
Iot thyroxine (TI4)
23.4
H
μg/dL
 Pleural fluid analysis:
Volume
200
mL
Clear and colorless
Protein
3.4
g/dL
Nucleated cell count
2,000
/μL
Small lymphocytes, a few nondegenerateneutrophils, macrophages, and mesothelial
cells
Opinion: modified transudate of cardiac disease
PROBLEIMIS:
1. Polycythemia. The increased hematocrit, hemoglobin, and RBC count indicate polycythemia.
 Dehydration, a common cause of relative polycythemia, was not observed on the physical examination.
Excitement may cause splenic contraction and relative polycythemia, but changes in the leukogram do
not support physiologic leukocytosis from epinephrine release. Therefore, absolute polycythemia is
probably present in this cat from hyperthyroidism with stimulation of erythropoiesis and, possibly,
increased erythropoietin production.
2. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and eosinophilia
a.1
Neutrophilic leukocytosis and lymphopenia suggest stress with endogenous cortisol release
0.
Eosinophilia. Eosinophilia is frequently observed with hypersensitivity or parasitic infestations
(including endo- and ectoparasites). Allergy and parasitism are not mutually exclusive as causes of
eosinophilia. This cat may have flea allergy dematitis.
3. Increased BUN concentration.The mildly
/ increased BUN concentration is probably the result of
increased protein catabolism associated with hyperthyroidism. Azotemia and high urine Sp Gr (l.060)
 suggest prerenal azotemia, but dehydration is not apparent on physical examination. However, some
azotemic cats may retain renal function sufficient to concentrate their urine during the progression of
renal disease (but usually not to the degree observed in this cat). The creatinine concentration is
within the reference interval despite an increased BUN concentration. This observation tends to
exclude decreased GFR from dehydration.
CASE STUDIES
455
4. Hepatic disease.
a. Increased ALP activity. ALP is an induction enzyme and generally serves as a marker of biliary
disease. Hepatic centrilobular lesions usually do not cause cholestasis, so increased ALP activity
must be explained by another mechanism. Hyperthyroidism is thought to cause increased bone
turnover. Therefore, an increase in activity of the bone isoenzyme of ALP is a possibility. In
humans, both hepatic and bone isoenzymes of ALP are increased during hyperthyroidism.
b. Increased ALT activity suggests hepatocellular injury with leakage of this cytosolic enzyme. This
change may represent centrilobular hepatocellular hypoxia secondary to hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.
5. Hyperglycemia. Hyperglycemia is observed occasionally in cats with hyperthyroidism. Possible
   ( ae e     s
hyperexcitability. Alternatively, hyperglycemia may be due to gluconeogenesis incited by cachexia and
muscle catabolism related to hyperthyroidism. In people with hyperthyroidism, hyperglycemia is
glucose uptake.
6. Hyperthyroidism. A markedly increased serum thyroxine (T4) concentration is diagnostic of
hyperthyroidism. In cats, this disease usually is associated with thyroid nodular hyperplasia.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may develop during the progression of disease.
7. Pleural effusion. Secondary hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, resulting from hyperthyroidism, is the
probable cause of the modified transudate. The three most common causes of lymphocyte-rich pleural
effusions in cats are cardiac disease, chylothorax, and lymphoma.
SUMMARY: The cat was hyperthyroid and responded to radioactive iodine treatment.
CASE 28
VON WILLEBRAND'SDISEASE
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Doberman Pinscher, female, 2 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Continuous vaginal bleeding since parturition 8 weeks ago, skin rash that
frequently bleeds
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Het
41
%
Platelets
253
x10/μL
WBC
8.3
x10²/μL
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
pink
Turbidity
clear
15 ds
1.036
pH
6.5
Chemistries
negative
Blood
2+
Sediment
50 to 60 RBC/hpf
0 to 1 WBC/hpf
Senum Chemistry
BUN
17
mg/dL
Cre atinine
0.7
mg/dL
Total protein
6.7
g/dL
Albumin
2.7
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.68
ALP
51
U/L
ALT
75
U/L
Glucose
105
mg/dL
Sodium
146
mmol/L
Potassium
4.4 
mmol/L
Chloride
117
mmol/L
Total CO2
21
mmol/L
Anion gap
8
mmol/L
Calcium
10.3
mg/dL
Cholesterol
276
mg/dL
456
CASE STUDIES
457
Other Tests
BMBT
6
H
min
APTT
14.2
sec
PT
6.3
sec
FDP
<10
μg/mL
Fibrinogen
200
mg/dL
Von Willebrand's
 factor antigen
16
% of N
PROBLEMS:
1. Von Willebrand's disease. vWF deficiency causes platelet dysfunction and prolonged buccal
mucosal bleeding time (BMBT). Other causes of a prolonged BMBT when the platelet count is within
the reference interval include uremia or increased FDPs which are not supported by the laboratory
data. Coagulation factor Vll deficiency accompanies deficiency of vWF, but factor Vlll activity is rarely
<30% of the reference interval. Therefore, the APTT is generally not prolonged. vWD is confirmed by
documenting decreased vWD factor antigen.
2. Hematuria. A positive occult blood reagent strip test and the presence of many erythrocytes in
the urine sediment indicate hematuria. Blood in a voided urine sample could be of genital tract origin,
which is a possibility in this dog.
 available and administered, if needed, to control any bleeding tendency associated with vWD. Platelets
 are not needed in the transfusion because the defect is a lack of plasma glycoprotein (vWF); the
platelets are normal.
CASE 29
UREATOXICOSIS
SIGNALMENT: Bovine, Holstein, cow (female), 7 months old
MEDlCAL HISTORY: One of a group of cattle accidentally fed a diet containing toxic levels of urea 72
hours prior to admission. The heifer has been sternally recumbent for at least 2 days.
 PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Large, splashy, atonic rumen; arrhythmia suggestive of atrial fbrillation;
diffuse fine muscular tremors of face, neck, and flank
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Het
37.1
%
Hb
13.2
L
g/dL
RBC
10.67
x10%/μL
MCV
34.8
fL
MCH
12.4
Pg
MCHC
35.6
%
 RBC morphology: slight anisocytosis
 Platele ts:
720
x10'/μL
WBC
44.6
H
x10/μL
Seg
36.126 (81%)
H
x10/μL
Lymph
6.244 (14%)
x10/μL
Mono
2.230 (5%)
H
x10/μL
Eos
0.0
×10/μL
Baso
0.0
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
 Plasma color pale yellow, clear
 Plas prot
8.1
H
g/dL
Fibrinogen
700
H
mg/dL
Urinalysis
Urine source
voided
Color
amber
Turbidity
cloudy
Sp Gr
1.029
pH
8.0
Protein
negative
Glucose
1+
Ketone
 negative
458
CASE STUDIES
459
Bilinubin
negative
Blood
negative
Se diment
0 RBC/hpf
 0 to 2 squamous cells/hpf
 many triple phosphate
Serum Chemistry
BUN
44
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
1.1
mg/dL
 Total protein
7.9
H
g/dL
Albumin
3.2
g/dL
Globulin 4.7 H g/dL
A/G ratio
0.68
GGT
19
H
U/L
AST
243
H
U/L
SDH
30
H
U/L
CPK
23,163
H
U/L
ALT
151
H
U/L
Glucose
87
mg/dL
Sodium
167
H
mmol/L
Potassim
3.9
mmol/L
Chloride
115
H
mmol/L
Total CO2
34
mmol/L
Anion gap
22
H
mmol/L
Calcium
9.2
TP/8u
 Phosphorus
7.8
mg/dL
Total bilirubin
1.7
H
mg/dL
Other Tests
Plasma NH;
148
H
μg/dL
Rumen NH,
38,935
H
μg/dL
PROBLEMS:
1. Polycythemia. Increased hematocrit, hemoglobin concentration, and RBC count indicate
 polycythe mia. Mild hemoconcentration may be secondary to dehydration, but another physical
examination will be necessary to confrm this impression. The hematocrit, MCV, and serum protein
concentration often are slightly low in cattle of this age. Once the primary problem has been corrected
and the heifer has been rehydrated, these parameters may drop to the low end of the reference interval.
2. Anisocytosis. Anisocytosis is a variation in erythrocyte size and is a normal finding in cattle.
3. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and monocytosis.
a. Leukocytosis and marked neutrophilia. Neutrophilia may be due to excitement and
catecholamine response associated with shipping as well as inflammation. Neutrophilia from
excitement is transient, whereas neutrophilia from inflammation is more persistent.
 Hyperfibrinogenemia suggests that inflammation is present. Possible sites of inflammation are the
rumen wall and the skeletal muscles.
b. Monocytosis. Monocytosis can occur in acute or chronic disease. Blood monocytes provide a
replacement pool for tissue macrophages.
        )  
plasma is due to hyperfibrinogenemia. This finding indicates inflammation.
460
CASE STUDIES
5. High anion gap. The elevated anion gap may be due to lactic acid production from shock;
however, the TCO, is within the reference interval. Blood gas analysis would give a more detailed
picture of acid-base alterations.
6. Hypernatremic hypovolemia. The presence of a large amount of a small molecular weight
substance (urea) has increased the tonicity of rumen fluid. Little urea diffuses out of the rumen, but
water can diffuse in. Water has transferred from the ECF to the rumen, but Na+ has remained in the
ECF, resulting in hypernatremia and hypovolemia. The total body water is normal, but there is
dehydration of the ECF and ICF, and accumulation of water in the GI tract.
7. Hyperosmolality of ECF. The ECF is hyperosmolal: (167 + 3.9) (2) = 341.8 mOsm/L. The ECF
hypernatremia has drawn water from the ICF, partially masking dehydration as assessed by signs of
hypovolemia. Loss of ICF water leads to cell shrinkage, possibly contributing to the neurologic
abnormalities. Determination of serum osmolality and calculation of the osmolal gap would help
determine whether unmeasured, nonpolar compounds have been absorbed from the rumen. Rumen
fluid osmolality would help determine the severity of the osmolar gradient between it and the ECF
deficit exists. Potassium may be leaking from damaged muscles, increasing ECF K'. However, the
heifer has been anorectic, decreasing ECF K+. The cardiac arrhythmia may be an indication of ICF K
depletion.Sequential serum K+monitoring is warranted.
9. Hyperchloridemia. Most of the hyperchloridemia is due to increased NaCl. The Na-Cl difference
(52) is increased slightly (reference interval 45 to 53), indicating a selective disorder in Cl is present.
The slight increase in Cl (compared to the marked increase in Nat) is most likely due to abomasal
stasis and sequestration of HCl secondary to the metabolic disorder.
10. Increased BUN concentration. Some of the urea may have been absorbed from the lower GI tract.
excess ammonia. If dehydration is present, prerenal azotemia also is a consideration.
11. Hyperproteinemia, hyperglobulinemia, and A/G ratio within the reference interval. The
hyperproteinemia is characterized by a proportional increase in albumin and globulin due to
hypovolemia (loss of plasma water).
12. Increased AST activity. AST activity is high in many cells including hepatocytes, skeletal muscle
cells, and erythrocytes. The SDH is within the reference interval and hemolysis is not present in the
plasma or serum, indicating that increased serum enzyme activity is from muscle injury (see below).
13. Markedly increased CK activity. Increased CK activity in unhemolyzed serum is indicative of
   d  no  s is po a assd n a
(downer cow). Another possible cause of muscle damage is myocyte shrinkage from hypernatremia
14. Increased ALT activity. The cytosol of hepatocytes contains little ALT activity in large animals.
The serum activity of this enzyme is seldom measured in these species. Elevated serum ALT activity in
cattle may be associated with muscle damage.
15. Increased GGT activity. ALP has a very broad reference interval in large animals and is not
clinically useful as a marker of biliary disease. GGT activity is a more sensitive indicator of biliary
d i as  P n siis ae i s ps a s ae u as
In this cow, GGT activity probably has been induced via cholestasis.
16. Increased SDH activity. SDH is an indicator of hepatocellular damage. It is located in the
cytoplasm of hepatocytes and leaks into the blood when hepatocellular membrane integrity is
compromised.
CASE STUDIES
461
17. Hyperammone mia. Rumen microfora convert urea to ammonia, which can be absorbed into the
blood in the form of NH,. Ammonia (and possibly other amines) contribute to neurologic
abnormalities and muscle weakness.
18. Normoglycemia and mild glucosuria. Transient hyperglycemia may produce glucosuria if blood
glucose exceeds the renal threshold. Hyperglycemia may be transient (e.g., excitement and
catecholamine release) but urine is stored in the bladder for a variable time. Therefore, glucosuria will
  r e r ou si nxa m o  p 
normoglycemia and glucosuria could be acute renal disease with renal tubular necrosis, but the
urinalysis findings do not support this possibility.
19. Mildly increased total bilirubin concentration. Anorectic cattle often have slight
hyperbilirubine mia.
20. Alkaline urine with triple phosphate crystalluria. An anorectic animal usually excretes acid
urine. The urine is alkaline because of the excretion of excess ammonia. Triple phosphate crystals form
in alkaline urine, leading to their presence in the sediment.
The rumen flora converted the urea to ammonia, some which was absorbed, leading to
hyperammonemia and ammonia toxicity. Consequences of ammonia toxicity include disorientation
(and other neurologic deficits) and muscle weakness. Subsequent prolonged recumbency caused
further muscle damage and limited access to food and water. Excretion of excess ammonia via the
kidneys produced alkaline urine and triple phosphate crystalluria. The heifer was treated with IV fluids
containing isotonic NaCl and 5% glucose to slowly lower the serum Na+ without producing secondary
cerebral swelling. Two gallons of rumen fluid from a healthy cow was given to re-establish normal rumen
flora. Within 6 hours, the heifer was improving and passing foul smelling feces. She eventually
recovered after 6 days of supportive care.
CASE 3OENDSTAGE RENALDISEASE
WITH UREMIC PNEUMONITIS
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Bull Mastiff, male, 2 years old
MEDlCAL HISTORY: Polyuria, diagnosed with congenital renal disease at 2 months of age, deterioration
despite supportive care, dialysis, and transfusion 2 weeks ago
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Severe respiratory distress, oliguria
RADlOGRAPHlC FINDINGS: Moderate pulmonary edema and mineralization of the tracheal rings
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
12H
35.7
Hb
12.7
g/dL
RBC
5.19
x10%/μL
MCV
68.8
fL
MCH
24.5
Pg
MCHC
35.5
%
 RBC morphology: normal
Platelets:
131
x10'/μL
WBC
20.8
H
x10/μL
Seg
19.74 (95%)
H
x10'/μL
Band
0.0
x10'/μL
Lymph
0.330 (2%)
x10/μL
Mono
0.530 (3%)
x10'/μL
Eos
0.000 (0%)
x10'/μL
Baso
0.000 (0%)
x10/μL
WBC morphology: normal
Plasma color: colorless, clear
 Plas prot
7.4
g/dL
Urinalysis
Urine source
cystocentesis
Color
yellow
Turbidity
clear
Sp Gr
1.010
pH
5.0
462
CASE STUDIES
463
 Protein
1+
Glucose
negative
 Ketone
 negative
 Bilinubin
negative
Blood
negative
Se diment
0 RBC/hpf
0 to 2WBC/hpf
0 to 2 transitional/hpf
amorphous crystal
Arterial blood gas analysis (on room air)
pH
7.144
L
pCO2
43.2
H
mmHg
pO2
65.5
L
mmHg
HCO;
13.9
L
mmol/L
BE
-13.1
L
mmol/L
Senum Chemistry
BUN
41
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
10.8
H
mg/dL
 Total protein
5.0
L
g/dL
Albumin
2.2
L
g/dL
Globulin
3.8
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.58
Glucose
45
L
mg/dL
Sodium
148
mmol/L
Potassium
5.5
H
mmol/L
Chloride
110
mmol/L
Total CO2
13
L
mmol/L
Anion gap
29
H
mmol/L
Calcium
13.9
H
mg/dL
 Phosphorus
16.2
H
mg/dL
PROBLEMS:
1. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and lymphopenia. Stress with endogenous cortisol release has
resulted in these leukogram changes. Neutrophilia is the result of increased release of neutrophils from
the bone marrow into the blood as well as decreased emigration of neutrophils from the blood into the
tissues. Lymphopenia is due to temporary redistribution of recirculating lymphocytes.
2. Hypoventilatory respiratory disease. Hypoxia with increased PCO2 (respiratory acidosis) is
 occurring. The combination of low PO, (hypoxia) and increased PCO, (hypercapnia) indicate
decreased pulmonary ventilation. The effective flow of air in and out of alveoli has been impeded.
 Depression of the respiratory centers is excluded because of the observed respiratory effort. Both
pneumothorax and hydrothorax have been excluded by radiography. Therefore, some form of
obstructive respiratory disease is present. Upper airway obstruction is excluded by physical
examination, leaving intrapulmonary obstructive disease as the cause of these laboratory
abnormalities.
3. Mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis. The expected metabolic compensation for respiratory
acidosis is to increase HCO concentration by decreased excretion through the kidneys. However, this
464
CASE STUDIES
dog also has a metabolic acidosis from prolonged renal disease. The combination of two forms of
acidosis has led to a profound decrease in blood pH (acidemia)
4. High anion gap with metabolic acidosis. The increased anion gap indicates the presence of
unmeasured anions. The decreased HCOs concentration indicates metabolic acidosis. The cause of
the acidosis is titration with acids, including phosphoric and uremic acids. More precise information
on the patient's acid- base status is obtained via blood gas analysis.
5. Hyperkalemia. The dog is in the terminal phase of oliguric renal disease, converting from a
polyuric renal disease to oliguric renal disease. Consequently, K is retained, leading to hyperkalemia
The acidosis probably is the cause of increased K*, because the forms of acidosis present (titration and
respiratory acidosis) tend not to produce ICF to ECF Kt shifts.
6. Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and increased Ca x P product. The combination of
increased calcium and phosphorus concentrations may be seen in congenital renal disease. The
Ca x P product = l5o.l. Therefore, the dog is at high risk for mineralization of soft tissue.
7. Azotemia. Markedly increased creatinine and mildly increased BUN concentrations are present.
The previous dialysis has reduced BUN concentration by increasing the rate of urine production, but
has not decreased the creatinine concentration.
8. Hypoglycemia. The dog has probably not eaten and is using glucose in the exertion of labored
breathing. Hypoglycemia may reflect the exhaustion of glycogen stores.
9. Hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and decreased A/G ratio. The calculated A/G ratio is
decreased (0.58), whereas globulin concentration is within the reference interval. Therefore,
hypoproteinemia is caused by hypoalbuminemia. Selective loss of albumin in the urine is caused by
congenital renal disease. A l+ proteinuria suggests marked protein loss in dilute urine.
10. Isosthenuria and mild proteinuria. A fixed urine specific gravity and proteinuria are consistent
e   aass  ae s i an 'i i is p 
and histopathology, diffuse mineralization of alveolar walls was found throughout the lungs (uremic
pneumonitis). This mineralization prevented normal elastic recoil of alveoli, leading to inability to
expire air and obstructive, hypoventilatory pulmonary disease. The kidneys were markedly small and
fibrotic (end stage renal disease).
CASE 31E
EARLYPRIMARV
HYPOTHYROIDISM
SIGNALMENT: Canine, English Springer Spaniel, male, 2 years old
 MEDICAL HISTORY: Hypothyroidism has been documented in this dogs lineage
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Dog is asymptomatic but owner desires testing for hypothyroidism
PHYSICAL FINDINGS: Corneal cholesterol deposits
ENDOCRINE LABORATORy DATA:
1521
Patient Value
Reference Interval
Total I4
0.78
(1.5 to 4.0μg/dL)
Total T3
104
(78 to 260ng/dL)
Free I4 (by dialysis)
0.7
(0.9 to 2.3ng/dL)
Anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies
negative
negative
Anti-I4 autoantibodies
6.0 %
(<10 %)
Anti-T3 autoantibodies
0.0%
(<2 %)
cTSH
1. 2 ng/ml
(<0.6 ng/mL)
1. Reference intervals. Each laboratory performing endocrine testing should establish their own
species-specific reference intervals. Commercial assay kits intended for use with human specimens 
must be modified for use with animal specimens.
2. Decreased total T4, low free T4 (by dialysis), and increased cTSH concentrations are consistent
with early primary hypothyroidism. Total T3 concentration may remain within the reference interval
as peripheral tissues and the thyroid gland produce a larger percentage of T3. This dog does not have
obvious evidence of autoimmune thyroiditis because anti-thyroglobulin, anti-T4, and anti-T3
autoantibody concentrations are within the reference interval.
COMMENT: This dog has early hypothyroidism. It would be reasonable to treat this patient with
thyroid replacement therapy (L-thyroxine). This dog should not be bred because of the history of
hypothyroidism in its lineage.
"A complete blood cell count and biochemical profle are recommended in the diagnostic evaluation of patients with
presumed or suspected endocrine disease. In this patient, hematologic and biochemical abnormalities were minimal to
absent and have been omitted to simplily discussion of the endocrine data.
bThe reader is relerred to the ofhicial website ol the Society Ior Comparative Endocrinology (http:/www.compendo.org) Ior a
list of laboratories that perform validated endocrine diagnostic testing and furnish associated relerence intervals.
465
CASE 32 POSSIBLE GLUCOCORTICOID
SUPPRESSIONOETVHROIDFUNCTION
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Golden Retriever, castrated male, 8 years old
MEDlCAL HIsTORY: Treatment with 20 mg prednisolone given orally every 48 hours for the past 18
months to control pruritus
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Obesity, slightly dry hair coat
PHYSICAL FINDINGS: Obesity (body weight = 107 pounds)
ENDOCRINE LABORATORY DATA:'
1521
Patient Value
Reference Intervall
Total I4
<0.5
(1.5 to 4.0μg/dL)
cTSH
0.2
(<0.6ng/mL)
1. Reference intervals. Each laboratory performing endocrine testing should establish their own
species-specific reference intervals. Commercial assay kits intended for use with human specimens
must be modified for use with animal specimens.
2. Decreased total T4 and TSH concentrations. A decreased total T4 concentration is present and is
probably related to treatment with an anti-inflammatory dosage of prednisolone for the past 1 l/2
 years. Suppression of TSH concentration by glucocorticoid administration has been difficult to
document, although it is presumed to be one of the mechanisms associated with the low total T4
concentration. Glucocorticoid-associated suppression of TSH concentration into the reference interval
has not been demonstrated, even in dogs with experimentally-induced hypothyroidism. However,
approximately 25% of dogs with hypothyroidism may have a TSH value that is within the reference
interval. If further evaluation of the thyroid axis is needed, the patient should be weaned from
prednisolone over a period of approximately l month. The patient's thyroid axis should be retested
when complete prednisolone withdrawal has been in effect for at least 6 weeks.
A complete blood cell count and biochemical profile are recommended in the diagnostic evaluation ol patients with
presumed or suspected endocrine disease. In this patient, hematologic and biochemical abnormalities were minimal to
absent and have been omitted to simplily discussion of the endocrine data.
bThe reader is relerred to the ofhcial website of the Society for Comparative Endocrinology (http:/www.compendo.org)
[or a list o laboratories that perlorm validated endocrine diagnostic testing and furnish asociated relerence intervals.
466
CASE 33PRIMARYHYPOTHYROIDISM
ANDPHENOBARBITAL
ADMINISTRATION)
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Miniature Poodle, male, 5 years old
MEDICAL HISTORY: Persistent lipemia, daily treatment with phenobarbital for epilepsy
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Lethargy, hair loss
PHYSICAL FINDINGS: Nonpruritic, bilaterally symmetrical alopecia
ENDOCRINE LABORATORY DATA:
Patient Value
Reference Intervalb
FT4 (by dialysis)
0.4
(0.9 to 2.3ng/dL)
cTSH
3.2
(<0.6ng/mL)
1. Reference intervals. Each laboratory performing endocrine testing should establish their own
species-specific reference intervals. Commercial assay kits intended for use with human specimens
must be modified for use with animal specimens.
2. Decreased free T4 and increased TSH concentrations. Decreased total T4 and free T4 are known
to occur with phenobarbital treatment, but these changes are mild and not necessarily associated with
the dramatically increased TSH concentration observed in this dog. These laboratory test results are
consistent with primary hypothyroidism. Thyroid replacement therapy with L-thyroxin should be
instituted
A complete blood cell count and biochemical profle are recommended in the diagnostic evaluation of patients with
presumed or suspected endocrine disease. In this patient, hematologic and biochemical abnormalities were minimal to
absent and have been omitted to simplily discussion of the endocrine data.
bThe reader is relered to the ofhicial website of the Society for Comparative Endocrinology (http:/www.compendo.org)
[or a list of laboratories that perform validated endocrine diagnostic testing and furnish associated relerence intervals.
467
CASE 34 HVPERADRENOCORTICISM
ANDDIABETESMELLITUSWITH
KETOACIDOSIS,HYPEROSMOLALITY
NECROTIZING PANCREATITIS, AND
URINARYTRACTINFECTION
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Miniature Poodle, male, 5 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Depression, weakness, vomiting, diarrhea
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
Hct
43
%
Hb
15.3
g/dL
RBC
5.1
×10%μL
MCV
85
H
fL
MCH
30
H
Pg
MCHC
35.6
%
 RBC morphology: occasional macrocytes
Platelets:
350
×10/μL
WBC
39
H
×10/μL
Seg
35.490 (91%)
H
x10'/uL
Band
0.780 (2%)
H
x10'/μL
Lymph
0.780 (3%)
x10'/μL
Mono
1.950 (5%)
H
x10'/μL
Eos
0.000 (0%)
x10'/μL
Baso
(%0)000'0
x10'/μL
WBC morphology: cytoplasmic basophilia and vacuolation
 Modifed Knott's test: Dirofilaria immitis present
Urinalysis
Urine source
catheterized
Color
dark yellow
Turbidity
cloudy
468
CASE STUDIES
469
15 ds
1.039
pH
8.0
Protein
2+
Glucose
2+
 Ketone
1+
 Bilirubin
negative
Blood
trace
Sediment
10 to 15 RBC/hpf
8 to 10WBC/hpf
 1 to 4 granular casts/hpf
bacilli, spermatozoa, fat droplets
Arterial blood gas analysis (on room air)
pH
7.282
L
pCO2
28.3
H
mmHg
pO2
85.1
mmHg
HCO;
12.9
L
mmol/L
Senum Chemistry
BUN
53
H
mg/dL
Cre atinine
2.9
H
mg/dL
 Total protein
9.7
H
g/dL
Albumin
3.7
H
g/dL
Globulin
4.2
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.88
ALT
331
H
U/L
ALP
1,321
H
U/L
ALP w/ levam
998
U/L
Glucose
160
H
mg/dL
Sodium
159
H
mmol/L
 Potassium
4.2
mmol/L
Chloride
87
mmol/L
Total CO2
13
L
mmol/L
Anion gap
29
H
mmol/L
Calcium
9.8
mg/dL
 Phosphorus
16.2
H
mg/dL
 Total bilirubin
0.3
 mg/dL
Amylase
2,422
H
U/L
Lipase
744
H
U/L
Other Tests
Baseline cortisol
9.8
H
μg/dL
Low dose dexameth
7.2
H
μg/dL
High dose dexameth
5.5
H
μg/dL
PROBLEMS:
1. Macrocytosis. The mean corpuscular volume is increased, indicating macrocytosis. A few
macrocytes are noted on the stained blood smear, but polychromasia is not present. The red blood cell
count is near the lower limit of the reference interval. These laboratory findings are consistent with
congenital macrocytosis that is observed occasionally in Poodles.
CASE STUDIES
2. Increased MCH but MCHC is within the reference interval. The MCH and MCHC usually
indicate similar trends in hemoglobin content within erythrocytes. When these values disagree, the
interpretation should be based upon the MCHC. Of the three erythrocytic indices (MCV, MCH, and
H  n              
calculation. Thus, the erythrocyte population is normochromic.
3. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia with toxic change, and monocytosis.
a. Leukocytosis is primarily due to a mature neutrophilia.
b. Neutrophilia suggests an increased tissue demand for phagocytes and/or a response to
corticosteroids. A clinically important left shift (>l,000 bands/μuL) is not yet present but should be
monitored by sequential leukograms.
C. Toxic change of neutrophils suggests infection or severe infammation; urinary tract infection is
present in this patient.
d. The lymphocyte count is depressed but still within the reference interval; a downward trend in
the lymphocyte count could be confirmed by sequential leukograms. The depressed lymphocyte
count may be due to temporary redistribution of recirculating lymphocytes from endogenous
cortisol release.
corticosteroids.
4. Heartworm infestation. The modified Knott's test reveals microfilaremia due to Diroflaria immitis
infection (heartworm disease). Eosinophilia and basophilia often accompany heartworm disease. The
lack of eosinophilia and basophilia suggests that the patient may be releasing excess endogenous
cortisol from stress or hyperadrenocorticism.
5. Urinary tract infection, hematuria, possible proteinuria, glucosuria, and ketonuria.
a. Pyuria and bacteriuria in a urine specimen obtained by catheter indicates urinary tract infection.
b. Urinary pH is expected to be acidic in carnivores. Alkaluria suggests that the bacteria are
degrading urea to ammonia.
C. The presence of erythrocytes and a positive dipstick test for blood indicate mild hematuria.
presence of proteinuria must be confirmed by another technique such as acid precipitation
(Robert's test)
e. Glucosuria with concurrent hyperglycemia indicates diabetes mellitus.
f. Ketonuria suggests a negative energy balance. Ketonuria is detected specifically by the
nitroprusside reaction via dipstick analysis and explains the presence of metabolic acidosis with an
increased anion gap in the biochemical profile.
6. Uncompensated metabolic acidosis with hypernatremia, hypochloridemia, and an increased
titration-type acidosis. The increased anion gap indicates that the unmeasured anions could be ketone
bodies or lactate from anaerobic metabolism secondary to shock. The urinalysis, however, confirms the
presence of ketones. In this patient, ketoacids probably are titrating plasma bicarbonate. Hypocapnia is
2quivocal but may indicate that the depth and/or rate of ventilation have been increased to promote
CO2 release, but the acidosis is still uncompensated. Excessive chloride is being lost via vomiting
resulting in hypernatremia.
7. Azotemia. The azotemia is probably prerenal in origin. Dehydration commonly accompanies
vomiting and diarrhea and will result in a decreased glomerular filtration rate. Post-renal azotemia
from urethral obstruction is excluded because the urinary catheter was passed easily. Renal azotemia is
dehydration
CASE STUDIES 
471
8. Hyperproteinemia, hyperalbuminemia, and A/G ratio within the reference interval. The A/G
body does not over-synthesize albumin
9. Increased ALT activity. Increased ALT activity indicates hepatocellular leakage. In this patient,
hepatocellular leakage could be due to cholestasis with a detergent action of bile on cell membranes
and/or injury of hepatocytes from pancreatic enzyme release into the peritoneal cavity. Steroid
 ss-si  a   n   oe 
damage and/or hepatocellular swelling from excessive glycogen accumulation (steroid hepatopathy).
10. Increased ALP activity with resistance to levamisole inhibition. Increased ALP activity occurs
from enzyme induction. In this patient, much of the enzyme activity is resistant to levamisole
inhibition and indicates the presence of the steroid isoenzyme of ALP, which is unique in dogs.
Cholestasis may have originated from regional inflammation associated with pancreatitis and/or
compression of bile canaliculi with hepatocellular swelling. Cholestasis induces increased activity of
the hepatic isoenzyme of ALP.
11. Hyperglycemia with glucosuria. Hyperglycemia with concurrent glucosuria indicates diabetes
mellitus.
12. Hyperosmolality. Serum osmolality can be estimated using the formula: mOsmol/kg = 2 [Nat + K*
(mmol/L)] + [glucose (mg/dl) ÷ 18] + [urea (mg/dl) + 2.8]) = mOsmol/kg. The estimated serum
0smolality in this patient is: (167.4) + (8.9) + (2.9) = 354.2 mOsmol/kg.
13. Hyperphosphatemia with an increased Ca x P product. Hyperphosphatemia is probably
secondary to the decreased elimination of phosphorus because of a decreased glomerular filtration rate
The calcium × phosphorus product is high (approximately 159), suggesting that mineralization of soft
tissue is eminent.
14. Hyperamylasemia and hyperlipasemia. Hyperamylasemia and hyperlipasemia are suggestive of
acute pancreatitis, but this should be confirmed by ultrasonography. With decreased GFR, the plasma
clearance half life of these enzymes may be prolonged.
15. Increased baseline cortisol concentration with failure to suppress following low dose and high
dose dexamethasone suppression tests. A high baseline cortisol concentration with a failure to
suppress the plasma cortisol concentration with low and high doses of dexamethasone suggests a
functional adrenocortical neoplasm
SUMMARY: This dog had hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus that were complicated by
ketoacidosis, hyperosmolality, acute necrotizing pancreatitis, and urinary tract infection. Ketoacidosis,
hyperosmolality, and diabetes mellitus initially were managed with fluid therapy and insulin
administration. Necrotizing pancreatitis ultimately resulted in persistent diabetes mellitus and exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency that required daily treatment with insulin and oral pancreatic extracts. The
urinary tract infection was eliminated with antibiotic therapy. An adrenocortical neoplasm was
suspected based on the plasma cortisol data. A unilateral adrenal mass was observed by
ultrasonography and adrenalectomy was performed. The mass was diagnosed histologically as an
adrenocortical adenoma. Following surgery, the plasma cortisol concentration returned to the reference
interval.
CASE 35 
ARTIEACTS OE LIPEMIA
HEMOLYSIS,ANDIMPROPERSAMPLE
HANDLING
SIGNALMENT: Canine, Akita, female, 9 years old
PRESENTING PROBLEMS: Seizures, depression, vomiting, diarrhea
COMMENT: Specimen mailed to laboratory, biochemical profle specimen received on clot
LABORATORY DATA:
Hematology
1H
45
%
qH
19.6
H
g/dL
RBC
6.61
x10/μL
MCV
68.1
fL
MCH
29.7
H
Pg
MCHC
43.6
H
%
 RBC morphology: normal
Plasma color: 4+ lipemia, 4+ hemolysis
 Platelet estimate: adequate
Platelets:
833
H
x10'/L
WBC
20.9
H
x10'/μL
Seg
15.466 (74%)
H
×10/μL
 Band
3.334 (16%)
H
x10'/μL
Lymph
0.836 (3%)
x10'/μL
Mono
1.045 (5%)
x10'/μL
Eos
0.200 (1%)
x10'/μL
Baso
0.000 (0%)
x10/μL
WBC morphology: cells look old, differential may be inaccurate, slight toxic
basophilia
Serum Chemistry
BUN
30
H
mg/dL
Creatinine
1.9
H
mg/dL
 Total protein
7.9
H
g/dL
472
CASE STUDIES
473
Albumin
3.2
H
g/dL
Globulin
4.7
H
g/dL
A/G ratio
0.68
ALT
198
H
U/L
ALP
112
U/L
Glucose
31
L
mg/dL
 Sodium
145
mmol/L
Potassium
5.9
H
mmol/L
Chloride
112
mmol/L
Total CO2
11
mmol/L
Anion gap
28
H
mmol/L
Calcium
11.9
H
mg/dL
Phosphorus
2.0
L
mg/dL
CK
422
H
U/L
Amylase
1,099
H
U/L
Lipase
55
L
U/L
PROBLEMS:
1. Increased hemoglobin, MCH, and MCHC. Because erythrocytes do not produce excessive 
quantities of hemoglobin, the presence of hyperchromia indicates hemolysis. This is verified by the
observation of 4+ hemolysis in the plasma for the complete blood cell count (CBC) and in the serum
submitted for the biochemical profle. If the hemoglobin value is falsely elevated, then the calculated
 MCH and MCHC will be erroneous. Hemolysis in laboratory specimens is observed most commonly as
an in vitro artifact. The presence of lipemia also promotes hemolysis.
2. Possible pseudothrombocytosis. The platelet count is increased, but the platelet estimate from
3. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, left shift, toxic change, and degenerative leukocytes.
a. The leukocyte differential count may be erroneous because the leukocytes are degenerate and
difficult to identify precisely. In some instances, cells are so old that a differential count cannot be
done at all.
 b. The presence of a left shift suggests severe inflammation or infection with a tissue demand for
phagocytes.
r. The slight cytoplasmic basophilia could indicate real toxic change or a nonspecific change in
cytoplasmic tinctorial property from prolonged exposure to EDTA anticoagulant.
d. If a delay is anticipated in shipping the CBC count specimen to the laboratory, 2 air-dried blood
 smears should be made to reflct leukocyte morphology at the time the sample was procured. The
EDTA tube can be refrigerated and will produce acceptable leukocyte and platelet counts for
approximately 24 hours post collection.
4. Mild azotemia. The azotemia could be prerenal (from vomiting and diarrhea), renal, or post-renal
 in origin. A urine specimen was not submitted but is needed to distinguish the cause of the azotemia.
interval. The protein values are difficult to interpret with certainty. Severe hemolysis will increase the
total protein concentration because of the presence of hemoglobin. Lipemia may decrease light
 transmittance through the serum specimen in the spectrophotometer, resulting in false high values,
especially in colorimetric endpoint assays. Such tests are commonly used to quantify total protein and
474
CASE STUDIES
albumin. The possibility of dehydration also is a consideration for the elevated protein values and
requires further investigation.
6. Increased ALT activity. The mild increase in ALT activity may be the result of increased
hepatocellular leakage or intracellular release of ALT associated with hemolysis of erythrocytes
(increased serum activity of AST and LDH also accompany hemolysis).
submitted on the clot. At room temperature, erythrocytes continue to consume glucose via anaerobic
  pup aq no i oui o dn asap a uo on ai sia
seizure activity in this patient resulted from hypoglycemia or if pseudohypoglycemia is an artifact of
erythrocyte metabolism of glucose.
8. Hyperkalemia (possibly pseudohyperkalemia). Hyperkalemia may accompany oliguria, anuria,
acidosis, or hemolysis in certain animal species. Certain Asian breeds of dogs (e.g., Akita, Shiba Inu),
 horses, and pigs have high intraerythrocytic potassium concentrations. Overt or covert hemolysis of
erythrocytes may result in fictitious hyperkalemia. Markedly increased platelet counts also can cause
an increase in serum K+ concentration; however, pseudothrombocytosis is probably present in this dog
(seeabove)
9. Decreased TCO with an increased anion gap. The decreased TCO, suggests metabolic acidosis;
however, the serum specimen was submitted on the clot. As erythrocytes continue to metabolize
glucose, lactic acid is produced via anaerobic metabolism. Lactic acid will titrate plasma bicarbonate,
resulting in fictitious acidosis. Accumulation of lactate, an unmeasured anion, also will result in an
increased anion gap.
10. Very mild hypercalcemia. Total calcium is measured by a colorimetric endpoint technique
Therefore, marked lipemia could cause a slight increase in calcium values. In addition, extreme
hemolysis also may falsely increase the calcium concentration. Hypercalcemia may accompany renal
disease, but is an unusual observation in dogs.
11. Hypophosphatemia. Hypophosphatemia is an unusual laboratory finding. Its presence in this
hypophosphatemia or hyperphosphatemia may be observed with hemolysis, depending upon the
analytical assay used.
12. Increased CK activity. Hemolysis results in increased CK activity in serum. Erythrocytes do not
contain CK; however, other substances released from erythrocytes are detected by the coupled
analytical reaction used to measure CK activity. The end result is a test value that reflects increased CK
activity.
13. Increased amylase activity. Increased amylase activity could be the result of necrotizing
 pancreatitis and/or decreased renal clearance of plasma enzyme activity.
14. Decreased lipase activity. Hemolysis directly inhibits lipase, resulting in decreased enzymatic
activity in the serum specimen.
SUMMARY: The blood and serum specimens for the CBC and biochemical profle are of limited
diagnostic use because of hemolysis, lipemia, and delayed shipment to the laboratory. This case
demonstrates that the laboratory result is only as useful as the quality of the specimen that is
s  p ui s e po sn u 'ia n on ns
 s ss   no n a (  ss 
is suspected), (2) in vitro hemolysis, (3) failure to separate serum from the clot, (4) improper specimen
storage, and (5) delay in conveying the specimen to the laboratory for analysis.
INDEX
 Note: Italicized page locators indicate a hgure/photo; tables
Acute intravascular hemolytic anemia (case 3), 389-391
are noted with a t.
laboratory data, 389-390
problems, 390-391
A
signalment, history, presenting problems, 389
AALA. See American Association for Laboratory
summary, 391
Accreditation
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, blood of horse, 84
 AAVLD. See American Association of Veterinary Laboratory
Acute lymphocytic leukemia, 91-92
Diagnosticians
dehnition and occurrence, 91
Abrupt water deprivation test, 273-274
differential diagnoses, 92
Absolute polycythemia, primary and secondary, 41
laboratory features, 92
Absolute reticulocyte count, formula for, 22
Acute myeloblastic leukemia, 96-97
 Absorption tests, 240
Acute myeloid leukemia, 96-98
Abyssinian cats, PK dehciency in, 5
classihcation, 96
Acanthocytes
subgroups, 96-98
description of, 19
Acute necrotizing pancreatitis, secondary hyperlipidemia
dog. 17
and, 189
Accelerated erythrocyte destruction, causes of, intravascular
Acute pancreatic necrosis (case 14), 418-420
vs. extravascular hemolysis, 31t
laboratory data, 418-419
Accreditation, Ior laboratories, 368
problems, 419-420
Accuracy, test validity and, 366
signalment, presenting problems, 418
Acetylcholine receptor antibodies, myasthenia gravis and,
summary, 420
289
Acute phase index, calculation of, 179
Acid-base balance, exercise and, 155
Acute phase protein methods, types of, 177
Acid-base disorders, common, electrolyte patterns in, I64
Acute-phase proteins, 178, 179
 Acid-base imbalance
assessing herd health status and, 180
Jaboratory differentiation of, 151t
measuring, 179
patterns of, 150
saliva as surrogate for blood in assessment of, 179-180
Acid-base regulation, 150
Acute-phase response, 179
Acidosis, Ieline inlectious panleukopenia and, 407
Acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) (case l8),
ACT. See Activated clotting time
430432
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone
laboratory data, 430-431
ACTH concentration, endogenous, measurement ol, 322
problems, 431-432
ACTH test, protocol and interpretation of, 320
signalment, presenting problems, 430
Actinomyces sp.
summary, 432
flamentous beaded bacteria typical ol, 335
Acute septic mastitis (case 21), 438-439
Activated clotting time, 132
laboratory data, 438
Activated factor IX, 127
problems, summary, 439
Activated [actor X, 127
signalment, presenting problems, 438
Activated partial thromboplastin time
Acute submassive or massive hepatic necrosis, 225
clotting factor activity and, 224
Acute undifferentiated leukemia, 96
prolonged, 135
Adenocarcinomas, nasal, 357
test, 136
Adenosine triphosphate
Acute granulocytic leukemia
creatine kinase and, 283
blood, cat, 85
Embden-Meyerhol pathway and, 5
lymph node, cat, 84
Adipokine assays, 187
475
476
INDEX
Adipokines, obesity and, 190
American Association Ior Laboratory Accreditation, 368
Adiponectin, obesity and, 190
American Association of Veterinary Laboratory
Adrenal cortex, 317-323
Diagnosticians, 368
basic concepts about, 317-318
American Cocker Spaniels, platelet dense granule defect in,
diseases of, 318-319
119
Jaboratory evaluation ol, 319-323
American Eskimo Dog
Adrenal function tests, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
methemoglobin reductase dehiciency in, 7
and,319
PK deficiency in, 5
Adrenal insuffciency with cortical atrophy, laboratory
AML. See Acute myeloid leukemia
hndings in, 323
Ammonia
Adrenocorticotropic hormone, 317, 319
metabolism of, 222
ADVIA-120, 55
 production of, in gastrointestinal tract, 221
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus larva and eosinophils, 345
 special handling and measurement of, 221
Alrican swine [ever virus, thrombocytopenia and, 121
in urine, 255
AG. See Anion gap
Ammonia tolerance test, 221
Agglutination
Ammonium biurate, in urine sediment, 267
description of, 18
Ammonium biurate crystalluria, hepatic failure and, 417
tests, 25
Ammonium biurate crystals, in urine sediment, 271
Aggregate reticulocytes, in cats, 21-22
Amoxicillin, renal tubwlar damage and high dosages of, 260
AgNOR score, 88
Ampicillin crystals, in urine, 272
AGP glycosylation ol, degree and nature, 180
Amylase
AID. See Anemia of inlammatory disease
measurement of, 23l-232
AIHA. See Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
serum amylase activity, characteristics of, 232-233
Akita
Anal sac, apocrine gland adenocarcinoma ol, 300
microcytic erthrocytes in, 14
Analytical method parameters, reference intervals and, 370
microcytosis without anemia in, 40
Analytical sensitivity, test validity and, 366
Alanine aminotransferase
Analytical test errors, 366, 367
hepatocellular leakage and, 211
Anaplasma centrale, 21
hepatocellular leakage enzymes and, 213
Anaplasma marginale, 21
muscle and, 284
in cow, I7
Alaskan Malamutes, stomatocytosis with macrocytosis in,
Anaplasma phagocytophilum morulae, in cytoplasm of two
15
neutrophils, 62
Albumin
Anaplasma platys, in dog, 17
anion gap and, 153
Anaplasmataceae spp. bacteria, in leukocytes, 61
concentrations, abnormalities in, 223-224
Ancylostomiasis, 385
measuring,176
Androgens, Epo release and, 11
 percentage of, in total serum protein concentration, 173
Anemia of chronic disorders
serum half-life of, 223
[eline inlectious peritonitis and, 401
Albumin/globulin (A/G) ratio, calculating, 177
multicentric lymphoma and, 409
Aldolase, in muscle, 285
renal abscess and secondary disseminated intravascular
Algae, in urine, 271
coagulation and, 411
Alimentary lymphoma, 87, 89
Anemia of chronic renal disease, renal amyloidosis and,
Alkaline phosphatase
434
cholestasis and, 212
Anemia of inflammatory disease, 37-38
induced hepatic enzymes and, 214-215
Anemia(s)
urine activity and, 264
Irom accelerated erythrocyte destruction, 30, 3lt, 32-35
Alkaline urine with triple phosphate crystalluria, urea
[rom blood loss, 28-30
toxicosis and, 461
in chronic renal disease, 279
ALL. See Acute lymphocytic leukemia
classihcation, 27-28
ALP See Alkaline phosphatase
according to bone marrow response, 27-28
ALP activity, increased, hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes
according to major pathophysiologic mechanisms, 28
mellitus, with other complications and, 471
according to size and Hb concentration, 27
Alpha-globulins, 174, 174, 175
clinical signs and physical hndings, 26
Alpha granules, 108-109
defined,26
ALP isoenzymes, types ol, 215-216
diagnosis, 26-27
ALT. See Alanine aminotransferase
external vs. internal hemorrhage, differential features,
ALT activity, increased
29-30
arti facts of lipemia, hemolysis, improper sample
history, 26
handling and, 474
laboratory hndings, 26-27
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
microangiopathic, 35
complications and, 471
Irom reduced or defective erythropoiesis, 35-40
urea toxicosis and, 460
causes of, 36t
INDEX
477
diferentiation of, 37-40
AST. See Aspartate aminotransferase
general considerations, 36-37
Asynchronous nuclear maturation, 60
Anestrus, cytologic characteristics of, 360
AT activity 137
Anion gap
Ataxia, circling, hepatic encephalopathy and, 413
albumin and, 153
Atoxoplasma sp., in cytoplasm of avian lymphocytes, 63
electrolytes and, 151-153
ATP See Adenosine triphosphate
calculations, 152
A-type natriuretic peptides, 288
interpretation of, 152-153
AUL. See Acute undiflerentiated leukemia
methods of measurement, 15l-152
Australian Shepherds, Pelger-Huet anomaly in, 60
elevated, urea toxicosis and, 460
Autoagglutination, immune-mediated anemia, in dog, 17
high with metabolic acidosis, end stage renal disease
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, 32
with uremic pneumonitis and, 464
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia
Anisocytosis
(case 2), 386-388
description of, 18
laboratory data, 386-387
urea toxicosis and, 459
problems, 387-388
Anorexia
signalment, medical history, presenting problems, 386
[eline infectious peritonitis and, 400
summary, 388
hepatic encephalopathy and, 413
Automated cell counters, 58
hepatic lipidosis and, 225
Automated diflerential leukocyte counts, 55
Antibiotic-responsive diarrhea, 240
Automated platelet counts, 1l1
Antibody detection, 24-26
Avian coagulation and hbrinolysis, 132
Antibody production, lymphocytes and, 58
Avian erythrocytes, morphology, 18
Anticoagulation, disorders in, 128-129
Avian heterophil, monocyte, thrombocyte, 46
Anti-erythrocyte antibodies
Avian heterophils, 45
detection of, 25-26
morphology of, 49
antiglobulin (Coombs) test, 25-26, 32
normal and toxic,47
blood cross matching, 25
toxic changes in, 60
Antigen detection, 24-26
Avian lymphoma, anatomic, functional, and laboratory
Antiglobulin (Coombs) test, 25-26, 32
[eatures, 90
Antiplatelet antibody, 114
Avian species, erythropoiesis in, 9
Anti-T4 autoantibodies, in dogs, 310
Avian thrombocytes, morphology, 109
Antithrombin dehciency, 128
Avian urine collection, 254
Anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies, 309-310
Azotemia
Aperture closure instruments, 114
acute intravascular hemolytic anemia and, 390
Aperture impedance flow automated hematology
acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
instruments, 11l
 Paraquat toxicosis) and, 446
API. See Acute phase index
acute salmonellosis and, 398
Aplastic anemia, causes of, 38
arti lacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
 APTT. See Activated partial thromboplastin time
handling and, 473
 Arabian foals, severe combined immunodehciency disease
dehned, 273
in, 182
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and.
Arterial partial pressure of oxygen, 148
464
Arterial PCO, 168-169
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
Arterial PO, 167-168
complications and, 470
 Artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis and, 429
handling (case 35), 472-474
 nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 441
laboratory data, 472-473
postrenal, 276
problems, 473-474
[eline lower urinary tract disease and, 437
signalment, presenting problems, comment, 472
prerenal, 275-276
 acute pancreatic necrosis and, 419
Ascites, in dogs with heart ailure, 351
pyometra and, 403-404
Aspartate aminotransferase
renal, 276
diagnostic signifcance ol, 285, 287
renal amyloidosis and, 434
diseases of muscle origin and, 286t
renal failure and, 423
hepatocellular leakage and, 211
Azurophilic granules, 45
hepatocellular leakage enzymes and, 214
increased activity o
muscle disease and, 429
Babesia bigemina, 21
urea toxicosis and, 460
Babesia bovis, 21
muscle and, 284
Babesia caballi, 21
skeletal muscle disease in birds and, 287
Babesia canis, I7, 21
Aspergillus sp., nasal infections and, 357
Babesia cati, 21
478
INDEX
Babesia equi, 21
Biliprotein,218
Babesia felis, 21
Bilirubin
Babesia gibsoni, 21
conjugated, 217,218, 219, 261
Babesia motasi, 21
with hyaline cast, spermatozoa, and leukocytes, in urine
Babesia ovis, 21
sediment, 267
Bacilli, 270
 interpretation of positive test result, 261
Bacteria
measurement of, 218, 261
in urine sediment, 266, 270-271
metabolism of, 217, 217
identilying features, 270-271
physiology ol, 261
significance of bacteriuria, 271
types of, 217-218
BALT. See Bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue
wnconjugated, 217, 219, 261
Band, granulopoiesis, 49,49
uptake and excretion, hepatic function evaluation and,
 Barbiturates, hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
212
Base excess, 149
Bilirubin concentration, urea toxicosis and, 461
Basenjis
Bilirubin crystals, in urine sediment, 271
basal serum T4 and IT4 concentrations in, 309
Bilirubinuria, 218, 261
glucosuria in, 260
acute pancreatic necrosis and, 419
PK dehciency in, 5
hepatic [ailure and, 417
Basopenia, 77
Biliverdin,219
Basophil colony-forming units, 8
erythrocyte destruction and, 11, 12
Basophilia
heme catabolism in birds and, 261
causes of, 76t
Biliverdinemia, 219
 description and mechanisms ol, 76-77
Biopsies, bone marrow, 24
Basophilic leukemia, blood of dog, 86
Birds
Basophilic stippling
age-related changes in plasma proteins in, 173
description of, 20
biliverdin in, 219
lead toxicosis, dog, 17
biuret method for total protein measurement in, 176
regenerative anemia, cow, 17
blood glucose values in, vs. in mammals, 191
Basophils, 45, 54-55
BUN interpretation in, 276-277
canine, 47
corticosteroid-induced heterophilia in, 68
 degranulated, 61
 flamentous organisms typical of megabacteria ol, 335
equine, 47
GGT and biliary disease in, 216
Jeline, 47, 48
glucose metabolism in, 193
function, 55
glucosuria in, 260
mammalian, 55
heteropenia in, 71-73, 72t
morphology, 54-55
heterophilia in, 64-71
production and kinetics, 55
hyperuricemia and renal disease in, 278
Basset Hound thrombopathia, 118
lymphoid neoplasia in, 83
BE. See Base excess
lymphoma in, 90
Beagle, PK dehciency in, 5
megabacteria ol, 338
 Belgian Tervuren dogs, inherited familial neutropenia in, 73
neutrophilia and heterophilia of inllammation/infection
Bence Jones proteinuria, 94, 258
in, 71
Benzene, thrombocytopenia and, 121
reticulocytes in, 21
Beta-globulins, 174, 174, 175
thyroid function testing in, 312
 Beta-glucuronidase, urine activity and, 264
urinalysis, not use[ul in, 253
 Beta-lactam antibiotics, hyporesponsive platelets and, 120 
urine osmolality measurement in, 257
 BFU-E. See Erythroid burst-orming units
urine transparency in, 255
BFU-MK. See Burst-forming unit megakaryocyte
xanthomas in, 338
Bicarbonate, Iractional clearance of, 279
 Birman cat neutrophil abnormality, 64
Bicarbonate ion, 148
Biuret method, Ior total protein measurement, 175, 176
Bile acids
Blastomyces dermatitidis yeasts, 334, 338
increased/decreased concentration ol, 221
Bleeding time, 115
metabolism of, 220
Blister beetle toxicosis, in horses, hypocalcemia and, 302
testing,219, 221
Blood, neutrophil kinetics in, 51
uptake and excretion, hepatic function evaluation and.
Blood cross matching, detection of anti-erythrocyte
212
antibodies and, 25
Bile peritonitis
Blood gases
ellusions and, 351
analysis of
 intracellular and free bile pigment in, 344
arterial partial pressure of oxygen, 148
Bile salts, 219
base excess, 149
Biliary obstruction, biochemical profle, 228t
bicarbonate ion, 148-149
INDEX
479
hydrogen ion concentration, 148
Borzoi, methemoglobin reductase dehciency in, 7
instrumentation, 147
Botrocetin assays, 116
partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 148
Bovine erythrocytes
sample management, 147-148
morphology of, 16
determination of, 147-149
platelets and,17
acid-base regulation, 150
Bovine leukemia virus, 91
blood gas analysis, 147-149
Bovine lymphoma
pulse oximetry, 148, 149-150
anatomic, functional, and laboratory [eatures, 91
total carbon dioxide content, 149
role of bovine leukemia virus in, 91
Blood glucose concentration
Bovine renal [ailure, 280
maintenance of, 193
Bovine thrombopathia, 118
measuring. 195
Bovine viral diarrhea, thrombocytopenia and, 121
Blood glucose meters, 194
Bowel obstruction, serum lipase activity and, 233
Blood loss, 28-29
Briard dogs, primary hypercholesterolemia ol, 188
acute, characteristics of, 28-29
Bromosulphalein, 223
causes of, 28t
Bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue, 57, 58
chronic, characteristics of, 29
Brown urine, acute intravascular hemolytic anemia and,
Blood pH, variations of, 154-155
391
Blood smears
BSP. See Bromosulphalein
evaluation, leukocytes, 59-61, 64
BT-PABA absorption test, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
 peripheral, staining and examination of, 15-16
and, 239
platelet evaluation/determination from, 1l2-113
B-type natriuretic peptides, 288
Blood wrea nitrogen, 274-277
Buccal mucosal bleeding time, 115
 in birds, interpretation of, 276-277
prolonged, disseminated intravascular coagulation and,
increased concentration
411
hyperthyroidism and, 454
von Willebrand's disease and, 457
interpretation of, 275-276
Budgerigars, xanthomas in, 338
urea toxicosis and, 460
BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen
measurement methods, 275
Burmese cats, lipid aqueous in, 188
metabolism concepts, 274-275
Burst-forming unit megakaryocyte, 109
wrea excretion, 275
“Blue eye,” 188
C
BLV. See Bovine leukemia virus
Cairn Terrier, PK dehciency in, 5
B lymphocytes, 57
Calcitonin, production ol, 297
 BMBT. See Buccal mucosal bleeding time
Calcium, 297-299
Body cavity efusions, 347-352
laboratory abnormalities in, 299-304
classification ol, 349-350
major disorders involving, 296
Mluid analysis, 348-349
measurement of, 298-299
color, 348
colorimetric methods, 298
cytology, 348-349
jon-selective electrodes, 298
nucleated cell counts, 348
urinary calcium excretion, 298-299
protein determination, 348
serum calcium concentration and dietary intake of, 298
general considerations, 347-348
total serum calcium, forms of, 297
mesothelial cells, 343
Calcium carbonate, with hyaline cast, spermatozoa, and
speciic conditions, 350-352
leukocytes, in urine sediment, 267
 Bone ALP isoenzyme, 216
Calcium channel blockers, hyporesponsive platelets and,
Bone marrow
120
hematopoietic and leukemic cells in, I0
Calcium oxalate dihydrate, in urine sediment, 268
neutrophil release Irom, 51
Calcium oxalate dihydrate crystals, in urine, 272
Bone marrow examination, 23-24
Calcium oxalate monohydate, in urine sediment,267
indications for, 23
Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystalluria, acute renal
stained bone marrow smear, 24
[ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 431
technique, 23-24
Calcium oxalates, in urine sediment, 271-272
Bone marrow lailure, primary and secondary, anemia Irom
Calcium-sensing receptor, 295
reduced or defective erythropoiesis and, 37
CalDAG-GEFI platelet disorders, 118
Bone marrow hyperplasia, chronic hemorrhagic anemia
CALP See Corticosteroid ALP isoenzyme
and, 396
CALT. See Conjunctival-associated lymphoid tissue
Bone marrow neutrophils
Calves, hypomagnesemia in, 304
maturation and storage compartment, 50
Camelidae erythrocytes, morphology ol, 18
proliferation or mitotic compartment, 50
Camelidae [amily, elliptical erythrocytes in members ol, 40
 Bone marrow panhypoplasia, 121
cAMP See Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
480
INDEX
Campylobacter spp., 246
[eline infectious panleukopenia (parvovirus infection),
Cancer, neoplasms arising Irom hematopoietic cells and.
405-407
83
[eline infectious peritonitis, 400-401
Candida spp.
[eline lower urinary tract disease, 436-437
in urinary sediment, 265
hemorrhagic anemia (ancylostomiasis), 385
yeasts, 338, 346
hepatic encephalopathy (hepatic hbrosis), 413-414
Canine acute lymphocytic leukemia, lymphoblasts in, I0
hyperadrenocorticism, 450-452
Canine bladder tumor antigen test, 264
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus with
 Canine distemper inclusions, in neutrophil and
ketoacidosis, hyperosmolality, necrotizing pancreatitis,
erythrocytes, 62
and UTI, 468-471
Canine distemper virus, in leukocytes, 61
hyperthyroidism, 453-455
Canine eosinophil and basophil, 47
inlammatory bowel disease, 424-426
Canine erythrocytes
multicentric lymphoma, 408-409
morphology of, 16
muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis, 427-429
platelets and, 17
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage, 440-442
Canine Franconi-like syndrome, glucosuria and, 260
portosystemic venous shunt with hepatic atrophy,
Canine granulocytic ehrlichiosis, 61
415-417
Canine lymphoma, 88-89
 possible glucocorticoid suppression ol thyroid Junction,
anatomic and functional features, 88-89
466
laboratory features, 89
primary hypothyroidism (and phenobarbital
Canine mature small lymphocyte, 48
administration),467
Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis, 61
pyometra, 402-404
Canine myeloblastic leukemia, promyelocytes in, 10
renal abscess and secondary disseminated intravascular
Canine neutrophils, 46
coagulation, 410-412
Histoplasma capsulatu yeasts in cytoplasm ol, 62
renal amyloidosis, 433-435
Canine parvoviral enteritis, neutropenia and, 72
right abomasal displacement, 443-444
Canine plasma cell myeloma, plasma cells in, I0
rodenticide toxicosis, 447-449
Canine reactive lymphocyte or immunocyte, 48
urea toxicosis, 458-461
Canine reticulocytes, 17
von Willebrand's disease, 456-457
Canine transmissible venereal tumor, 337
CaSR. See Calcium-sensing receptor
Capillaria plica, in urine specimens, 271
Casts
Capillaria plica ovum, in urinary sediment, 265
types of, 270
Capillary electrophoresis, 177
in urine sediment examination, 270
Caprine erythrocytes, morphology of, 18
Catecholamines
Carboxylated [actors (Il, VI1, IX, and X), 125
eosinopenia and, 75
Carcinomas, nasal, 357
glycogenolysis and, 191
Cardiac disease
Catheterized urine specimens, 253-254
hepatic disorders and, biochemical profle, 228t
Cats
troponins and, 183
bilirubinuria in, 261
Cardiac troponins, muscle disease and, 287-288
chronic renal disease and hypocalcemia in, 302
Case studies, 383-474
continuous glucose monitoring devices used for, 194
acute intravascular hemolytic anemia (red maple
corticosteroid-induced neutrophilia in mammals/
toxicosis), 389-391
heterophilia in birds and, 67-68
acute pancreatic necrosis, 418-420
 diagnosis of exocrine pancreatic insufhciency in,
238-239
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis), 430-432
erythroleukemia in, 98
acute salmonellosis, 397-399
estimates of regeneration for punctate reticulocytes in,
acute septic mastitis, 438-439
23
artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
glucosuria in, 260
handling, 472-474
hemophilia B in, 127
autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia.
hypercalcemia in, 299
386-388
hypereosinophilic syndrome in, 74
chronic hemorrhagic anemia (iron-lack anemia),
hyperthyroidism in, 453-455
394-396
intestinal isoenzyme of ALP in, 216
early primary hypothyroidism, 465
lymphoma in, 89-90
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis,
metabolic acidosis and renal ailure in, 280
462464
 neutrophilia and heterophilia of inlammation/infection
estrogen-induced pancytopenia (Sertoli cell tumor),
in, 70
392-393
obesity in, 190
exocrine pancreatic insufhiciency, diabetes mellitus, and
pancreatitis in, 234, 237
chronic renal [ailure, 421-423
diagnostic steps for, 237-238
INDEX
481
parvovirus infection in, 405-407
Chloramphenicol, inhibition of heme synthesis and, 3
performing TRH stimulation test in, 315
Cholangiohepatitis, clinical features, characteristics, and
platelet counts for, 111
laboratory fndings on, 226
polycythemia vera in, 100
Cholangitis
retieulocytes in, 21-22
biochemical profle, 228t
Cattle
 clinical leatures, characteristics, and laboratory fndings
cold hemoglobinuria ol, 35
on, 226
corticosteroid-induced neutrophilia in mammals/
Cholestasis, 218
heterophilia in birds and, 68
acute pancreatic necrosis and, 419
high serum LDH activity and lymphoma in, 287
defined, 212
hypomagnesemia in, 304
Cholesterol, 183
ketonuria and ketosis of, 261
lipoprotein proiles and, 185
Jymphoma in, 91
Cholesterol crystals, in urine, 272
neutrophilia and heterophilia of inlammation/infection
Cholesterol esters, 183
in, 70
Cholesterol ester-transfer protein, lack of, 185
parturient paresis and hypocalcemia in, 302
Chondrosarcomas, nasal, 357
polycythemia vera in, 100
Chow Chow
renal disease and hypocalcemia in, 280
microcytic erthrocytes in, 14
variability of erythrocyte antigens in, 25
microcytosis without anemia in, 40
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
Christmas [actor, 124
macrothrombocytopenia in, 119
Chromogenic technique, Protein C and, 137
thrombocytopenia in, 112
Chronic basophilic leukemia, 99
CBA. See Collagen-binding activity assay
Chronic eosinophilic leukemia, 99
CD34+ cells, 7
Chronic granulocytic leukemia, characteristics ol, 99
Cell counters, automated, 13, 14, 58
Chronic hemorrhagic anemia (case 5), 394-396
Cellular casts, 270
laboratory data, 394-395
Centrilobular hepatic lesions caused by hypoxia, 224-225
problems, 395-396
dlinical features and characteristics ol, 224
signalment, presenting problems, 394
laboratory hndings on, 224-225
summary, 396
Cerebrospinal luid, 354-356
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 92-93
cytologic examination, 355-356
blood, horse, 84
general considerations, 354
dehnition and occurrence, 92
gross appearance, 354
differential diagnoses, 93
with pleocytosis and Cryptococcus neoformans yeasts, 344
laboratory [eatures, 92-93
protein, 355
Chronic monocytic leukemia, 100
special tests, 356
Chronic myeloid leukemia, 99-100
total nucleated cell count, 355
dehnition, 99
Cerebrospinal fluid CK activity, central nervous system
subgroups, 99-100
disease and, 287
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, 100
Ceruloplasmin,180
Chronic renal disease
iron transport and, 5
hyperthyroidism and, 313
CFU-Bas. See Basophil colony-forming units
hypocalcemia and, 302
CFU-E. See Erythroid colony-forming units
Chylomicra,185
CFU-G. See Granulocyte colony-forming units
Chylous elusions, 350
CFU-GEMM. See Myeloid stem cell
Ciliated epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages, 345
CFU-GM. See Granulocyte/monocyte colony-forming units
Circovirus, heteropenia in birds and, 72
CFU-M. See Monocyte colony-forming units
Citrated plasma clotting tests, 133-136
CFU-Meg. See Megakaryocytic colony-forming units
activated partial thromboplastin time, 135
CFU-MK. See Colony-forming-unit-megakaryocyte
methods, 134-135
CGL. See Chronic granulocytic leukemia
prothrombin time, 135-136
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, 64, 118
Russell viper venom test, 136
Chelated or complex calcium, 297
sample management, 133-134
Chemistry re[erence intervals, 374-375t
specihc factor analysis, 136
Chemokine receptor 4, 110
thrombin time, 136
Chemotaxis, neutrophils and, 51
CK. See Creatine kinase
 Chemotherapeutic agents, thrombocytopenia and, 121
CK-BB,283
Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, Iype 3 VWD in, 118
CK-MB, 283
Chih uah ua
CK-MM, 283
methemoglobin reductase dehciency in, 7
Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid
PK dehciency in, 5
Tissues (WHO), 96
Chlamydophila psittaci, in cytoplasm of avian monocyte, 63
"Clean catch" urine collection, 253
482
INDEX
CLL. See Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Congenital portosystemic shunts
Clostridium sordelli, equine hyperammonemia and, 245
chronic, progressive, 228t
Clostridium spp.
clinical leatures, characteristics, and laboratory fndings
in inflammatory lesions, 338
on, 227
testing for, malabsorption and, 240
Conjugated bilirubin, 217, 218, 219, 261
Clot retraction evaluation scale, I116
Conjunctival-associated lymphoid tissue, 57
Clot retraction test, 115-116
Coomassie Briliant Blue RG 230, dye-binding method [or
Clotting [actor activity, liver and, 224
total protein measurement, 175
Cluster of differentiation (CD) markers, 83
Coombs tests. See Antiglobulin (Coombs) tests
CML. See Chronic myeloid leukemia
Coonhounds, Pelger-Huet anomaly in, 60
Coagulation
COP See Colloid osmotic pressure
avian, 132
Ot 'pue eruaue auaoyap uou Xouaoyap raddo
defined, 107
Copper reduction tablet method, glucosuria and, 260
laboratory evaluation of, 132-138
Corrected reticulocyte percentage, formula for, 22
mechanisms and disorder of extrinsic pathway ol,
Corticosteroid administration, serum lipase activity and,
126
234
mechanisms and disorders oI common pathway of,
Corticosteroid ALP isoenzyme, 215-216
128-129
Corticosteroid hepatopathy
mechanisms of, 123-126
biochemical profle, 228t
 clinical leatures, characteristics, and laboratory fndings
449
on, 226
Cobalamin, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and.
Corticosteroid-induced neutrophilia in mammals/
240-241
heterophilia in birds, 66-68
Cobalamin concentration, malassimilation diseases and
eosinopenia, causes, 67
typical laboratory changes in, 24lt
leukogram hndings, 66-67
Cobalamin measurements, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
lymphopenia, causes, 67
and, 239
mechanisms, 67
Cocci, 270
 possible clinical hndings, 67
Coccidia, 339
species characteristics
Coccidioides immitis yeasts, 338
birds, 68
surrounded by inlammatory cells, 335
cats, 67-68
Cockatiels, xanthomas in, 338
cattle, 68
Cocker Spaniel-Poodle cross, methemoglobin reductase
dogs. 67
dehciency in, 7
horses, 68
Cocker Spaniels, PFK dehciency in, 7
Corticosteroids, gluconeogenesis and, 192
Codocytes, description of, 19-20
Cortisol concentration, high baseline, hyperadrenocorticism
COLA, 368
and diabetes mellitus, with other complications and, 471
Collagen-binding activity assay, 116
Coumarin toxicosis, 447449
Colloid osmometry, 182-183
Cows
Colloid osmotic pressure
acid-base status of, 280
serum or plasma
acute septic mastitis in, 438-439
determination of, 182-183
glucosuria in,260
estimation of, 183
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage in, 440-442
physiologic considerations, 182
right abomasal displacement in, 443-444
Colony-forming-unit-megakaryocyte, 109
urea toxicosis in, 458-461
Colony-stimulating factors
CRD. See Chronic renal disease
monocytes as major source of, 53
C-reactive protein, 179
Colony-stimulating [actors, granulopoiesis and, 49
pancreatic inflammation and necrosis and, 236
Colorimetric methods
Creatine kinase
for calcium measurement, 298
diagnostic signihcance ol, 285, 287
for phosphorus measurement, 299
diseases of muscle origin and, 286t
 Colorimetric reagent strips, reading, 194
increased activity, urea toxicosis and, 460
Colostral antibody, detecting lailure of passive transler ol.
muscle and principal isoenzymes of, 283-284
in foals and calves, 176-177
skeletal muscle disease in birds and, 287
Colostrum, mare, antibodies in, 25
Creatinine, metabolism of, 277
Commercial laboratories, quality control in, 367-368
CRH, 319
Complete blood count
Cross match tests, detection of anti-erythrocyte antibodies
megaesophagus and, 244
and, 25
pancreatic inflammation and necrosis and, 235
Cryoglobulinemia, 94
testing for, malabsorption and, 240
Cryptococcus neoformans yeast, 334, 338
Confrmatory tests, 378
Cryptosporidiosis, testing for, malabsorption and, 240
INDEX
483
Crystalluria, 271-272
specimen collection and handling, 331-333
CSFs. See Colony-stimulating Jactors
fne-needle aspiration, 331-332
cTnl, 183
fluids,332
cTnT, 183
smear preparation, 332-333
Curschmann's spirals, 345
 stab method/nonaspiration hne-needle biopsy, 332
Cushing's syndrome, 317
swabs, 332
Cutaneous lymphoma, 87
tissue imprints, 331
Cut-offs
tissue scrapings, 331
choosing, 376
synovial uid, 352-354
decreased value and, 378
appearance,352
dehined, 373
cytologic examination, 353-354
increased value and, 379
mucin clot test, 352-353
receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve, 379
nucleated cell count, 353
Cyanide-Iree hemoglobinhydroxylamine complex method,
protein, 353
Hb concentration and, 13
viscosity, 352
Cyanmethemoglobin technique, Hb concentration and, 13
vaginal, 360-361
 Cyclic adenosine monophosphate, production ol, 107
 cell collection, 360
Cyclic hematopoiesis, 73, 119
 cytologic characteristics of estrus cycle, 360
 Cyclooxygenase inhibitors, hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
normal cells, 360
Cystine crystals, in urine, 268, 272
reproductive diseases, 360-361
Cystocentesis specimens, 254
Cytoplasmic basophilia, 60
Cytauxzoon felis, 21
Cytoplasmic enzymes, evaluation of, 213-214
Cytokines,49
Cytoplasmic vacuolation, 60
Cytologic examination, for synovial fluid analysis, 353
Cytotoxicity,58
Cytology, 331-361
body cavity elfusions, 347-352
D
bile peritonitis, 351
Dacryocytes, description of, 19
chylous elfusions, 350
Dalmations, uric acid crystals in, 272
classifcation of, 349-350
D-dimer, 137
egg yolk peritonitis, 351-352
DEA. See Dog erythrocyte antigen
exudates, 350
Defective erythropoiesis
[eline infectious peritonitis, 350
anemia from
fluid analysis, 348-349
causes of, 36t
general considerations, 347-348
differentiation of, 37-40
heart [ailure, 350-351
general considerations, 36-37
hemorrhagic, 351
 Degranulated eosinophils, 61
neoplasms, 351
canine, 47
specihc conditions, 350-352
Dehydration
woperitoneum, 351
evaluation of, 145
cerebrospinal Mluid, 354-356
relative polycythemia and, 41
cytologic examination, 355-356
DELAT test, 26, 32
general considerations, 354
Dendritic cell neoplasms, 100-101
gross appearance, 354
defnition, 100-101
protein,355
subgroups, 101
special tests, 356
Dense granules, 109
total nucleated cell count, 355
Devon Rex cats, inherited vitamin-K-dependent multifactor
diagnosis of digestive disorders and, 246
coagulopathies in, 129
equine endometrial, method of collection and cytologic
Dexamethasone suppression test
examination, 361
high-dose, 321
inlammatory lesions, 333, 338-339
low-dose, 320-321
lymph nodes, 342, 347
 Dextrose-containng parenteral fluids, hyperglycemia and,
hyperplastic/reactive, 347
192
lymphadenitis, 347
Diabetes control devices, 194
lymphoma, 347
Diabetes mellitus, 193, 315
metastatic neoplasia, 347
hepatic lipidosis and, 225
normal, 342, 347
hyperadrenocorticism and, 468-471
neoplasms, 340-342
hypocalcemia and, 301
noninflammatory, nonneoplastic lesions, 339-340
ketonuria and, 261
respiratory system, 356-359
 Jaboratory assessment of endocrine pancreas and,
nasal exudates and masses, 356-358
316-317
tracheo-bronchoalveolar cytology, 358-359
secondary hyperlipidemia and, 189
484
INDEX
Diarrhea, clinical investigation ol, 240
detecting transitional cell carcinoma antigens in urine
Diazotization method, for bilirubin measurement, 261
ol, 264
DIC. See Disseminated intravascular coagulation
diagnosis of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in,
Diestrus, cytologic characteristics of, 360
238-239
Diff-Quick, 16
early primary hypothyroidism in, 465
Diffuse pattern of lymphoma, 87
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis in,
Digestive system, 231246
462464
cytology, 246
erythrocyte antigens and, 25
equine hyperammonemia, laboratory detection of,
erythropoietin administration in, 121
245-246
estrogen-induced pancytopenia in, 392-393
exocrine pancreas, 231
exocrine pancreatic insufhciency, diabetes mellitus and
malassimilation attributable to malabsorption, laboratory
chronic renal [ailure in, 421-423
detection of, 239-243
exocrine pancreatic insulhciency in, 238
malassimilation attributable to maldigestion, laboratory
glucosuria in, 260
detection of, 238-239
granulomatous disease and hypercalcemia in, 301
megaesophagus, laboratory detection of, 243-244
hemorrhagic anemia in, 385
pancreatitis, laboratory detection of, 231-238
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus in, with
 protein-losing enteropathy, laboratory detection of,
ketoacidosis, hyperosmolality, necrotizing pancreatitis,
244-245
and UTI, 468-471
Diltiazem, hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
hyperadrenocorticism in, 450-452
 Diluted samples technique, electrolytes and anion gap and,
hyperadrenocorticism in, serum alkaline phosphatase
152
activity and, 322
Dioctophyma renale, in urine specimens, 271
hypercalcemia and renal disease in, 300
Dioctophyma renale ova, in urinary sediment, 266
hypercalcemia in, 299
Dipetalonema reconditum, 21
hypoalbuminemic, 298
Dipstick ELISA test, for detecting IgG, 177
hypothyroid, hypercholesterolemia in, 313
Dipstick tests, urine protein quantitation and, 257
hypothyroid, serum TSH concentrations in, 309
Direct-reading bilirubin, 218
inllammatory bowel disease in, 424-426
Dirofilaria immitis, 21
inlluence of breed on T4 and ∫T4 concentrations in,
in urine specimens, 271
308-309
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
intestinal isoenzyme of ALP in, 216
hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
lymphoma in, 88-89
schistocytes and, 19
megaesophagus in, 243
secondary, renal abscess and, 410-412
metabolic acidosis and renal failure in, 280
Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndrome, acquired
multicentric lymphoma in, 408-409
dehciency of nonenzymatic [actors in, 128
neutrophilia and heterophilia of inllammation/inlection
Distemper inclusions, in canine erythrocytes, description
in, 70
ol, 21
obesity in, 190
 Divalent metal transporter 1, 5
pancreatitis in, diagnostic steps for, 237
D-lactate, 200
pericardial effusions in, 351
DMTl. See Divalent metal transporter l
polycythemia vera in, 100
Dogs
primary hypothyroidism (and phenobarbital
absolute reticulocyte count and estimated degrees of
administration) in, 467
regeneration for, 22
 primary hypothyroidism in, comparing single/multiple
acquired von Willebrand disease in, 118
analytes for sensitivity, specihcity, and accuracy in,
ACTH test and, 320
31lt
acute pancreatic necrosis in, 418-420
pure megakaryocytic hypoplasia in, 121
acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
pyometra in, 402-404
Paraquat toxicosis) in, 445-446
renal abscess and secondary disseminated intravascular
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) in,
coagulation in, 410-412
430432
renal amyloidosis (nephrotic syndrome) in, 433-435
anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies in, 309
reticulocytes in, 21
artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
rodenticide (coumarin) toxicosis in, 447-449
handling in, 472-474
serum CK activity in, 284
autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia
serum lipase activity in, 233
in,386-388
small intestinal malabsorptive disease in, 240
chronic hemorrhagic anemia in, 394-396
von Willebrand's disease in, 456-457
chronic renal disease and hypocalcemia in, 302
Dohle bodies, 60
continuous glucose monitoring devices used for, 194
Drentse-Patrijshond, stomatocytosis with macrocytosis in,
corticosteroid-induced neutrophilia in mammals/
15
heterophilia in birds and, 67
Drug-induced thrombocytopenia, 122
INDEX
485
Ducks, urine transparency in, 255
Endocrine system, 295-323
Dutch Kooikers, Type 3 VWD in, 118
adrenal cortex, 317-323
Dye-binding method, Ior total protein measurement, 175
endocrine pancreas, 315-317
Dye clearance tests, 223
laboratory abnormalities in calcium, phosphorus, and
Dyserythropoiesis
magnesium imbalance, 299-304
anemia, maturation abnormalities and, 37
overview of, 295, 297-299
in English Springer Spaniels, 40
 parathyroid gland, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium 
 Dysproteinemias. See Protein abnormalities
and, 295
(dysproteinemias)
thyroid function, 304-315
Dysthrombocytopoiesis, 123
Endogenous creatinine clearance, calculating, 278
Dystrophin, muscular dystrophy and, 289
Endogenous lipids, 184
Endometrial cytology, 346
E
Endometrial epithelial cells and [ree cilia, 346
Eccentrocytes
Endothelial cells, 107
description of, 20
antithrombotic properties of, 107-108
onion toxicosis, dog, 17
procoagulant properties that follow stimulation of, 108
Echinocytes
Endothelium, 107
description of, 19
damage to, 108
dog. 17
 End stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis (case 30),
EctoADPase release, 108
462-464
EDTA
laboratory data, 462-463
automated platelet counts and, 1ll
problems, 463-464
luid collection and, 332
signalment, medical history, presenting problems,
monocytes and, 52
radiographic hndings, 462
EDTA-induced platelet clumping, 112
summary, 464
Effusions
Endurance exercise, acid-base balance, electrolytes and,
bile peritonitis and, 351
155
chylous, 350
 English Springer Spaniels
classifcation of, 347, 349-350
dyserythropoiesis in, 40
[eline infectious peritonitis as cause of, 350
PFK dehiciency in, 7
hemorrhagic, 351
Enhanced platelet [unction, 120-121
pericardial, 351
Enteritis, serum lipase activity and, 233
uroperitoneum and, 351
Enterocolitis, hyperlipidemia secondary to, 189
EGF See Epidermal growth factor
Enzymatic lactors, 124-125
Egg yolk peritonitis, ellusions and, 351-352
Enzyme activity, in urine, 264
Ehrlichia canis,61
Eosinopenia
hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
corticosteroid or “stress" leukogram and, 236
Ehrlichia weingi, 61
description and mechanisms ol, 75-76
Ehrlichia weingi morulae, in cytoplasm of canine
hyperadrenocorticism and, 451
neutrophil, 62
neutrophilia and heterophilia of inflammation and, 68
 Ehrlichiosis, thrombocytopenia and, 121
Eosinophilia
Ehrlich's diazo reaction, 262
causes of, 75t
 Electrolyte clearance, quantilying, 279
description and mechanisms ol, 74
Electrolyte concentrations, variations of, 154-155
hyperthyroidism and, 454
Electrolytes
Eosinophilic inflammation,359
anion gap and, 151-153
Eosinophilic leukemia, blood of horse, 86
calculations, 152
Eosinophilic myeloprolilerative disease, bone marrow ol 
interpretation of, 152-153
horse, 86
methods of measurement, 151-152
Eosinophils, 45, 54, 346
disorders of, 156
canine,47
exercise and, 155
cytology, body cavity elusions, 349
osmolality and, 146
degranulated, 61
ELISA, 177
eqwine, 47
anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies and, 309
[unction, 54
Elliptocytes, description of, 19
lymphadenitis and, 347
Embden-Meyerhol pathway, erythrocyte metabolism and.
morphology, 54
5
porcine,47
 Endocrine pancreas, 315-317
 production and kinetics, 54
laboratory assessment of, 316-317
Eperythrozoon spp., 21
Endocrine pancreatic hormones, basic concepts of,
Eperythrozoon wenyoni, 21
315-316
EPI, serum folate concentrations and, 242
486
INDEX
Epicellular parasites, 21
globin synthesis, 4
Epidemiology basic, 373, 376-381
heme synthesis, 3
Epidemiology 2 × 2 contingency table, 377t
increased production of, 11
Epidermal growth [actor, 111
intravascular destruction of, 12
Epinephrine, glycogenolysis and, 191
intravascular destruction of, pathway, I2
Epithelial cells
metabolic pathways, 6
ciliated,345
nucleated, identilying, 59
endometrial,346
oxidants and, 35
noncorniied,346
 peripheral blood smear, 15-16, 18-21
in urine sediment, 264,265,269
polycythemia, 40-41
Epithelial tumors, 340-341
red blood cell indices, 14-15
Eqwine endometrial cytology, method of collection and
in urinary sediment, 265
cytologic examination, 361
in urine sediment examination, 269
Eqwine eosinophil and basophil, 47
Erythroid burst-lorming units, 8
Equine erythrocytes
Erythroid colony-forming units, 8
morphology of, 16
Erythrokinetics, 7, 9, 11
in rouleaux and platelets, 17
Erythroleukemia, bone marrow of cat, 85
Equine hepatic lipidosis syndrome, of pony mares and
Erythroleukemia (m6), 97-98
horses, 189
Erythron, defnition and description of, 3
Equine hyperammonemia, 245-246
Erythroplastids, description ol, 21
Equine infectious anemia, thrombocytopenia and, 121
Erythropoiesis, 9, 11
Equine lymphoma, 90-91
characteristics of, 9
anatomic and functional features, 90
regulation of, 11
laboratory features, 91
sequence of, 9
Equine neutrophils, 46
Erythropoietin (Epo), actions ol, 11
Erythremic myelosis, blood of cat, 85
Escherichia coli, eqwine hyperammonemia and, 245
Erythrocyte deformability, decreased, examples ol, 32
Essential thrombocythemia, 100
Erythrocyte destruction, accelerated, causes of, 3lt
blood of cat, 86
Erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase activity, selenium
Essential thrombocytosis, 122-123
dehciency and, 289
Estrogen-induced pancytopenia (case 4), 392-393
Erythrocyte morphology, 16-21, 17
laboratory data, 392-393
agglutination,18
problems and summary, 393
anisocytosis, 18
signalment, presenting problems, 392
basophilic stippling, 20
Estrus
distemper inclusions in canine erythrocytes, 21
cornihed/superhicial cells predominant during, 346
eccentrocytes, 20
cytologic characteristics ol, 360
erythroplastids, 21
ET. See Essential thrombocytosis
Heinz body, 20
Ethmoid hematomas, nasal, 358
Howell-Jolly bodies, 20
Ethylene glycol toxicosis, 272, 430-431
hypochromia, 19
calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals in, 271
macrocytes, 18
Ewes, ketonuria and pregnancy disease of, 261
microcytes, 18
Excessive ineflective granulopoiesis, 73
normal,16
Exercise
nucleated erythrocytes, 20-21
acid-base balance, electrolytes and, 155
parasites, 21
hyperkalemia in hypothyroid dogs and, 161
poikilocyte, 19-20
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
polychromasia, 18-19
diagnosis of, 238-239
Rouleaux formations, 18
in dogs, 238
spherocytes, 18
Exocrine pancreatic insufhciency, diabetes mellitus, and
Erythrocytes, 3-41, 9
chronic renal [ailure (case 15), 421-423
 accelerated destruction of
laboratory data, 421-422
causes for, 31t
problems, 422-423
 anemia: diagnosis and classihcation, 26-30.
signalment, presenting problems, 421
32-40
summary, 423
antigen and antibody detection, 24-26
Exogenous creatinine clearance, 278
blood reticulocyte evaluation, 21-23
 Exogenous dyes, uptake and excretion of, hepatic Junction
bone marrow examination, 23-24
evaluation and, 212
destruction of, ll-13
Exogenous lipids, 184
erythrokinetics, 7, 9, 11
Extracellular osmolality, 146-147
erythron, 3
Extracellular parasites, 21
evaluating, 13-14
Extrahepatic biliary disease, clinical features,
extravascular destruction ol, pathway, I2
characteristics, and laboratory hndings on, 226
INDEX
487
Extravascular hemolysis
Feline lower urinary tract disease (feline urologic
causes of accelerated erythrocyte destruction and, 3lt
syndrome) (case 20), 436-437
dinical and laboratory characteristics ol, 33
laboratory data, 436-437
examples of aids in identification of, 33
problems, 437
mechanisms of, 30, 32-33
signalment, presenting problems, 436
Extrinsic pathway of coagulation, mechanisms and
Feline lymphoma, 89-90
disorders of, 126
anatomic and functional features, 89-90
Exudates, 347, 350
laboratory features, 90
nasal, 356-358
role of viral agents, 89
Feline mast cell leukemia, poorly differentiated mast cells
F
in, 10
Factor II, 124
Feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity, 179, 234
Factor V 108, 111
FeLV-induced anemias, 39
Factor VIl, 124
FeLV-infected cats, macrocytic erythrocytes in, 15
Factor VIIa, 108
Ferrets, lymphoma in, 90
Factor VII1, 108
Ferritin, defhned, 5
Factor IX, 124
Ferrochelatase, 3
Factor X, 108, 124
Ferroportin 1, 5
disorders ol common pathway of coagulation and, 128
FGF See Fibroblast growth lactor
hereditary dehciency of, in dogs and cats, 128
Fibrin-bound plasmin, 130
Factor XI, 111
Fibrin formation,130
Factor XII (Hageman [actor), 124
 clot retraction evaluation scale, 116
Factor XIII, 125
scheme for, 124
False-negatives, 377, 378, 381
Fibrinogen, 111
False-positives, 377, 378, 381
hereditary dehciency ol, in goats and dogs, 128
Familial hyperchylomicronemia, 188
as index of inflammation in animals, 179
Fasting hyperlipidemia, 187
Fibrinogen concentration, 136, 177
pancreatic inflammation and necrosis and, 236
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products, 137
Fat droplets, in urinary sediment, 265, 270
Fibrinolysis, 107
Fats, mature lipocytes Irom, 336
avian, 132
Fatty casts, 270
formation of, 130
 FDPs. See Fibrin(ogen) degradation products
laboratory evaluation ol, 132-138
FE. See Fractional excretion
mechanisms and disorders of, 129-131
Fecal alpha, PI, 244-245
Fibrinolytic [actors, assays Ior, 138
Fecal proteolytic activity, exocrine pancreatic insufhciency
Fibroblast growth factor, 11l
and,239
Fibroblast growth [actor-4, 110
Feline basophil, 48
Fibrosarcomas, nasal, 357
Feline basophil and small lymphocyte, 47
Filarids, 21
Feline erythrocytes
Fine-needle aspiration, 331-332
morphology of, 16
FIP virus, platelet function and, 121
platelets and, 17
Fitzgerald factor, 126
Feline hepatic lipidosis, biochemical profle, 228t
Fletcher [actor, 126
Feline hyperthyroidism, function tests in diagnosis ol,
Flow cytometry
314
assays, 116-117
 Feline immunodehciency virus, neutropenia and, 72
platelet counts and, 112
Feline infectious panleukopenia
Fluid collection, 332
case 9, 405407
FN. See False-negatives
laboratory data, 405-406
FNA. See Fine-needle aspiration
 presenting problems, 405
Folate, malabsorption and, 240
problems, 406-407
Folate concentration, malassimilation diseases and typical
signalment, presenting problems, 405
Jaboratory changes in, 24lt
summary, 407
Folate measurement, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and,
neutropenia and, 72
239
Feline infectious peritonitis
Foxhounds, Pelger-Huet anomaly in, 60
case 7, 400-401
FP. See False-positives
laboratory data, 400-401
IPLI, 237
presenting problems, 400
Fractional excretion, 279
 problems and summary, 401
Free hemoglobin, 12
elflusions caused by, 350
Free T4 dialysis, conhrming hyperthyroidism and, 315
macrophages, neutrophils, and background precipitate
Fructosamine, in glycated protein assays, 196
[rom,344
∫T4. See Serum-Iree T4
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 72, 89, 120, 121
∫TLI. See Feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity
488
INDEX
Fungal hyphae, 335
Glucorticoids, decrease in glycogenolysis and, 192
in urinary sediment, 266
Glucose
Fungi
excessive use of, 192
pulmonary lesions and, 359
[ate of blood glucose, 192-193
in urine, 271
[eline hyperthyroidism and, 314
Fusocytes, description ol, 19
glucose metabolism in birds, 193
hyperglycemic disorders, 196
hypoglycemic disorders, 196
G
GALT. See Gut-associated lymphoid tissue
maintenance of blood glucose concentration, 193
Gamma-globulins, 174, 174, 175
means of evaluating glucose metabolism, 193-196
Gamma glutamyl transerase, 216-217, 264
sources of blood glucose, 19l-192
Gastritis, serum lipase activity and, 233
Glucose control, Levey-Jennings chart, 368
Gastrointestinal disease, hypocalcemia and, 301
Glucose homeostasis
Gastrointestinal tract, urea excretion via, 275
abnormalities in, 223
GDH. See Glutamate dehydrogenase
hepatic function evaluation and, 212
Geese, urine transparency in, 255
Glucose intake, reduced, 193
Gen tamycin, renal tubular damage and high dosages ol, 260
Glucose in urine, 259-260
German Shepherds
interpretation of positive test result, 260
Aspergillus terreus in, 271
measurement of, 260
exocrine pancreatic insulhciency in, 238
physiology, 259-260
 megaesophagus and, 243
Glucose metabolism
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in, 240
in birds, 193
GFR
disorders of, 190-191
measurement of, 278-279
evaluating, 193
endogenous creatinine clearance, 278
Glucose tolerance tests, 194-195
exogenous creatinine and isohexol clearance, 278-279
diabetes mellitus and, 316
GGT. See Gamma glutamyl translerase
[eline hyperthyroidism and, 314
GGT activity, increased, urea toxicosis and, 460
intravenous or oral, 195
Giant platelets, 113
Glucosuria, 194
Giant Schnauzers
right abomasal displacement and, 444
cobalamin dehciency in, 241
urea toxicosis and, 461
macrocytic anemia in, 14
in various animals, 260
Giardiasis, testing for, malabsorption and, 240
Glutamate dehydrogenase, hepatocellular leakage enzymes
Glanzmann thrombasthenia, 1l8, 119
and, 214
Glitter cells, dehned, 269
Glutaraldehyde coagulation test, Ior detecting IgG, 177
Globin, 3
Glycated proteins, 196
synthesis of, 4
Glycoalbumin, in glycated protein assays, 196
Globulin concentrations, abnormalities in, 223-224
Glycogen, reduced hepatic storage ol, 192
Globulins
Glycogenesis, 192
electrophoresis and separation ol, 174-175
Glycogenolysis, promotion of, 191-192
measuring, 176-177
Glycogen storage, hepatic Iunction evaluation and, 212
Glomerular hltration rate, prerenal azotemia and, 275
GM-CSF 110
Glomerulotubular imbalance, renal amyloidosis and, 435
Golden Retrievers, megaesophagus and, 243
Glomerulus
Gold standard, 376, 377
glucose filtered by, 259
Gout, avian, 353
ketones fltered by, 260
Gradual water deprivation test, 274
Glucagon
Granular casts, in urine sediment examination, 270
gluconeogenesis and, 192
Granule release, platelet aggregation and, ll0-1ll
glycogenolysis and, 191-192
Granules, types of, 45
metabolic elfects of, 316
Granulocyte colony-forming units, 8
Glucocorticoids, hyperglycemia and, 192
Granulocyte-CSF 49
Glucocorticoid secretion, adrenal cortex and, 317
Granulocyte/macrophage-CSF 49
(Ze ases) uonoumj pioukyl jo uorssaddns prosgronosn[
Granulocyte/monocyte colony-forming units, 8
endocrine laboratory data, 466
Granulomatous disease, hypercalcemia in dogs and, 301
signalment, medical history, presenting problems,
Granulopoiesis
physical hndings, 466
excessive ineffective, 73
Glucocorticoid treatment, corticosteroid hepatopathy and
regulation of, 49-50
226
sequence of,49
Gluconeogenesis
Granulopoietic hyperplasia, neutropenia and, 73
dehned, 192
Grass tetany, hypomagnesemia in cattle and, 304
inadequate, 193
Grey Collies, cyclic hematopoiesis in, 73, 119
INDEX
489
Greyhounds
Hematuria
alpha-globulin peaks on serum electrophoretogram and.
occult blood test and, 262
180
rodenticide toxicosis and, 449
basal serum T4 and IT4 concentrations in, 309
urine color and, 254
higher MCV in, 14
von Willebrand's disease and, 457
Growth hormone
Heme, synthesis ol, 3
gluconeogenesis and, 192
Hemochromatosis, in Salers cattle, 4
hyperglycemia and, 192
Hemocytometer, 14, 58
GT. See Glanzmann thrombasthenia
manual platelet counts with, 112
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue, 57, 58
Hemoglobin
increased, artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper
H
sample handling and, 473
HALT. See Head-associated lymphoid tissue
occult blood test and, 261, 262
Haptoglobin, 12, 180
transport of, 3
Haptoglobin-hemoglobin binding assay, 177
Hemoglobin Alc, in glycated protein assays, 196
Hb concentration
Hemoglobinemia, intravascular hemolysis and, 35
erythrocyte evaluation and, 13-14
Hemoglobinemic plasma, color of, 13
Jactors allecting, 14
Hemoglobinopathies, 4
Hct. See Hematocrit
Hemoglobinuria, 288
HDLs. See High-density lipoproteins
occult blood test and, 262
Head-associated lymphoid tissue, 57
Hemolysis, 4
Heart failure, chylothorax in cats and, 350
Hemolytic anemia
Heartworm disease, platelet function and, 121
acute intravascular, 389-391
 Heartworm inlestation, hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes 
characteristics of, 30
mellitus, with other complications and, 470
 clinical hndings Ior, 30
Heinz bodies
differentiating causes of, 30
description of, 20
laboratory hndings for, 30
in erythrocyte ghosts, acetaminophen toxicosis in cat,
serum iron and, 4
17
Hemolytic tests, 25
formation of, erythrocytes and, 35
Hemopexin, 12
red maple toxicosis, horse, 17
 Hemophagocytic histocytic sarcoma, characteristics ol, 101
Hemacolor, 16
Hemophilia B, 127
Hemoproteus spp., 21
plump spindle cells [rom, 336
in cytoplasm of avian erythrocyte, 63
Hemarthrosis, 354
Hemorrhage
rodenticide toxicosis and, 449
acute vs. chronic, causes of, 28t
Hematocrit
clinical hndings, 28
anemia detection with, 27
external and internal, dillerential [eatures of anemia
defined, 13
with, 29-30
Jactors affecting, 14
hypocalcemia and, 301
hemorrhage and, 29
laboratory hndings, 29
Hematology relerence intervals, 372t
Hematomas, 339-340
259
Hematopoiesis, 8
Hemorrhagic anemia (case l)
Hematopoietic cells, in bone marrow, I0
laboratory data, 385
Hematopoietic neoplasia, 83-101
signalment, presenting problems, problems and
acute lymphocytic leukemia, 91-92
summary, 385
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 92-93
Hemorrhagic cystitis, feline lower urinary tract disease and,
large granular lymphocyte lymphoma/leukemia, 93
437
lymphoma, 83, 87-91
Hemorrhagic effusions, 351
lymphoprolilerative disorders, 83
Hemosiderin, 5
myeloproliferative disorders, 95-101
Hemosiderinuria, 35
acute myeloid leukemia, 96-98
Hemostasis, 107-139
chronic myeloid leukemia, 99-100
 antithrombotic properties of endothelial cells, 107-108
general characteristics, 96
coagulation
mast cell leukemia, 100
laboratory evaluation of, 132-138
myelodysplastic syndrome, 98
mechanisms/disorders of vitamin-K-dependent
myeloid-derived macrophage and dendritic cell
[actors, 129
neoplasms, 100-101
coagulation and Abrinolysis, 123-139
plasma cell tumors, 93-95
mechanisms/disorders of common pathway of
Hematopoietic stem cells, neutropenia and, 72
coagulation, 128-129
490
INDEX
Hemostasis (continued)
Hepatic laboratory tests, 212-217
mechanisms/disorders o extrinsic pathway of
alterations in hepatic synthesis and homeostasis,
coagulation, 126
223-224
mechanisms/disorders of intrinsic pathway of
hepatic enzyme alterations, 213-217
coagulation, 126-128
hepatic uptake, conjugation, and secretion, 217-219,
mechanisms of coagulation, 123-126
221-223
defned, 107
Hepatic lipidosis
endothelium,107
clinical [eatures and characteristics of, 225
essential concepts, 107
laboratory hndings on, 225-226
fbrinolysis
Hepatic necrosis, acute submassive or massive, clinical
avian coagulation and, 132
[eatures, characteristics, and laboratory hndings on, 225
laboratory evaluationol132-138
Hepatic neoplasia, primary or metastatic, clinical features
mechanisms/disorders of, 129-131
and laboratory hndings on, 227-228
hepatic synthesis and, 224
Hepatic photosensitivity, 223
platelets, 108-123
Hepatocellular disease, exocrine pancreatic insuffciency.
disorders of, 117-123
diabetes mellitus, chornic renal [ailure and, 423
function, 110-111
Hepatocellular injury
laboratory evaluation of, 1ll-117
acute pancreatic necrosis and, 419
601-801 x80oydrou
chronic hemorrhagic anemia and, 395
production, 109-110
conditions related to, 211
procoagulant properties that Iollow stimulation o
Hepatocellular leakage enzymes, 213-214
endothelial cells, 108
alanine aminotransferase, 213-214
Hemostasis disorders, patterns for, 133t
aspartate aminotransferase, 214
Hemostasis reference intervals, 373t
dehined, 213
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, 149
general characteristics, 213
Heparan sulfate, 108
glutamate dehydrogenase, 214
Hepatic abnormalities, laboratory tests and detection ol,
lactate dehydrogenase, 214
211
sorbitol dehydrogenase, 214
Hepatic atrophy, 211
Hepatocellular leakage/necrosis, 211
Hepatic diseases
Hepatotoxicity, hepatic lipidosis and, 225
biochemical proiles ol, 224-228
Hepatozoon canis gametocyte, in canine monocyte, 63
acute submassive or massive hepatic necrosis, 225
Hepatozoon spp., in leukocytes, 61
centrilobular hepatic lesions caused by hypoxia,
Hepcidin, iron homeostasis and, 5
224-225
Hephaestin, iron transport and, 5
cholangitis, cholangiohepatitis, and extrahepatic
Hereditary, sex-linked, lactor IX dehciency or hemophilia,
biliary disease, 226
127
chronic, progressive liver disease, 226-227
Hereditary, sex-linked, factor VIIl: coagulant, 127
congenital portosystemic shunts, 227
Hereditary dehciency ol prekallikrein, 127
corticosteroid hepatopathy, 226
Hereditary [actor XI dehciency, 127
hepatic lipidosis, 225-226
Herpesvirus, heteropenia in birds and, 72
large focal hepatic lesions, 225
Heteropenia in birds 
multifocal hepatic necrosis, 224
causes of, 72t
primary or metastatic hepatic neoplasia, 227-228
excessive demand for or destruction of heterophils in
hyperthyroidism and, 455
birds, 71
secondary hyperlipidemia and, 189
excessive inelfective granulopoiesis, 73
Hepatic disorders
margination of cireuwlating neutrophils, 71
biochemical profles ol
reduced production of heterophils in birds, 71-74
typical changes in animals, 228t
Heterophilia in birds, 64-71
serum lipase activity and, 233
causes of, 65t
Hepatic encephalopathy (hepatic hbrosis) (case 12),
corticosteroid-induced, 66-68
413-414
inlammation and infection, 68-71
laboratory data, 413-414
dinical hndings, 68-69
 problems and summary, 414
leukogram changes, 68
signalment, presenting problems,413
mechanisms, 69-70
Hepatic enzyme alterations, 213-217
species characteristics, 70-71
hepatocellular leakage enzymes, 213-214
leukogram findings, 64
induced hepatic enzymes, 214-217
Heterophil-lymphocyte reversal, in avian species, 71
Hepatic functions, laboratory tests and evaluation of, 212
Heterophils, 45
Hepatic insuhciency, 2ll-212
avian, 45, 46
dehned, 211
avian, morphology, 49
mechanisms of, 211
toxic, 60
INDEX
491
High-density lipoproteins, 185
Hyperamylasemia
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test, protocol and
causes of, 232t
interpretation of, 321
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
High-dry magnihication, 16
complications and, 471
Histiocytic sarcoma cells, characteristics of, 101
poor specihcity Ior pancreatitis, 233
Histiocytic sarcoma of interstitial dendritic cell origin, 101
Hyperbilirubinemia, 35
Histiocytomas, 337, 342
causes of, 218
Histoplasma capsulatum yeasts, 334, 338
hepatic disease and, 414
Horses
hepatic [ailure and, 417
acute intravascular hemolytic anemia in, 389-391
pancreatic inllammation and necrosis and, 236
acute salmonellosis in, 397-399
Hypercalcemia
bile acid measurements for, 221
 artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
continuous glucose monitoring devices used for, 194
handling and, 474
corticosteroid-induced neutrophilia in mammals/
canine adrenal insufhciency and, 300
heterophilia in birds and, 68
canine lymphoma and, 89
hepatic encephalopathy in, 413-414
causes of, 299-300, 301
hyperammonemia in, 245-246
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and,
hypercalcemia and renal disease in, 300
464
Jymphoma in, 90-91
multicentric lymphoma and, 409
muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis in, 427-429
Hypercalcitonism, in bulls with thyroid C-cell neoplasms,
neutrophilia and heterophilia of inllammation/infection
302
in, 70-71
Hypercapnia, 168t
performing TRH stimulation test in, 315
hypoventilatory diseases and circumstances associated
polycythemia vera in, 100
with, 168t
Horse urine, cloudiness of, 254
Hyperchloridemia, urea toxicosis and, 460
Howell-Jolly bodies 
Hypercholesterolemia
description of, 20
hypothyroidism and, 313
dog. 17
Hypercholestrolemia, renal amyloidosis and, 435
Hyaline casts, 270
Hypercoagulation, factors related to, 131
in urinary sediment, 266
Hypereosinophilic syndrome, 74
Hydrogen ion concentration, 148
Hyperhbrinogenemia, 178
Hydrogen ion concentration (pH) in urine, methods of
acute intravascular hemolytic anemia and, 390
measurement and interpretation of, 263
acute salmonellosis and, 398
Hyperadrenocorticism, 318
disseminated intravascular coagulation and, 412
case 26, 450-452
hepatic disease and, 414
laboratory data, 450-451
muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis and, 428
problems, 451-452
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 441
 signalment, medical history, presenting problems, 450
right abomasal displacement and, 444
summary, 452
Hyperglobilinemia, artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and 
corticosteroid hepatopathy and, 226
improper sample handling and, 473
other laboratory abnormalities in, 322-323
Hyperglobulinemia, 178-181
Hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
A/G ratio decreased in, 181
problems (case 34), 468-471
disseminated intravascular coagulation and, 412
laboratory data, 468-469
plasma cell myeloma and, 94
problems, 469-471
urea toxicosis and, 460
signalment, presenting problems, 468
Hyperglycemia, 190
summary, 471
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and.
Hyperalbuminemia, 178
431432
acute pancreatic necrosis and, 420
acute septic mastitis and, 438
arti [acts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
causes of, 197t
handling and, 473
[eline lower urinary tract disease and, 437
[eline inlectious panleukopenia and, 407
glucosuria and, 260
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
hyperthyroidism and, 455
complications and, 471
right abomasal displacement and, 444
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 441
Hyperglycemia with glucosuria
Hyperammonemia, 221
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
eqwine,245-246
complications and, 471
hepatic disease and, 414
mild, acute pancreatic necrosis and, 420
hepatic insufhciency and, 222
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 441-442
portosystemic venous shunting and, 222
Hyperglycemia without glucosuria, hyperadrenocorticism
urea toxicosis and, 461
and, 451
492
INDEX
Hyperglycemic disorders, 196
Hypersplenism, 33
Hyperinsulinism, 315
Hyperthyroidism, 313-315
detecting. 194
case 27, 453-455
laboratory assessment of endocrine pancreas and, 317
laboratory data, 453-454
Hyperkalemia, 279, 289
problems, 454-455
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 432
signalment, presenting problems, 453
adrenal insufhciency and, 323
summary, 455
arti facts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
in cats, 313
handling and, 474
conhrming, additional tests for, 315
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and,
diagnosis of, 315
464
[eline, function tests in diagnosis ol, 314
 [eline lower urinary tract disease and, 437
hepatic lipidosis and, 225
mechanisms and causes of, 159, 160t, 161
hyperthyroidism and, 455
Hyperlactatemia, causes of, 200
laboratory abnormalities in, 313-314
Hyperlipasemia, 280
Hypertriglyceridemia, 186
caluses of, 232t
pancreatic inflammation and necrosis and, 236
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
Hyperuricemia, renal disease in birds and, 278
complications and, 471
Hyperventilation, causes of, 169t
interpretation of, 233
Hypervitaminosis D, hypercalcemia and, 300
Hyperlipidemia
Hypoadrenocorticism, 318-319
causes of, 188t
megaesophagus and, 243-244
dehned, 187
Hypoalbuminemia, 181
[asting, pancreatic inllammation and necrosis and, 236
chronic liver [ailure or atrophy and, 224
Hyperlipoproteinemia, 187
hepatic [ailure and, 416
Hypermagnesemia, 280
inllammatory bowel disease and, 425
causes of, 304
rodenticide toxicosis and, 448
Hypermylasemia, 280
Hypoaldosteronism, hyperkalemia and, 159
Hypernatremia, 157t, 158
Hypocalcemia, 298
Hypernatremic hypovolemia, urea toxicosis and, 460
acute pancreatic necrosis and, 420
Hyperosmolality, 147
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and,
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus with, 468-471
432
Hyperosmolality of ECF, urea toxicosis and, 460
causes of, 301-302, 301t
Hyperparathyroidism, primary, 296
hepatic failure and, 417
Hyperphosphatemia, 279
inllammatory bowel disease and, 426
causes of, 303, 303t
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 442
 end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and,
 parturient paresis in cattle and, 302
464
protein-losing enteropathy and, 245
[eline lower urinary tract disease and, 437
renal amyloidosis and, 435
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
renal [ailure and, 423
complications and, 471
Hypocapnia, 148, 169, 169t
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 442
Hypocarbia, 148
renal amyloidosis and, 435
Hypochloridemia
renal [ailure and, 423
acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
Hyperplastic/reactive lymph node, 347
Paraquat toxicosis) and, 446
Hyperproteinemia, 177-181
acute renal lailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 432
acute intravascular hemolytic anemia and, 390
pyometra and, 404
acute pancreatic necrosis and, 420
renal disease and, 280
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 431
right abomasal displacement and, 444
acute salmonellosis and, 398
Hypocholesterolemia, hepatic [ailure and, 416
arti facts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
Hypochromasia, iron dehciency in dog, 17
handling and, 473
Hypochromia, 19
[eline infectious panleukopenia and, 406
Hypocoagulation, factors related to, 131
 eline inlectious peritonitis and, 401 
Hypocobalaminemia, 241
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
Hypofbrinogenemia, 182
complications and, 471
Hypoglobulinemia,182
with hyperglobulinemia and monoclonal gammopathy.
Hypoglycemia, 190
plasma cell myeloma and, 94
artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 441
handling and, 474
pancreatic inflammation and necrosis and, 236
causes of, 198t
pyometra and, 404
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and,
relative, 177-178
464
urea toxicosis and, 459, 460
hepatic [ailure and, 416
INDEX
493
inllammatory bowel disease and, 426
serum iron and, 4
pyometra and, 404
sullonamide administration and drug-induced form of,
Hypoglycemic disorders, 196
307
Hypokalemia, 280,289
thyroid function testing in birds, 312
acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
Hypoventilatory diseases, hypoxemia, hypercapnia, and
Paraquat toxicosis) and, 446
respiratory acidosis, 168t
mechanisms and causes of, 160t, 161-162
Hypoventilatory respiratory disease, end stage renal disease
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 442
with uremic pneumonitis and, 463
right abomasal displacement and, 444
Hypovolemia, 146
Hypomagnesemia, causes of, 304
Hypoxemia, 168t
Hyponatremia, 158
acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
 Paraquat toxicosis) and, 446
Paraquat toxicosis) and, 446
hypoventilatory diseases and circumstances associated
adrenal insufhciency and, 323
with, 168t
renal disease and, 280
Hypoxia
Hyponatremic dehydration
biochemical proile, 228t
acute salmonellosis and, 398
centrilobular hepatic lesions caused by, 224-225
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 442
pyometra and, 404
Hypo-osmolality, 147
IALP See Intestinal and placental ALP isoenzyme
Hypoparathyroidism
ICG. See Indocyanine green
hypocalcemia and, 301
Icteric plasma, color of, 13
primary,296
IDEXX QBC VetAutoReader, 111
Hypophosphatemia, 300
IDEXX SNAP cPL, 234
arti lacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and improper sample
Idiopathic hyperlipodemia, 187
handling and, 474
IDLs. See Intermediate-density lipoproteins
causes of, 303-304, 303t
IL-3, 7, 11, 110
hemolysis and, 35
IL-9, 7
Hypoproteinemia, 18l-182
IL-11, 7, 110
causes of, 244
IL-12, 110
 end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and.
IL-1-alpha, 110
464
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemias, causes ol, 32
hepatic [ailure and, 416
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 122
inlammatory bowel disease and, 425
Immunoblot, 177
relative, 181
Immunocytes,60
renal amyloidosis and, 435
Immunoglobulin, deficiency in, diseases characterized by 182
rodenticide toxicosis and, 448
Immunonephelometry, 177
serum iron and, 4
 Inappetence, hypertriglyceridemia and, 189
Hyporesponsive platelets, 120
In-clinic testing
Hyposthenuria
advantage with, 368
dehned, 257
customer service and, 369
hepatic [ailure and, 417
Indirect antiglobulin test, 25
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, adrenal function tests
Indirect-reading bilirubin, 218
and, 319
Indocyanine green, 223
Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis, in euthyroid animals,
 Induced hepatic enzymes, 214-217
overview of, 305
alkaline phosphatase, 214-215
Hypothyroidism, 312-313
bone ALP isoenzyme, 216
anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies in dogs with, 309
corticosteroid ALP isoenzyme, 215-216
in dogs, anti-T4 autoantibodies and, 310
gamma glutamyl transferase, 216-217
early primary (case 31)
general characteristics of, 214
endocrine laboratory data, 465
intestinal and placental ALP isoenzyme, 216
signalment, medical history, presenting problems,
Infection, left shift as hallmark of, 68, 69
physical fndings, comment, 465
Inlammation
incidence of, 312
le[t shift as hallmark of, 68, 69
laboratory abnormalities in, 313
platelets and, 1ll
megaesophagus and, 243
Inllammatory bowel disease, hepatic lipidosis and, 225
primary (and phenobarbital administration) (case 33)
Inflammatory bowel disease (malabsorption with protein-
endocrine laboratory data, 467
losing enteropathy) (case 16), 424-426
 signalment, medical history, presenting problems,
laboratory data, 424-425
physical hndings, 467
problems, 425-426
secondary, 313
signalment, presenting problems, 424
secondary hyperlipidemia and, 188
summary, 426
494
INDEX
Inllammatory lesions, 333
K
infectious agents seen in, 338
Keratin-producing cyst or tumor, 335
Inflammatoryleukogram
Keratin-producing lesions, 339
acute pancreatic necrosis and, 419
Keratocytes
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 432
description of, 19
hepatic disease and, 414
dog. 17
renal abscess and secondary disseminated intravascular
Ketoacidosis,199
coagulation and, 411
 hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus with,
 Inflammatory response, Iunctions of other mediators of,
468-471
50
low blood insulin concentrations and, 316
Inherited lipoprotein lipase dehciency, 188
Ketone bodies, 197
 Injection site reactions, 333
Ketonemia
with intracellular and extracellular globular foreign
causes of, 199
material,334
low blood insulin concentrations and, 316
Institutional laboratories, quality control in, 367-368
Ketones, 186, 191, 197,199
Insulin
measurement of, 199
cellular uptake of glucose and, 192
661 'jo uonnpoud
metabolic elflects of, 315-316
in urine, 260-261
 Insulin antagonists, 193
interpretation of positive test result, 260-261
 Insulin-dependent hypertriglyceridemia, 188
measurement of, 260
Insulin/glucose ratios, amended, 194
physiology, 260
Interleukins, lymphocyte-derived, function of, 58
Ketonuria, 260-261
Intermediate-density lipoproteins, 185
causes of, 199
Intestinal and placental ALP isoenzyme, 216
low blood insulin concentrations and, 316
Intracellular parasites, 21
Ketosis, 260
 Intravascular hemolysis, 30
acute septic mastitis, increased anion gap and, 438
causes of accelerated erythrocyte destruction and, 31t
Kidneys
hemoglobinemia and, 35
serum phosphorus regulated by, 299
mechanisms of, 34-35
urea excretion and, 275
complement-mediated lysis, 34
Klebsiella, equine hyperammonemia and, 245
membrane alterations by other mechanisms, 35
osmotic lysis, 34-35
L
oxidative injury, 34
Laboratory tests
physical injury, 34
overlapping values for, 376
Intravascular hemolytic anemia, clinical and laboratory
theoretically perlect, histogram ol, 376
characteristics of, 35
Labrador Retrievers
Intravenous glucose tolerance test, 195
acid-base balance and electrolytes in, 155
Intrinsic pathway of coagulation, mechanisms and
glucosuria in, 260
disorders of, 126-128
inherited vitamin-K-dependent multi factor
Ionized calcium, 297-298
coagulopathies in, 129
Ion-selective electrodes, calcium measurement and, 298
Lactate, 191, 199-200
Iron, storage of, 5
measurement of, 200
Iron dehciency anemia
muscle and, 289
Jaboratory hndings in, 39-40
production of, 199
microcytic, hypochromic anemia with variable
Lactate dehydrogenase
neutrophil and platelet counts and, 39
diagnostic signihcance of, 285, 287
Inon-lack anemia, 394-396
diseases of muscle origin and, 286t
 Iron metabolism
hepatocellular leakage enzymes and, 214
TIBC and,4
muscle and isoenzymes ol, 284-285
transferrin and, 5
LALP See Liver ALP isoenzyme
transport of iron, 4
Landseer-ECT thrombopathia, 118
Iron overload, 4
Large local hepatic lesions, clinical leatures, characteristics,
 Islets of Langerhans, 315
and laboratory hndings on, 225
Isohexol clearance, 278
Large granular lymphocyte (LGL) lymphoma/leukemia
Isosthenuria, 257
dehnition and occurrence, 93
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and,
dillerential diagnoses, 93
464
laboratory features, 93
renal [ailure and, 423
Large granular lymphoma
in cats, 89
intestine, cat, 84
Joint luid, 344
Latex agglutination, 177
INDEX
495
Latex agglutination test, Ior detecting IgG, 177
relative number of, 16
Laurell rocket technique, Protein C and, 137
in urinary sediment, 265, 266, 267, 269
LCFAs. See Long-chain fatty acids
Leukocytosis
LDH. See Lactate dehydrogenase
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and,
canine lymphoma and, 287
463
skeletal muscle disease in birds and, 287
[eline infectious peritonitis and, 401
LDLs. See Low-density lipoproteins
hyperadrenocorticism and, 322, 451
Lead, inhibition of heme synthesis and, 3
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
Lead toxicosis, urine color and, 254
complications and, 470
Left shift, neutrophilia and heterophilia of inflammation
hyperthyroidism and, 454
and, 68, 69
muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis and, 428
Leishmania spp. 53,339
pyometra and, 403
Leptin, obesity and, 190
rodenticide toxicosis and, 448
Leptocytes
urea toxicosis and, 459
description of, 19
in young healthy horses, 66
dog. 17
Leukocytozoon spp., 21
Leukemia inhibitory factor, 110
Leukograms
Leukemias
interpretation of, 59
anemia,maturation abnormalities and,37
 pancreatic inllammation and necrosis and, 235
dehned, 87
Leukopenia
morphologic appearance of forms ol, 84-86
acute salmonellosis and, 398
platelet defects and, 120
[eline inlectious panleukopenia and, 406
Leukemic cells, in bone marrow, 10
Levey-Jennings charts, 367, 368
Leukemoid response, 70
LIF See Leukemia inhibitory factor
Leukocyte adhesion dehiciency type Ill disorder, 119
Likelihood ratios, 380
Leukocyte count, differential, 59
Lipase, 233-234
Leukocyte esterase activity, in urine, 263
characteristics of, 233
Leukocytes, 45-80
measurement of, 231-232
basophils, 54-55
 Lipase activity, decreased, artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis,
bone marrow examination, 64-80
and improper sample handling and, 474
basopenia, 77
Lipemia
basophilia, 76-77,76t
dehned, 189
eosinopenia, 75-76
diabetes mellitus and, 317
eosinophilia, 74,75t
ellects ol, on laboratory tests and management ol, 189-190
lymphocytosis, 77-78, 77t
glucose measurement and, 194
lymphopenia, 78, 79t
Lipemia-refrigeration test, 186
monocytopenia, 74
Lipemic plasma, color of, 13
monocytosis, 74
Lipid metabolism, overview of, 184
neutropenia in mammals and heteropenia in birds,
Lipids, digestion of, 184
71, 72t 72-73
Lipomas, 341
neutrophilia in mammals and heterophilia in birds,
mature lipocytes [rom, 336
64, 65-71, 65t
Lipoprotein lipase determination, 187
 prognosis and responses ol, 79-80
Lipoproteins
eosinophils, 54
determination of, 186-187
 infectious organisms within cytoplasm ol,
synthesis of, 184
62-63
Liver, 211228
Jaboratory evaluation of, 58-64
biochemical profles of hepatic diseases, 224-228
blood smear evaluation, 59-6l, 64
cholestasis, 212
white blood cell count, 58-59
decreased hepatic Iunctional mass, 2ll-212
lymphocytes, 56-58
hepatic laboratory tests, 212-224
mast cells, 55-56
hepatocellular leakage/necrosis, 211
monocytes-macrophages, 52-53
 portal blood flow alteration, 212
xooqdrou
 synthesis/homeostasis of serum constituents and, 223
Junction, production, and kinetics, 45
vitamin-K-dependent clotting Iactors produced by, 224
in health and disease, 46-48
Liver ALP isoenzyme, 215
neutrophils and avian heterophils, 45,48-52
Liver disease
organisms or diagnostic inclusions observed in, 61
chronic, progressive
prognosis and responses of, 79-80
biochemical proile, 228t
[avorable prognosis, 80
clinical [eatures and characteristics, 226-227
general considerations, 79-80
laboratory hndings on, 227
guarded and poor prognosis, 80
hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
496
INDEX
Liver [unction testing, malabsorption and, 240
[eline, 89-90
L-lactate dehydrogenase, 200
anatomic and functional features, 89-90
Llamas, elliptical erythrocytes in, 40
laboratory features, 90
Long-chain fatty acids, 184, 185
role of viral agents, 89
Loop of Henle, urine volume and, 255
hypercalcemia and, 300
Low-density lipoproteins, 185
 morphologic appearance of forms of, 84-86
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
mustelid, anatomic and functional features/laboratory
interpretation of, 321
features, 90
protocol for, 320
of nasal cavity, 357
Lower limit of detection, test validity and, 366
subclassihcation, 87-88
Lowry and modified Lowry methods, for total protein
anatomic distribution, 87
measurement, 175
CD expression (immunophenotype), 88
Lowry (Folin-Ciocalteau phenol) method, for total protein
histologic pattern in lymph nodes, 87
measurement, 175
morphology of neoplastic lymphocytes,
Low urine speciic gravity, pyometra and, 404
87-88
Lymphadenitis, 347
Lymphopenia
Lymphangiectasia, 242-243
causes of, 79t
Lymph node aspirates, 343
corticosteroid or “stress" leukogram and, 236
Lymph node hyperplasia, Ieline infectious panleukopenia
description and mechanisms of, 78
and, 407
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and,
Lymph nodes
463
hyperplastic/reactive, 347
[eline infectious panleukopenia and, 406
normal, 342,343,347
hyperadrenocorticism and, 451
Lymphoblasts, 57, 61
hyperthyroidism and,454
Lymphocytes, 56-58
inflammatory bowel disease and, 426
cytology, body cavity effusions, 349
with lymphangiectasia, 243
distribution and circulation, 57-58
neutrophilia and heterophilia of inllammation and,
function, 58
68
life span of, 57
Lymphopoiesis, 57
mature, 56
Lymphosarcoma, 83, 337
morphology 56-57
Lysosomal storage diseases, characteristics ol, 64
plasma cells and, 56
Lysosomes, 1l09
production, 57
reactive, 56
M
relative, 60
Macroamylase, serum amylase measurement and, 233
small, in chylothorax, 343
Macrocytes, description ol, 18
Lymphocytic leukemia, 87
Macrocytic, normochromic anemia with variable neutrophil
Lymphocytosis
and platelet counts, causes of, 40
causes of, 77t
Macrocytosis
description and mechanisms ol, 77-78
 in dogs with portosystemic venous shunts, 14
Lymphoid neoplasia forms, 83, 87-95
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
acute lymphocytic leukemia, 91-92
complications and, 469
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, 92-93
Macrophages, 333
large granular lymphocyte lymphoma, 93
activation of, 53
lymphoma, 83, 87-91
alveolar, 345
plasma cell tumors, 93-95
cytology, body cavity ellusions, 349
Lymphoid neoplasms, origination of, 83
with hemosiderin and hematoidin crystals due to
Lymphomas, 83,87-91,342, 347
chronic hemorrhage, 344
avian, anatomic and functional features/laboratory
monocyte-derived, 53
features, 90
morphology.52-53
bovine, 91
[rom sialocele, 336
canine, 88-89
Macroplatelet, shift platelet, dog, 17
anatomic and functional features, 88-89
Macrothrombocytopenia, in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels,
laboratory Ieatures, 89
119
in cattle, high serum LDH activity and, 287
Magnesium
dinical staging of, 88
Jaboratory abnormalities in, 299-304
dehnitions and comments, 83, 87
measurement and monitoring of, 299
in dogs. 84
Malabsorption
 in dogs, LDH activity and, 287
inlammatory bowel disease and, 425
equine
 laboratory detection of malassimilation due to,
anatomic and functional features, 90
239-243
laboratory features, 91
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and, 240-242
INDEX
497
Malassezia spp. yeasts, 338
Megakaryocytic colony-forming units, 8
[ootprint-shaped, 334
Megakaryocytic leukemia, 98, 123
Malassimilation
blood of cat, 86
laboratory detection ol, due to malabsorption,
Megesterol acetate, hyperglycemia and, 192
239-243
Melanomas, 342
lymphangiectasia, 242-243
malignant, 337
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, 240-242
Membrane-bound cytoplasmic granules, types ol,
laboratory detection ol, due to maldigestion, 238-239
108-109
 Maldigestion, laboratory detection of malassimilation due
Membrane filter test, Ior detecting IgG, 177
to, 238
MEP See Megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor
Malignancy, cytomorphologic [eatures ol, 340t
Mesenchymal/connective tissue tumors, 340
Malignant lymphoma, 87
Mesothelial cells, 343
Malignant melanoma, 337
Metabolic acid base imbalance, disorders ol, 156
Mammalian leukocytes, 45
Metabolic acidosis, 163-165
Mammals
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 431
age-related changes in plasma proteins in, 173
acute salmonellosis and, 399
erythropoiesis in, 9
[eline lower urinary tract disease and, 437
neutropenia in, 71-73, 72t
mechanisms and causes of, 163-165 
neutrophilia in, 64-71
Metabolic alkalosis, 165-167
Mammary carcinoma cells in lymph node, metastatic, 343
causes of, 166
Mare colostrum, antibodies in, 25
rare, 166-167
Marginal neutrophil pool, 51
 paradoxical aciduria in HCl loss, 166
Mast cell leukemia, 100
right abomasal displacement and, 444
blood of dog. 86
Metamyelocyte, 49
Mast cells, 55-56
Metarubricytes, 9, 10
in blood of dog with enteritis, 48
description of, 21
unction of, 55-56
dog. 17
morphology and production ol, 55
Metastatic hepatic neoplasia, clinical features and
Mast cell tumors, 341
laboratory hndings on, 227-228
cell, 337
Metastatic mammary carcinoma cells in lymph node, 343
o nasal cavity, 357, 358
Metastatic neoplasia, 347
Mastitis, acute septic, 438-439
Methemoglobin,12
Mastocytemia, 56
 Methemoglobinemia, acute intravascular hemolytic anemia
MCH. See Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
and, 390
 MCHC. See Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
Methemoglobin reductase pathway, 7
MCV. See Mean corpuscular volume
Metritis, 360-361
MDS. See Myelodysplastic syndrome
Micelles, I184
 Mean corpuscular hemoglobin, 14, 15
Microangiopathic anemia, 35
increased, hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes melitus.
Microbicidal action, neutrophils and, 51
with other complications and, 470
Microcystosis, hepatic [ailure and, 417
 Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, 14, 15
Microcytes, description of, 18
Mean corpuscular volume, 14 
Microcytic, hypochromic anemia, with variable neutrophil
 Mean platelet component concentration, determining, 114
and platelet counts, 39
 Mean platelet volume, measuring, 113
Microcytosis without anemia, 40
Mediastinal lymphoma, 87
Microfilariae, 21
in cats, 90
Microplatelets, 113
in horses, 90
Microscopic evaluation, of blood smear, 15-16 59
Medical decision limit, 373
Mineralocorticoid dehciency, 319
Medullary washout, concentration test results and diseases
Miniature horses, hyperlipidemia of enterocolitis in, 189
causing, 274
Miniature Poodles, PK defciency in, 5
Megabacteria, of birds, 335, 338
Miniature Schnauzers
Megaesophagus
pancratitis in, 237
complete blood count and, 244
stomatocytosis with macrocytosis in, 15
dehned, 243
Mixed metabolic acidosis and alkalosis, laboratory fndings,
hypoadrenocorticism and, 243-244
mechanisms, and causes of, 167
hypothyroidism and, 243
 Mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis, end stage renal
laboratory detection ol, 243-244
disease with uremic pneumonitis and, 463-464
myasthenia gravis and, 243
 Mixed respiratory and metabolic acid-base disorders, 169
 Megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor, 109
[ood [ydonnau [euraen aas INN
Megakaryocytes
Modifed Lowry (bicinchonic acid) method, Ior total
derivation of, 109
protein measurement, 175
Stage I, 1I, and II1, 109
Modifed transudates, 347, 349-350
498
INDEX
Monoclonal gammopathy, 181
Mustelid lymphoma, anatomic, functional, and laboratory
Monocyte colony-forming units, 8
[eatures, 90
Monocytes, 45
Myasthenia gravis
avian, 46
acetylcholine receptor antibodies and, 289
canine, three, 48
megaesophagus and, 243
function, 53
Mycobacteria spp.,53
morphology, 52
Mycoplasma haemocanis, 21
production and kinetics, 53
Mycoplasma haemofelis,17,21
Monocytic leukemia, 97
Mycoplasma haemosuis, 21
blood of dog, 85
Myeloblasts, 10, 48, 49
Monocytopenia, 74
Myelocytes, 49
Monocytosis
Myelodysplastic syndrome, 98
corticosteroid or “stress" leukogram and, 236
anemia, maturation abnormalities and,37
description and mechanisms of, 74
Myeloid: nucleated erythroid cells (M:E ratio), estimating.
[eline infectious panleukopenia and, 406
24
neutrophilia and heterophilia of inflammation and, 68
Myeloid-derived macrophage, 100-101
rodenticide toxicosis and, 448
dehnition, 100-101
Morphine, hyperglycemia and, 192
subgroups, 101
 MPC. See Mean platelet component concentration
Myeloid stem cell, 7, 8
MPV. See Mean platelet volume
Myelomonocytic leukemia, 97
 Mucin, large amorphous masses ol, 336
Myelomonocytic leukemia, blood of horse, 85
Mucin clot test, 352-353
Myelophthisic anemia, 38-39
Mucus, in urine sediment, 270
Myelophthisis, thrombocytopenia and, 121
Mucus thread, in urinary sediment, 266
Myeloproliferative disorders, 95-101
Multicentric lymphoma, 87
acute myeloid leukemia, 96-98
bovine, 91
chronic myeloid leukemia, 99-100
equine, 90
description of, 95
[eline, 89
general characteristics, 96
Multicentric lymphoma (case 10)
mast cell leukemia, 100
laboratory data, 408-409
myelodysplastic syndrome, 98
 problems and summary, 409
 myeloid-derived macrophage and dendritic cell
signalment, presenting problems, 408
neoplasms, 100-101
Multifocal hepatic necrosis
platelet delects and, 120
biochemical profle, 228t
Myoglobin
 dinical leatures, characteristics, and laboratory fndings
dehned, 288
on, 224
occult blood test and, 261
Multipotential stem cells, 7
Myoglobinuria
Muscle, 283-289
muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis and, 428
 diseases with high serum enzyme activity of muscle
muscle injury and, 288
origin, 286t
occult blood test and, 262
serum enzymes of muscle origin, 283-285
Myoglobinuric nephrosis, 427-429
Muscle disease
laboratory hndings in, 287-289
N
acetylcholine receptor antibodies and myasthenia
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase, urine activity and, 264
gravis, 289
NAHLN. See National Animal Health Laboratory Network
dystrophin,289
Nasal lymphoma, in cats, 90
erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase activity and
National Animal Health Laboratory Network, 368
selenium dehciency, 289
National Cancer Institute of Working Formulation, 87
lactate, 289
National Veterinary Service, 368
myoglobin,288
Natriuretic peptides, 183
natriuretic peptides, 288
muscle function/dysfunction and, 288
potassium, 289
 Necrotizing pancreatitis, hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes 
thiamine dehciency, 289
mellitus with, 468-471
troponins,287-288
Needle smears, 333
Muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis (case 17),
NEFAs. See Nonesterifed fatty acids
427-429
 Negative acute-phase protein, 179
laboratory data, 427-428
Negative likelihood ratios, 380
problems, 428-429
Negative predictive values, 380, 381
signalment, presenting problems, 427
Neoplasia
summary, 429
biochemical profles of hepatic disorders in animals
Muscular dystrophy, dystrophin and, 289
with, 228t
INDEX
499
elfusions and, 351
chronic hemorrhagic anemia and, 395
metastatic,347
hemorrhage and, 29
 pseudohyperparathyroidism and, 300
in hemorrhagic anemia, 385
serum lipase activity and, 233
right abomasal displacement and, 444
Neoplasms, 340-342
Neutrophilic leukocytosis and lymphopenia, acute
classifcation of, 340
intravascular hemolytic anemia and, 390
epithelial tumors, 340-341
Neutrophil kinetics, in blood, 51
respiratory tract,359
Neutrophil maturation stages, 45, 49
round cell tumors, 341-342
Neutrophil metamyelocytes, I0
spindle cell tumors, 341
Neutrophil myelocyte, 10
vaginal, 361
 Neutrophil nuclear hypersegmentation, causes ol, 60
Neoplastic cells, marker expresson of, 88
Neutrophil nuclear hyposegmentation, 60
Neoplastic mastocytemia, 56
Neutrophil release, Irom bone marrow, 51
 Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, concentration test results
Neutrophils, 45
and, 274
Anaplasma phagocytophilum morulae in cytoplasm of, 62
 Nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage (case 22), 440-442
canine,46
laboratory data, 440-441
[rom cat with Pelger-Huet anomaly, 46
problems, 441-442
cytology, body cavity effusions, 349
signalment, presenting problems, 440
equine,46
summary, 442
equine segmented, 49
 Nephrotic syndrome, 433-435
∫unction of, 51-52
description of, 280
immature, differential leukocyte count and, 59
enhanced platelet {unction and, 120
lymphadenitis and, 347
secondary hyperlipidemia and, 189
morphology, 45
Nerium oleander, 161
production of, 50-51
Neutropenia
during proestrus, 346
acute salmonellosis and, 398
toxic, 60
in mammals,71-73
toxic change of, 59
causes o, 72
Neutrophil specifc antigen, 97
excessive inelective granulopoiesis, 73
New methylene blue, staining of peripheral blood smear
excessive tissue demand for or destruction of
with, 15
neutrophils, 71
 Niledipine, hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
margination of circulating neutrophils, 71
Nitric oxide release, 107
reduced production of neutrophils, 71-73
Nitrite test, bacteria in urine and, 263
mechanisms of, 73
NMB. See New methylene blue
 Neutrophilia
Ncardia spp. lamentous beaded bacteria typical ol. 35
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and.
Nodular pattern of lymphoma, 87
463
Non-Anaplasmataceae spp. bacteria, in leukocytes, 61
[eline inlectious peritonitis and, 401
Nonenzymatic protein coagulation [actors, synthesis of,
hyperadrenocorticism and, 451
125
hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes mellitus, with other
Nonesterihed fatty acids, 184, 185-186, 187
complications and, 470
Noninlammatory, nonneoplastic lesions, 339-340
hyperthyroidism and, 454
Nonregenerative anemias, 4, 27-28
in mammals, 64-71
inlectious agents as cause of, 39
causes of, 65t
unknown mechanisms of, 38
dinical hndings at time of blood collection, 64
Nonseptic inllammation, 353
corticosteroid-induced, 66-68
Normoalbuminemia, chronic hemorrhagic anemia and, 396
inlammation and infection, 68-71
Normocytic, normochromic, regenerative anemia
leukogram hndings, 64
rodenticide toxicosis and, 448
mechanisms ol, 64, 66
Normocytic, normochromic anemia, 37
other causes of, 71
Normocytic, normochromic anemia with neutropenia, 38
species characteristics, 65
Normoglycemia
other causes of, 71
glucosuria and, 260
rodenticide toxicosis and, 448
urea toxicosis and, 461
urea toxicosis and, 459
Normokalemia, [eline infectious panleukopenia and, 407
 Neutrophilia with degenerative lelt shilt, pyometra and, 403 
Normonatremia, 167, 167t
 Neutrophilic inllammation, 344
Normonatremic dehydration
 Neutrophilic leukocytosis
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 432
acute intravascular hemolytic anemia and, 390
[eline infectious panleukopenia and, 407
autoimmune hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia
Normoproteinemia, chronic hemorrhagic anemia and, 396
with, 388
Normouricemia, 278
500
INDEX
nRBCs. See Nucleated erythrocytes
Paraquat toxicosis, acute, in dog, 445-446
NSA. See Neutrophil specific antigen
Parasite ova, in urine, 271
NTproANP, 288
Parasites
NTproBNP 288
epicell ular, 21
Nucleated erythrocytes, 21
extracellular, 21
description ol, 20
intracellular, 21
identilying, 59
Parathormone
Nutritional dehiciencies,anemia,maturation abnormalities
major disorders involving, 296
and, 37
production of and activities promoted by, 295
Nutritional (or malabsorption secondary)
quantitation of,297
hyperparathyroidism,296
Parathormone-related peptide, 295, 297
Parathyroid function, 295
O
Parentage testing, antigen identihcation and, 24
Obesity, 190
Parrots, xanthomas in, 338
Occult blood test, 261-262
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO), 148
hemoglobinuria, 261
Parvovirus enteritis, secondary hyperlipidemia and, 189
measurement of, 262
Parvovirus infection, in cat, 405-407
physiology, 261
PCV. See Packed-cell volume
Odds ratio (OR), 380
PDGF See Platelet-derived growth factor
Oral glucose tolerance test, 195
PDW. See Platelet distribution width
Oronasal hstulas, 357
Pelger-Huet anomaly, 60
Osmolality
Penicillium spp., nasal infections and, 357
dehned, 146
Pentose phosphate pathway, 7
extracellular, 146-147
Peracute purulent inllammatory disease, acute septic
of urine, 255
mastitis and, 439
Osmolal or osmolar gap, 146
 Pericardial elusions, in dogs, 351
Osteolysis, 94
Peripheral blood smear, 15-21
Osteosarcomas, nasal, 357
staining and examination of, 15-16
Ovine erythrocytes, morphology, 18
systemic evaluation of, 16
Oxidants, erythrocytes and, 35
 Perirenal hemorrhage, 440-442
 Peritoneal fuid evaluation, pancreatic inflammation and
P
necrosis and, 236-237
Packed-cell volume, 13
Peritonitis, serum lipase activity and, 233
PAF See Platelet activating factor
 Perl's blue staining, bone marrow examination and, 24
PAI. See Plasminogen activator inhibitors
Persistent hyperglycemia, 195
Pancreas, functions of, 315
Persistent hyperlipidemia, 187
Pancreatic disease, laboratory tests specihc for, 234-235
PFK. See Phosphofructokinase
Pancreatic inflammation and necrosis
PFK dehciency, consequences ol, 7
complete blood count, 235-236
pH, of urine, 258, 263
peritoneal luid evaluation, 236-237
Phagocytosis, neutrophils and, 51
serum biochemical abnormalities, 236
 Phagocytosis by macrophages, senescent erythrocyte
supplementary laboratory hndings in, 235-237
removal and, 1l, 12
urinalysis, 236
Phenobarbital administration, primary hypothyroidism and.
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity, 234
467
Pancreatitis
Phosphatidylserine, 125
acute, hepatic lipidosis and, 225
Phosphofructokinase, 5
in cats, diagnostic steps for, 237-238
 Phospholipids, 184
clinical spectrum of, 231
Phosphorus
jn dogs, diagnostic steps for, 237
[ractional clearance of, 279
hypocalcemia and, 301
[unction of, 299
laboratory detection of, 231-238
laboratory abnormalities in, 299-304
major disorders involving, 296
biochemical profles, 231-234
Phylloerythrin, 223
specihc tests for pancreatic disease, 234-235
Physiologic thrombocytosis, 122
Pancytopenia, estrogen-induced, 392-393
Pigs, suckling, reticulocytosis in, 22
Panhypoproteinemia, enteric disease and, 244
 Pituitary diabetes insipidus, concentration test results and,
Paradoxical aciduria, 280
274
 right abomasal displacement and, 444
 PK defciency, characteristics of, 5
Paraproteinemia, 181
Plasma, color of, 13
 Paraproteinemia of plasma cell myeloma, hyporesponsive
Plasma carbohydrates, 190-200
platelets and, 120
glucose, 19i-196
INDEX
501
ketones, 197, 199
antiplatelet antibody, 114
lactate, 199-200
bleeding time, 115
Plasma cell myeloma, 93, 94
clot retraction, 115
bone marrow, dog,84
low cytometry assays, ll6-117
Plasma cell tumors, 93-95
mean platelet component concentration, 114
dehnition and occurrence, 93-94
mean platelet volume, 113
diagnostic criteria, 94
platelet count, lll-112
laboratory [eatures, 94-95
platelet distribution width, 113
 Plasma cortisol measurement, adrenal cortex evaluation
platelet evaluation [rom stained blood smears,
and, 319
112-113
Plasmacytomas, 93, 94, 337
 platelet function assays, 1l4-115
Plasma lipids, 183-190
reticulated platelets, 113
hyperlipidemia, 187-190
VWF assays, 116
measurement and clinical signihicance of, 186-187
mammalian, description of, 108
types and origins, 183-186
morphology, 108-109
Plasma lipoproteins, characteristis ol, 185
production of, 109-110
 Plasma protein concentration, hemorrhage and, 29
Platelet surface-associated immunoglobulin, direct
Plasma proteins, 173-175
determination ol, by fluorescence labeling and flow
age-related changes in, 173
cytometry, 114
in Iresh serum, 173
PLE. See Protein-losing enteropathy
nutritive ∫unction of, 173
Pleural elusion, hyperthyroidism and, 455
 Plasmin, plasminogen activation to, 129
PLI. See Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
 Plasminogen, 129
Pluripotential stem cells, 7, 8
activators of, intrinsic and extrinsic, 131
Poikilocytes, types of, 19-20
 Plasminogen activator inhibitors, 131
Polychromasia
 Plasminogen activator inhibitor type l, 108
description of, 18
Plasmodiurm spp., 21
dog, 17
 Platelet activating lactor, 1ll
Polychromatophilic erythrocytes, 18, 19
Platelet aggregation, 16.114
with Howell-Jolly body, I0
 Platelet aggregometers, 114
Polyclonal gammopathies, characteristics ol, 181
Platelet counts
Polycythemia, 40-41
automated, 111-112
absolute, 41
hemorrhage and, 29
acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
interpreting, 112
Paraquat toxicosis) and, 446
manual count with hemocytometer, 112
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 431
 Platelet-derived growth factor, 11l
acute salmonellosis and, 398
Platelet distribution width, determining, 113
hyperthyroidism and, 454
Platelet estimation, determining, 1l2-113
spurious or relative, 41
 Platelet Function Analyzer-100, 114
urea toxicosis and, 459
Platelet [unction assays, 114 
Polycythemia vera, 99-100
Platelet glycoprotein Ib-IX-V 110
Polyomavirus, heteropenia in birds and, 72
Platelet microparticles, 113
Polyuria, concentration test results and diseases causing,
Platelet morphology 17
274
Platelet phospholipid, 125
Poodles
 Platelet plugging, clot retraction evaluation scale, 116
 congenital macrocytosis in, 14
Platelets, 107, 108-123
methemoglobin reductase deficiency in, 7
circulating lilespan for, 109
Porcine eosinophil, 47
disorders of, 117-123
Porcine erythrocytes, morphology of, 16
acquired qualitative {unctional disorders, 120-121
Porphyrins, heme biosynthesis and, 3
causes of thrombocytosis, 122-123
Portal blood Mlow, alteration of, 212
extrinsic platelet dysfunction, 117-118
Portosystemic shunts
[unctional impairment of platelets, 117
congenital, 227
intrinsic platelet dysfunction, 118-119
microcytosis with mild anemia and, 40
mechanisms of thrombocytopenia, 121-122
 Portosystemic venous shunt with hepatic atrophy (case
thrombocytosis, 117
13), 415-417
function of, 1l0-11l
laboratory data, 415-416
adhesion, 110
problems, 416-417
aggregation,110
 signalment, presenting problems, radiographic hndings,
granule release, 1l0-111
415
shape changes, 110
summary, 417
Jaboratory evaluation of, 1ll-117
Positive acute-phase protein, 179
502
INDEX
Positive likelihood ratios, 380
hypoproteinemia and, 244
Positive predictive value, 380
Jymphangiectasia and, 242
Post-analytical test errors, 366
quantilying radiolabeled protein loss into intestinal tract,
 Postprandial hyperlipemia, secondary hyperlipidemia and,
245
188
Protein S, 107
Postprandial hyperlipidemia, 187
Postrenal azotemia, 276
Proteinuria
Post-test odds, 380
acute renal [ailure (ethylene glycol toxicosis) and, 431
Potassium
end stage renal disease with uremic pneumonitis and,
[ractional clearance of, 279
464
muscle and, 289
hepatic [ailure and, 417
Potassium depletion, urea toxicosis and, 460
interpretation positive test result for, 258
Poultry, erythroleukemia in, 98
measurement of, 258
PRCA. See Pure red cell aplasia
 Proteus, equine hyperammonemia and, 245
Pre-analytical test errors, 366
Prothrombin, 124
Precision, test validity and, 366
Prothrombinase complex, 128
Precursor cells, 7
Prothrombin time, 135-136
Predictive values
clotting [actor activity and, 224
negative, 380,381
Prototheca spp., 39
positive, 380
in urine, 271
Prerenal azotemia, 275-276
Protozoa, 339
[eline infectious panleukopenia and, 406
Prussian blue staining, bone marrow examination and, 24
Prerenal proteinuria, 259
 PSAIg. See Platelet surface-associated immunoglobulin
Pre-test odds, 380
Pseudocasts, 270
Primary absolute polycythemia, 41
 Pseudohyperparathyroidism, neoplasia-associated, 300
 Primary granules, 45
Pseudomonas spp., equine hyperammonemia and, 245
Primary hepatic neoplasia, clinical leatures and laboratory
 Pseudoneutropenia, 71
hndings on, 227-228
Pseudo-Pelger-Huet anomaly, 60
Primary hypercholesterolemia, 188
Pseudothrombocytosis, artifacts of lipemia, hemolysis, and
Primary hyperlipidemia, 187, 188t
improper sample handling and, 473
 Primary hyperparathyroidism, 296
PSS. See Portosystemic shunts
Primary hypoparathyroidism, 296
PT. See Prothrombin time
Proconvertin, 124
PTH. See Parathormone
Proestrus
PTHrp. See Parathormone-related peptide
cytologic characteristics of, 360
P2Y12, 119
noncornihed epithelial cells and neutrophils during. 346
Pugs, PK dehciency in, 5
Proetinuria, diabetes mellitus and, 317
Pulmonary carcinoma, 346
Progenitor cells, 7, 9
Pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute Paraquat
Promonocytes, 52
toxicosis) (case study), 445-446
Promyelocytes (progranulocytes), 10, 48, 49
laboratory data,445
Promyelocytic leukemia, 97
problems, summary 446
Prorubricyte, 9
signalment, medical history, presenting problems, 445
Prostacyclin release, 107
Pulmonary lesions, fungi and, 359
Protein
Pulse oximetry, 149-150
in cerebrospinal fluid, 355
 Punctate reticulocytes, in cats, 22
measurement of, 175-177
 Pure megakaryocytic hypoplasia, 121
 acute phase protein methods, 177
Pure red cell aplasia, 38
albumin, 176
Purulent exudates, 333
albumin/globulin (A/G) ratio, 177
Purulent inflammation
hbrinogen, 177
causes of, 359
globulin, 176-177
with nasal exudates and masses, 357
total protein, 175-176
Purulent peritonitis, [eline infectious peritonitis and, 401
in urine, 257
 Pyogranulomatous inflammation, ruptured keratin-
Protein abnormalities (dysproteinemias), 177-182
 producing cyst or tumor and, 336
hyperprotenemia, 177-181
Pyometra (case 8), 402-404
hypoproteinemia, 181-182
laboratory data, 402-403
Protein-bound calcium, 297
 problems, 403-404
Protein C, 107, 128-129, 137-138
signalment, history, presenting problems, 402
Protein-losing enteropathy, 244-245
summary,404
Pyothorax, degenerate neutrophils and mixed bacteria
hypocalcemia and, 245
Irom, 344
INDEX
503
Pyridoxine deficiency, iron dehciency anemia and, 40
Refractometry
Pyruvate kinase. See Adenosine triphosphate
protein measurement with, 175
Pyuria, detecting,263
urine specinc gravity measurement and, 256
 Regenerative anemia, 27
Q
Relative lymphocytes, 60
Quality assurance, in laboratories, 368
Relative polycythemia, causes ol, 41
Quality contro]
Renal abnormalities
test results and, 367-369
laboratory test detection ol, 272-280
commercial and institutional laboratories, 367-368
defnitions, 272-273
in-clinic testing, 368-369
evaluation of renal [unction, 273-280
Quantitative bufly coat analysis, platelet counts and, 11l-112
Renal abscess and secondary disseminated intravascular
coagulation (case 11), 410-412
R
laboratory data, 410-411
 Racing Greyhounds, acid-base balance and electrolytes in,
problems, 411-412
155
signalment, history, presenting problems, 410
Radioimmunoassays, 177
summary, 412
 Rambouillet sheep, inherited vitamin-K-dependent
Renal amyloidosis (nephrotic syndrome) (case 19),
multi factor coagulopathies in, 129
433-435
 Rank-percentile method, for reference interval calculations,
laboratory data, 433-434
371
problems, 434-435
 Rapid-reacting acute-phase proteins, 179
signalment, presenting problems, 433
Rapoport-Luebering pathway, 7
summary, 435
 Ratites, urine transparency in, 255
Renal azotemia, 276
 RBC agglutination, 16
Renal disease
RBC counts, factors affecting, 14
concentration test results and, 274
RBC rouleaux formation, 16
dehned, 272
Reactive thrombocytosis, 123
in horses, hypercalcemia and, 300
 REAL. See Revised European-American Classiication of 
miscellaneous alterations occurring in, 279-280
Lymphoid Neoplasms
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 441
Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve, 379, 379
serum iron and, 4
 Recombinant human TSH, 310
urogenital proteinuria and, 259
 Rectal scrapings, pathogenic organisms found in cytologic
Renal epithelial cells, in urine sediment examination,
preparations of, 246
269
 Red blood cell antigens/antibodies, general concepts related
Renal [ailure
to, 24-25
acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
 Red blood cell indices, 14-15
 Paraquat toxicosis) and, 446
mean corpuscular hemoglobin, 15
bovine, 280
mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, 15
dehined, 272
mean corpuscular volume, 14
in dogs, 280
red cell distribution width, 15
exocrine pancreatic insuffciency and, 239
Red cell distribution width, 15
hypocalcemia and, 301
Red maple toxicosis, in horse, 389-391
inadequately concentrated urine and, 256
Reduced erythropoiesis
multicentric lymphoma and, 409
anemia from
muscle disease, myoglobinuric nephrosis and, 429
causes of, 36t
Renal function evaluation, 273-280
dillerentiation of, 37-40
blood wrea nitrogen, 274-277
general considerations, 36-37
GFR measurement, 278-279
Reference group
serum creatinine, 277-278
 demographic parameters Ior, 370
uric acid, 278
environmental and physiological conditions for, 370
urine concentration tests, 273-274
Reference intervals, 369-373
urine electrolyte clearance ratios, 279
calculating, methods [or, 370-371
Renal [unctions, measurement of, 273
chemistry, 374-375t
Renal proteinuria, renal amyloidosis and, 435
hematology, 372t
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, 296
hemostasis, 373t
Renal tubular acidosis, 263
narrow, 371
 Reovirus inlections, heteropenia in birds and, 72
Resistin, obesity and, 190
speci hcity and, 369-370
Respiratory acidosis, 168t
 specimen collction and handling parameters, 370
hypoventilatory diseases and circumstances associated
trans[er of, 371, 373
with, 168t
wide, 371
Respiratory alkalosis, 169, 169t
504
INDEX
Respiratory function disorders, 167-169
Saliva
arterial PCO, 168-169
as surrogate for blood in assessing acute-phase proteins,
arterial PO, 167-168
179-180
Respiratory system cytology, 356-359
urea excretion via, 275
nasal exudates and masses, 356-358
Salivary gland cells, normal, 343
tracheo-bronchoalveolar cytology, 358-359
Salmonellosis, acute (case 6), 397-399
Reticulated platelets, 113
laboratory data,397
Reticulocyte counts, in hemolytic anemia, 30
problems, 398-399
Reticulocyte enumeration, means of, 22-23
 signalment, presenting problems, 397
Reticulocyte percentage, 22
summary, 399
Reticulocyte production index, 23
 Sample handling, improper, artilacts of lipemia, hemolysis
Reticulocytes,9
and, 472-474
defined, 21
Sarcocystis spp., 339
interpretation of parameters for, 23
SCF 7
quantitation of, 21
Schistocytes
species characteristics of, 21-22
defined, 35
Reticulocytosis, 14, 23
description ol, 19
in cats. vs. in dogs, 22
in dog. 17
 Revised European-American Classihcation ol Lymphoid
SCID. See Severe combined immunodehciency disease
Neoplasms, 88
Scottish Deerhounds, basal serum T4 and IT4
Rhinosporidiosis, 357
concentrations in, 309
Rhinosporidium seeberi, 357
Scottish Terriers
organisms from nasal cavity 345
high mean ALP activity in, 216
 Rhodococcus equi, degenerate neutrophils and, 345
Type 3 VWD in, 118
rhTSH. See Recombinant human TSH
Scott syndrome, 119
 Rickettsial diseases, thrombocytopenia and, 121
Scurvy, bleeding time and, 115
Richettsia spp., 53
SDH. See Sorbitol dehydrogenase
 Right abomasal displacement (case 23), 443-444
Sebaceous cells, 336
Jaboratory data, 443-444
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia, 339
 problems, summary, 444
Secondary absolute polycythemia, causes of, 41
signalment, presenting problems, 443
Secondary disseminated intravascular coagulation, renal
Ristocetin assays, 116
abscess and, 410-412
Rodenticide (coumarin) toxicosis (case 25), 447-449
Secondary granules, 45
laboratory data, 447-448
Secondary hyperlipidemia, causes ol, 188-189, 188t
problems, 448-449
Secretory acidosis, 165
signalment, medical history, presenting problems, 447
Segmenter, granulopoiesis, 49, 49
summary, 449
Selenium dehciency, erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase
Romanowsky stains, 16
activity and, 289
 Rottweiler dogs. hypereosinophilic syndrome in, 74
Sensitivity, laboratory tests, 377, 380
Rough-coated Collie, exocrine pancreatic insuffciency in,
Serine protease coagulation factors, synthesis ol, 124
238
Serm amyloid A (SAA), 179
Rouleaux formations, description of, 18
Seromas,339-340
Round cell tumors, 341-342
Sertoli cell tumor, 392-393
diagnosis of, 341
Serum, ionic composition of, 153
histiocytomas, 342
Serum chloride, 162-163
lymphomas,342
abnormalities, 162
mast cell tumors, 341
evaluation of abnormalities, 162-163
melanomas, 342
physiologic considerations, 162
ol nasal cavity, 357
Serum cholesterol determination, 186
plasmacytomas, 342
Serum cobalamin
transmissible venereal tumors, 342
malabsorption and, 240
RPI. See Reticulocyte production index
small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and, 240-241
RTA. See Renal tubular acidosis
Serum creatinine, 277-278
Rubriblasts, 9, 10
excretion, renal and gastrointestinal, 277
Rubricyte, 10
interpretation of increased serum creatinine
Ruminants, chronic renal disease and hypocalcemia in, 302
concentration, 277-278
Russell viper venom test (Stypven time), 136
metabolism, 277
Serum electrophoretograms, normal and abnormal, 174
S
Serum enzymes of muscle origin, 283-285
 5. equi lymphadenitis, degenerate neutrophils and chains of
alanine aminotransferase, 284
bacterial cocci [rom, 343
aldolase, 285
INDEX
505
aspartate aminotransferase, 284
Specihc gravity, of urine, 255, 256
creatine kinase, 283-284
Specihcity, in laboratory tests, 378, 380
lactate dehydrogenase, 284-285
Specimen collection parameters, relerence intervals and,
Serum Ierritin concentration, increases/decreases in, 5
370
Serum Iolate, malassimilation disorders and, 241-242
Specimen handling parameters, relerence intervals and,
Serum-Iree T4, measurement ol, 308
370
Serum Iructosamine concentrations, of hyperthyroid cats,
Spermatozoa
314
in urinary sediment, 266
 Serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase, 284
in voided urine, 271
 Serum insulin, 194
Spherocytes
Serum iron
description of, 18, 20
 decreased, conditions with, 4
immune-mediated anemia, dog. 17
increased, conditions with, 4
Spinal lymphoma, in cats, 90
 Serum osmolality, 146
Spindle cell tumors, types of, 341
Serum potassium, 158-159, 161-162
Spitz thrombopathia, 118
mechanisms and causes of hyperkalemia, 159, 160t, 161
Spleen, cireulating platelet mass in, 109
mechanisms and causes of hypokalemia, l60t, 16l-162
Sporothrix schenchii yeasts, 335, 338
physiologic considerations, 158-159
Spurious polycythemia, 41
 Serum pyruvic transaminase, 213, 284
Squamous cell carcinomas, 340
Serum sodium, 156-158
nasal, 357
evaluation of Na+/K+ ratio, 158
prominent anisocytosis in tumor cells from, 336
hyponatremia, normonatremia, or hypernatremia and,
Squamous cells, with adherent Simonsiella sp. and other
156-158
bacteria [rom oral cavity, 345
 physiologic considerations, 156
Squamous epithelial cells, in urine sediment, 265, 269
 Serum sodium concentration and hydration, mechanisms
Squash preparations, 333
and diseases associated with combinations of, 156-157t
Stab method/nonaspiration hne-needle biopsy, 332
 Serum triglyceride determination, 186
Staging, of lymphoma, 88
 Serum unconjugated cholic acid, 242
Stained blood smears, platelet evaluation Irom, 1l2-113
Setaria spp., 21
Standardbred horses, inherited familial neutropenia in,
Severe combined immunodefciency disease, in Arabian
73
[oals, 182
Starvation
SGPT. See Serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase
hepatic lipidosis and, 225
 Shar Pei
hypertriglyceridemia and, 189
microcytic erthrocytes in, 14
ketonuria and, 261
microcytosis without anemia in, 40
Stem cell factor, 110
 Sheep, hypomagnesemia in, 304
granulopoiesis and, 49
Shetland Sheepdogs, Iype 3 VWD in, 118
Stem cells, 7
Shiba Inu
Stephanurus dentatus, in urine specimens, 271
microcytic erthrocytes in, 14
Stewart, P A., SID theory, 154
microcytosis without anemia in, 40
Stomatocytes, description of, 20
 Shift reticulocytes, 22
Stromal cell derived [actor l, 110
SI. See Serum iron
Strong ion diflerence (SID) theory
Sialocele, 339
acid-base interpretation based on strong ion diflerence,
macrophages Irom, 336
154
Siberian Huskies, benign Jamilial hyperphosphatasemia in,
limitations of, 154
216
simplified, 154
SIBO. See Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
usefulness of, 154
Six Sigma, 367
Stuart [actor (factor X), 124
 Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
SUCA. See Serum unconjugated cholic acid
jncreased folate with EPI and, 242
Sullonamide crystals
malabsorption and, 240-242
drug induced in urine, 272
 Small intestinal malabsorptive disease, clinical signs in
in urine sediment, 268
dogs, 240
Swabs, 332
Smear preparation, 332-333
Sweat, urea excretion via, 275
 Sodium, Iractional clearance of, 279
Synovial Muid analysis, 352-354
Somali cats, PK deficiency in, 5
appearance,352
Sorbitol dehydrogenase
cytologic examination, 353-354
hepatocellular leakage and, 211
mucin clot test, 352-353
hepatocellular leakage enzymes and, 214
nucleated cell count, 353
increased activity, urea toxicosis and, 460
protein,353
Specihic granules, 45
viscosity, 352
506
INDEX
anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies, 309-310
TAFI. See Thrombin activatable ibrinolysis inhibitor
hyperthyroidism, 313-315
Tamm-Hors[all protein
hypothyroidism, 312-313
casts and, 270
inlluence of breed on T4 and IT4 concentrations in
in urine, 257
dogs, 308-309
TAP See Trypsinogen activation peptide
measurement of serum-free T4, 308
Target cells, description of, 19-20
measurement of serum T3, 307-308
TATs. See Thrombin-antithrombin complexes
measurement of serum T4, 306-307
TBW. See Total body water
overview, 304-312
TEG. See Thromboelastography
possible glucocorticoid suppression ol, 466
TEG 5000, 138
secretion and transport of T3 and T4, 304-306
99e 'jo sadki 'sioua isa1
T4 response to TRH or TSH, 310-312
Test results, generating, 365-381
TSH concentration measurement, 309
basic epidemiology, 365, 373-376, 377-381, 377t
Thyroiditis
quality control, 365, 367-369
anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies in dogs with, 309
re[erence intervals, 369-371, 372t, 373, 373t, 374-375t
in dogs, anti-T4 autoantibodies and, 310
test validity, 365-367
Thyroid Registry, 310
Test validity, 365-367
Thyroid stimulating hormone, 305
protocols related to, 366
Thyrotropin releasing hormone, 305
sources of error and, 366-367
Thyrotropin (TSH) concentration, endogenous,
TFPI. See Tissue Jactor pathway inhibitor
measurement of, 309
Theileria annulata,21
Thyroxine (T4), 305
Theileria cervi, 21
measurement of serum-{ree T4 (IT4), 308-309
Theileria mutans, 21
measurement of serum T4, 306-307
Thiamine dehciency, muscle and, 289
secretion and transport of, 304-306
Thiazide diuretics, hyperglycemia and, 192
Tissue [actor (factor II1), 126
Thrombin, as positive leedback accelerator of coagulation,
Tissue [actor pathway inhibitor, 108, 126
128
Tissue [actor synthesis, 108
Thrombin activatable hbrinolysis inhibitor, 131
Tissue imprints, 331
Thrombin-antithrombin complexes, 137
Tissue plasminogen activator, 108
 Thrombin formation, scheme for, 124
Tissue scrapings, 331
Thrombin time, 136
Titration acidosis, 165
Thrombocytes, avian, 46, 109
TLI. See Trypsin-like immunoreactivity
Thrombocytopenia
T lymphocytes, 57
autoimmune hemolytic anemia and, 386-388
TN. See True-negatives
disseminated intravascular coagulation and, 411
Tonicity, 146
drug-induced, 122
Total body water, 145-146
immune-mediated, primary and secondary, 122
decreased, 145
mechanisms of, 12l-122
extracellular Mluid, 145
platelet counts and, 112
increased, 146
vaccine-induced, 122
intracellular Muid, 145 
Thrombocytosis
volume, 145
causes of, 122-123
Total CO content, measurement and components of, 149
chronic hemorrhagic anemia and, 395
Total protein, measuring, 175
 in hemorrhagic anemia, 385
Total unconjugated bile acid, 242
nephrosis and perirenal hemorrhage and, 441
Toxic granulation, characteristics of, 60
platelet counts and, 112
Toxoplasma gondi, 339
Thromboelastography, 138
Toxoplasma spp., 53
comparison of TEG tracings Irom three dogs with
TP See True-positives
yarying coagulation status, 138
 tPA. See Tissue plasminogen activator
methods, 138
TPO. See Thrombopoietin
TEG tracing, 139
Tracheoalveolar washes, 345
Thrombomodulin expression, 107-108
Tracheo-bronchoalveolar cytology, 358-359
Thrombopathia, 118
Transferrin, 4, 5
Thrombopoietin, platelet production regulated with,
 Transitional epithelial cells, in urine sediment examination,
109-110
269
Thrombosis, risks for, 117
Transmissible venereal tumors, 342
Thromboxane A, 110
Transudates, 347, 349
Thyrocalcitonin, 297
TRH. See Thyrotropin releasing hormone
Thyroid disease, diagnosis of, TSH stimulation and, 31l
TRH stimulation test, 3ll-312
Thyroid function, 304-315
conhrming hyperthyroidism and, 315
anti-T4 and anti-T3 autoantibodies, 310
Triaditis, 238
INDEX
507
Trichloroethylene, thrombocytopenia and, 121
laboratory data, 458-459
Trichomonas spp., 339
problems, 459-461
 Triglyceride accumulation, hepatic lipidosis and, 225
signalment, medical history, presenting problems, 458 
Triglycerides, 184
summary, 461
Triodothyronine (T3), 305
Uremia
measurement of serum T4 and, 307-308
defned,273
secretion and transport of, 304-306
hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
Triple phosphate crystals, in urine, 272
 Uremic pneumonitis, end stage renal disease with, 462-464
Troponin C, 287
Urethral obstruction, hypocalcemia and, 301
Troponin 1, 287
Uric acid, 268, 278
Troponins
Uric acid crystals, 272
cardiac disease and isoforms of, 183
Urinalysis, 253-272
dehined, 287
chemical characteristics, 257-264
Troponin I, 287
bilirubin, 261
True-negatives, test results, 377
canine bladder tumor antigen test, 264
True-positives, test results, 377
enzymes, 264
Trypanosoma brucei, 21
glucose, 259-260
Trypanosoma congolense, 21
hydrogen ion concentration, 263
Trypanosoma cruzi, 21
jnterpreting positive test result, 258-259
Trypanosoma evansi, 21
ketones, 260-261
Trypanosoma johnbakeri, 21
leukocyte esterase activity, 263
Trypanosoma theileri, 21
methods of measurement, 257-258
Irypanosoma vivax, 21
nitrite, 263
Trypanosomes, 21
occult blood test, 261-262
Trypsin, 235
protein, 257
 Trypsin-like immunoreactivity, 235
wobilinogen, 262-263
diagnosis of exocrine pancreatic insufhciency and, 238
urogenital proteinuria, causes of, 259
malassimilation diseases and typical laboratory changes
collection methods, 253-254
in, 241t
catheterized specimens, 253-254
Trypsinogen, 235
voided specimens, 253
Trypsinogen activation peptide, 235
malabsorption and, 240
TSH. See Thyroid stimulating hormone
proper sample handling, 254
TSH response to TRH, 312
sediment examination, 264, 265-269, 269-272
TSH stimulation test, 310-311
algae, 271-272
TT. See Thrombin time
bacteria, 270-271
 T suppression test, conhrming hyperthyroidism and, 315
casts (cylinduria), 270
TUBA. See Total unconjugated bile acid
epithelial cells, 264, 269
Tumors, nasal, 357
erythrocytes, 269
 Turbidometric immunoassays, 177
[at, 270
2 × 2 contingency tables
∫ungi, 271
epidemiology.377t
leukocytes, 269
use of, 376
mucus,270
parasite ova, 271
U
principles, 264
 Unbound iron-binding capacity (UIBC), 5
sperm, 271
Uncompensated disseminated intravascular coagulation,
411, 412
298-299
 Uncompensated metabolic acidosis, hyperadrenocorticism
Urinary protein/creatinine (UPC) ratios, hyperthyroidism
and diabetes mellitus, with other complications and, 470
and,313
 Uncompensated mixed metabolic alkalosis/metabolic
Urinary sediment
acidosis, acute pulmonary hemorrhage and edema (acute
bacteria and leukocytes in, 266
Paraquat toxicosis) and, 446
Candida sp. yeasts in, 265
Unconjugated bilirubin, 217, 219, 261
Capillaria plica ovum in, 265
 Unipotential progenitor cells, 9
Dioctophyma renale ova in, 266
Unopette system, 58
erythrocytes and leukocytes in, 265
Unstained rod-shaped structures, consistent with
[at droplets in, 265
mycobacteria within macrophages, 334
[ungal hypha in, 266
Unstained smears, protecting Irom formulin fumes, 333
granular cast and spermatozoa in, 266
Upper limit of detection, test validity and, 366
hyaline cast in, 266
UP/UC ratio, interpreting, 259
mucus thread in, 266
Urates, in avian urine, 254
squamous epithelial cells in, 265
Urea toxicosis (case 29), 458-461
transitional epithelial cells in, 265
508
INDEX
Urinary system, 253-280
Vaginal cytology, 346
renal abnormalities detected by laboratory tests,
cell collection, 360
272-280
cytologic characteristics of estrus cycle
urinalysis, 253-272
anestrus, 360
Urinary tract
diestrus, 360
hemorrhage into, wrogenital proteinuria and, 259
estrus, 360
 inflammation into, urogenital proteinuria and, 259
proestrus, 360
Urinary tract infection, hyperadrenocorticism and diabetes
normal cells, 360
mellitus with, 468-471
reproductive diseases, 360-361
Urinary tract inflammation, estrogen-induced pancytopenia
neoplasia, 361
and, 393
subinvolution of placental sites, 361
Urine
vaginitis and metritis, 360-361
abnormal volume, causes of, 256t
Vaginal smear, 360
 Bence-Jones protein in, 258
Vaginitis, 360-361
enzyme activity in, 264
Vascular endothelium, antithrombotic properties of, 107
leukocytes in, 263
V-BTA assay, 264
pH of, 258, 263
Verapamil, hyporesponsive platelets and, 120
 physical characteristics olf, 254-257
Very-low-density lipoproteins, 185
color, 254
Veterinary Laboratory Association, 368
odor, 255
Vitamin D, metabolically active, 297
solute concentration, 255-257
Vitamin D dehciency, hypocalcemia and, 301
transparency 254-255
Vitamin D metabolism, major disorders involving, 296
volume, 255, 256t
Vitamin-K-dependent clotting Iactors, liver and production
Urine concentration tests, 256, 273-274
of, 224
 interpreting results of, 274
Vitamin-K-dependent factors, 124
rationale for, 273
acquired dehciency of, 128
types of, 273-274
mechanisms and disorders of, 129
Urine cortisol/creatinine ratio, with high-dose suppression
VLA. See Veterinary Laboratory Association
test, 321
VLDLs. See Very-low-density lipoproteins
Urine electrolyte clearance ratios, Iractional clearances,
Voided urine specimens, 253
279
von Willebrand factor
Urine glucose, 194
assays, 116
Urine protein dipsticks, protein measurement with, 355
synthesis, storage, and release ol, 108
Urine protein to urine creatinine, calculating ratio of, 258
yon Willebrand's disease
Urine sediment
acquired, 118
ammonium biurate in, 267
case 28, 456-457
bilirubin with hyaline cast, spermatozoa, and leukocytes
laboratory, 456-457
in,267
problems, summary, 457
calcium carbonate in, 267
signalment, presenting problems, 456
calcium oxalate dihydrate in, 268
clinical signs of, 117
calcium oxalate monohydate in, 267
forms of, 116
celular cast with hemoglobin staining, 267
Iype 1, 117-118
cystine crystals in, 268
Type 2, 118
sullonamide crystals in, 268
Type 3, 118
transitional cell carcinoma in
VWE See von Willebrand factor
wet mount, 269
Wright's stain, 269
W
triple phosphate in, 268
Waxy casts, 270
tyrosine in, 268
Weibel-Palade bodies, 108
uric acid in, 268
Westgard Rules, 367
waxy cast in, 267
West Highland White Terrier, PK deficiency in, 5
Urobilinogen, 262-263
White blood cell counts, 58-59
 interpretation of Fndings, 262-263
abnormalities in, 59
measurement of, 262
methods of determination, 58-59
physiology, 262
neutrophilia and heterophilia of inflammation/infection
Urogenital proteinuria, causes ol, 259
pue
Uroperitoneum, effusions and, 351
in birds, 71
in cats, 70
V
in dogs, 70
Vaccine-induced thrombocytopenia, 122
in horses, 70-71
Vacuolation, cytoplasmic, 60
World Health Organization (WHO)
IN DEX
509
Classification of Tumours of Haematopoietic and
Coccidioides immitis, 335, 338
Lymphoid Tissues, 96
Cryptococcus neoformans, 334, 338
lymphoma classification, 88
CSF with pleocytosis and, 344
Wright's stain,16
Histoplasma capsulatum, 334, 338
Malassezia spp., 38
Sporothrix schenchii, 335
Xanthomas, 338
superhicial,338
in urine, 271
Yeasts
Z
Blastomyces dermatitidis, 334, 338
Zinc sullate turbidity test, Ior detecting IgG,
Candida spp., 346
177