Klaus-Dieter Budras · Patrick H. McCarthy ·
Wolfgang Fricke · Renate Richter
Anatomy of the Dog
vet
with Aaron Horowitz and Rolf Berg
schlutersche
Fifth, revised edition
vet
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
Anatomy of the Dog
Fifth, revised Edition
Professor Klaus-Dieter Budras
Institute of Veterinary Anatomy
 Free University of Berlin 
Professor em. Patrick H. McCarthy
Professor Aaron Horowitz
 Professor Rolf Berg
Dept. of Structure and Function
School of Veterinary Medicine 
Ross University, St. Kitts, West Indies
 Science Illustrator
Wolfgang Fricke
Renate Richter
Co worker
Dr Anita Wunsche and Dr Sven Reese
Contributions to Clinical and Functional Anatomy by
Dr Sven Reese, Dr Klaus Gerlach and Professor Klaus-Dieter Budras
Introduction to Radiographic Technique and Ultrasound Diagnosis
Professor Cordula Poulsen Nautrup
Aydenbouol panduo o uopnponu
Dr Claudia Noller
schlutersche
Co-workers on the Atlas of the Anatomy of the Dog
Fourth and Fifth Edition
Title Figure:
Renate Richter
Editor:
 Prof. Dr Klaus-Dieter Budras, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Freie Universitat Berlin
Contributions:
Prof. Dr. Hermann Bragulla, Schocl of Veterinary Medicine, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, USA
Dr. Klaus Gerlach PhD, Tierarztliche Praxis, Berlin
TA Claudia Herrmann, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Freie Universitat Berlin
Dr. Ruth Hirschberg, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Freie Universitat Berlin
Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c. Horst E. Konig, Institut fir Anatomie, Veterinarmedizinische Universitat Wien
Prof. Dr. Dr. h. c. Hans-Georg Liebich, Institut fir Tieranatomie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Minchen
Dr. Claudia Noller, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Freie Universitat Berlin
Dr. Anita Wiunsche, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Freie Universitat Berlin
 Prof. Dr. Paul Simoens, Faculteit Diergeneskunde, Gent, Belgium
Editorial contribution:
Dr. Silke Buda, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Freie Universitat Berlin
Index:
Thilo Voges, Institut fir Veterinar-Anatomie, Freie Universitat Berlin
An index of earlier co-workers and of the sources for illustrations, radiographs, and photographs can be
obtained from the previous edition.
           
Printed in Germany
ISBN 978-3-89993-018-4
A CIP catalogue record for this bock is available from Deutsche Nationalbibliothek, Frankfurt —-Germany.
All rights reserved. The contents of this book both photographic and textual, may not be reproduced in any form, by print,
photoprint, phototransparency, microfilm, video, video disc, microfiche, or any other means, nor may it be included in any
computer retrieval system, without written permission from the publisher.
Any person who does any unauthorised act in relaticn to this publication may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims
for damages.
Table of Contents
References
 Introduction to Anatomy . . 
Topographical Anatomy:
Chapter 1: Surface of the Body and Axial Skeleton
1. Division of the animal body
····
2.
 Skin (common integument)
4
3. Cutaneous glands, modifications of the skin, digital end-organs
6
4.
Vertebral column and thorax
8
5. Articulations of the vertebral column and of the thorax; atlanto-occipital joint and atlanto-axial joints
(A. WUNSCHE and K.-D. BUDRAS) . .
10
Chapter 2: Neck and Chest Region (Cervical and Thoracic Region)
1. Cutaneous muscles and cutaneous nerves of the neck and thoracic wall
12
2. Dorsal extrinsic limb muscles 
12
 3. Ventral extrinsic limb muscles . .
14
4. Nerves, vessels, and visceral organs of the neck .
14
Chapter 3: Thoracic Limb
1. The skeleton of the thoracic limb
. .....
16
Medial veins of the thoracic limb, medial shoulder and arm muscles and their nerve supply
2.
18
3. Lateral veins of the thoracic limb; lateral shoulder and arm muscles and their nerve supply
20
4.
 Antebrachial (forearm) muscles and their nerve supply
·.·...
22
5. Vessels and nerves of the thoracic limb
24
6. Synovial structures of the thoracic limb (A. WUNsCHE and K.-D. BUDRAS)
26
Chapter 4: Thoracic and Abdominal Wall
1. Muscles of the vertebral column, nuchal ligament and lumbar cutaneous nerves 
28
2.
 Respiratory muscles
30
3. Body wall, prepuce, and mammary glands (Mammae)
32
4.
Abdominal muscles, rectus sheath, prepubic tendon
34
5. Inguinal region, inguinal space (inguinal canal), neuromuscular and vascular lacunae
36
 Chapter 5: Thoracic Cavity
1. Lungs, tracheal bifurcation and bronchi
38
2.1
 Blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic system of the lungs; aortic arch; lymph nodes of the thoracic cavity, thymus .
40
3.
Thoracic cavity, pleura, and veins of the thoracic cavity
42
4.
 Heart, surface of the heart, heart wall and relationships in the interior of the heart 
44
5. Heart, coronary vessels, heart valves, cardiac conduction system
46
6. Autonomic nervous system ........... .
48
 Chapter 6: Abdominal Cavity
1. Topography of the abdominal organs and relationships of the peritoneum.
50
2. Peritoneal cavity, lymph nodes of stomach and intestine, cisterna chyli and spleen 
52
 3. Stomach and small intestine, pancreas . .
54
4.
 Large intestine, blood vessels of stomach and intestine
56
5.
Liver and gall bladder (H. BRAGULLA and K.-D. BUDRAS) . . .
58
6. Autonomic nervous system, abdominal aorta, caudal vena cava, sublumbar muscles and the lumbar plexus 
60
Chapter 7: Urinary and Genital Organs, Pelvis 
1. Urinary organs . .
62
 2. Urinary bladder and peritoneal relationships of the genital organs
64
3. Female genital organs
66
4. Male genital organs, lymphatic system of the lumbar and pelvic regions 
68
5. Arteries, veins and nerves of the pelvic cavity, adrenal glands
70
6.
Pelvic diaphragm, ischiorectal fossa, associated arteres, veins and nervs .
72
  d   e  d a  a  
74
 Chapter 8: Pelvic Limb
1. The skeleton of the pelvic limb
76
2.1
Muscles of the hip joint and their nerve supply
78
3.
 The medial saphenous vein, obturator nerve, femoral nerve, medial thigh muscles, femoral space (femoral canal) . .
80
4.
 The lateral saphenous vein, common peroneal nerve and tibial nerve; crural (leg) muscles and popliteus muscle
82
5. Arteries and accompanying vessels and nerves of the pelvic limb
84
6. Synovial structures of the pelvic limb (S. REESE and K.-D. BUDRAS) .
86
Chapter 9: Head
1. Skull, including the hycid apparatus .
88
2. Skull, paranasal sinuses .
90
3. Lymphatic system, superficial veins of the head, facial nerve (VII)
92
4.
 Facial muscles and mandibular muscles . . 
94
5. Internal (deep) muscles of mastication, trigeminal nerve (V), mandibular nerve (V3), maxillary nerve (V2)
96
6.
 Lacrimal apparatus, optic nerve (II), ophthalmic nerve (V1), nerves and muscles of the eye, and external nose 
98
7. Nose, larynx, oral cavity and pharynx
.100
 8. Pharyngeal muscles, cranial nerves of the vagus group (IX, X, XI), autonomic nervous system of the head, arteries of the head,
external acoustic meatus .
.102
9. Tongue, lingual muscles, hypoglossal nerve (XI), salivary glands, and dentition.
.104
10.Joints of the head (S. REESE and K.-D. BUDRAS) . . :
.106
ii
Chapter 10: Central Nervous System
1. Spinal cord and meninges ... .
.108
 2. Brain (Encephalon) and its meningeal coverings
.110
3. Cerebrum (Telencephalon), brain stem and limbic system .. .
.112
4. Rhinencephalon, sites of egression of the cranial nerves, arterial supply of the brain
.114
 5. Cerebral veins, sinuses of the dura mater, cerebral ventricles and chorcid plexuses . .. . . 
. .116
 Chapter 11: Sense organs
1. The eye (P. SIMOENS and K.-D. BUDRAS)
.118
2. The ear (H. KONIG and K.-D. BUDRAS)
.120
.122
Tables, Special Anatomy
1. Myology
...
.124
2. Lymphology
.134
 3. Cranial nerves (C. HERRMANN and K.-D. BUDRAS) .
General Anatomy
1. Osteology: membranous and chondral ossification; growth of bones in length and diameter
.140
.142
3.
Arthrology: the connections of bones and the form of joints .
.144
4.
Myology: general myclogy
.146
5.N
Myology: skeletal musculature and its accessory structures .
.148
6. Nervous system . ....
.150
7. Endocrine system
.152
8.
Cardiovascular system (R. HIRSCHBERG)
.154
9. Lymphatic system (H.-G. LIEBICH and K.-D. BUDRAS)
.156
10.Glands, mucous membranes, and serous membranes
.158
 Introduction to the physics of radiographic and ultrasound diagnostic techniques (C. PoULsEN NAUTRUP) .. ....  . .
. .160
 Introduction to Computed Tomography and Anatomy of the CT Scan (C. NoLLER) .
. .176
 Contributions to Clinical and Functional Anatomy
.180
Index .
.212
How to use this book:
The framed introductions at the beginning of the text-pages dealing with topographical anatomy give information with respect to the dis-
section of the areas shown in the figures. At the same time, they can be used as abbreviated dissection instructions. Boldface terms of anatom-
ical structures serve for emphasis and, insofar as they are identified by numbers, they are represented on the neighboring illustration-page
where they are identified by the same number Numbers on the margin of the text-pages refer to the Clinical and Functional Anatomy, The
numbers in the clinical anatomy part refer to the corresponding page in the topographical anatomy; e.g., “8.2' refers to the part numbered
'2' on page 8. The anatomical/medical terms and expressions occurring in the text are explained and interpreted in *Anatomical Terms.'
Abbreviations of anatomical terms follow the abbreviaticns as employed in the Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria (2005). Other abbreviations
are explained in the appertaining text, and in the titles and legends for the illustrations. A few abbreviations that are not generally employed
are listed here:
The cranial nerves (Nervi craniales) are designated with roman numerals I - XII.
Spinal nerves (Nervi spinales):
n
 Nervus spinalis
nd
— Ramus dorsalis n. spinalis
IPU
Ramus dorsclateralis
ndm —
 Ramus dorsomedialis
nv
Ramus ventralis
nvl
Ramus ventrolateralis
nvm
 Ramus ventromedialis
nC
Nervus cervicalis (e.g., nC1 - first cervical nerve)
nCy
Nervus coccygeus s. caudalis
nL
 Nervus lumbalis
nS
Nervus sacralis
nT
— Nervus thoracicus
Vertebrae
vC
— Vertebra cervicalis (e.g., vC3 - third cervical vertebra)
vL
- Vertebra lumbalis
vS
Vertebra sacralis
vT
— Vertebra thoracica
1V
Preface to the Fifth Edition
The present revised and enlarged edition is published at a time of change,
dissection and contribute by that to the acquisition of a solid knowledge.
which is characterized by the new appointment of all anatomically orient-
 For dissection and pictorial rendition, the topographical-anatomical pro-
ed chairs in the German-speaking area. The tendency to shorten the time
 cedure offers the enormous advantage that comprehensive subjects can be
for anatomical education has existed for a longer time, which to a moder-
imparted with brevity in a natural reality. For the practicing veterinarian
ate degree seems to be acceptable and unavoidable for the creation of free
'sueiado pesans ie uoneo iog aqens are saeid peydeiaodot au
space for new educational subjects. Because this trend now seems to
assume excessive proportions, the danger exists of a partial or even total
The consideration of computed tomography, which thanks to Dr Noller
renunciation of the dissection of the animal body, which since the time of
was integrated into the current eighth edition, has the objective to safe-
Leonardo da Vinci has been considered a very efficient and essential
guard an attractive field of activity for anatomy. The imparting of normal
method of depening our knowledge. The deficiency in practical exercises
structure discoverable by computed tomography and supplemented by the
cannot be compensated by our offer of anatomical drawings but will miti-
 presentation of clinical-functional cases creates a solid basis for the further
development and application of imaging procedures in the clinical curricu-
our realistic figures in the atlas part of our textbook have the indisputable
lum and later in the practice of veterinary medicine.
value that they provide the essential basis for understanding much used
sketches and schematic representations. Beyond that, as an illustrated
guide to dissection, they promote the proper initiative for an independent
Berlin, in the summer of 2007
The Authors
Preface to the First German Edition (abridged)
The Atlas of the Anatomy of the Dog was conceived as a compendium and
 Professor Fritz Preuss introduced the whole-animal topographical anatomy
-Sip ieoiue ienudeiaodoi aui ot uoonponu ue se au aues ai ie
dn uea i am au pa sunsu uass s pue ug u
section as well as for teaching. The subject matter of anatomy was pre-
to the dras-tinc shortening and repositioning of the dissection exercises.
pared from a topographical point of view with separation into systems. To
 The successful and exacting method of dissection with the short time avail-
do that, the osteology, myology, angiology, neurology and splanchnology
able places high demands on the students and requires a multisided support
of the different parts of the body were dealt with in sequence in their reci-
by the instructors. With its true to nature rendition of areas of dissection
procal re-lationship to one another and demonstrated by topographical
with accompanying text, the present atlas should serve for this purpose
colored plates with complementary schematic diagrams. The methods of
 also. Instructions for dissection of the illustrated preparation and guidance
presentation emphasize the mutual topographical relationships of the ves-
to the person carrying out the exercise were placed at the beginning of the
sels and nerves considered, laying stress on their nomenclatural agreement.
 described part. Structures to be dissected are specially emphasized in the
In that way, the concern for the multiplicity, the breadth, and the com-
text by boldface print. To keep the space limitations, anatomical variations
plexity of the material should be minimized. The concept chosen here, with
are given less attention. The current Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria
its close relationship of content and apposition of illustration and pertinent
(HOLZHAUSEN, Vienna 1973) was utilized, which also holds in the main
description, has the advantage of being able to deal with the essential in the
for the applied abbreviations. Moreover, in the written material only ver-
smallest space.
tebrae and nerve branches were abbreviated (e.g.: VL 1 for the first lumbar
vertebra; nL 1vl for the ventrolateral branch of the first lumbar nerve). In
The present book offers to the students a clearly arranged illustrative mate-
the legends of the figures and the tabular compositions, owing to the limi-
rial and an abbreviated reading supplementing textbook study and class-
tations of space even more extensive, otherwise uncommon, abbreviations
room material as well as an aid for review, especially for preparation
had to be used. Suggestions and wishes of the students, for example with
for examinations. For the practising veterinarian, it is drawn up as a source
[eue ioy pue kaonou lads ioy saqen au suedaid oi noadsa
of quick information and to refresh and deepen what was previously
terms were largely considered.
learned. The breadth, division and sequence of the subject matter accord-
ing to the pre-ceding are coordinated with the topographical dissection that
 Dissections from the anatomical collection of the Department of Anatomy,
is offered to the students at the Free University of Berlin as the teaching
Histology and Embryology (Institute for Veterinary Anatomy, Histology
program in their first semester of study. Upon the foundation achieved, the
and Embryology) ofthe Free University of Berlin served as models for the
subsequent study of comparative and clinically applied anatomy is con-tin-
figures. These specimens were prepared by the technical staff of the depart-
ued. Topographical anatomy is the foundation and the key to understand-
 ment, Mr. Seifert, Mr. Dressel, and Mr. Schneider.
ing the associated medicine It is of special value to the surgeon and pathol-
ogist.
 Berlin, summer 1983
The Authors
References
Adams, D. R., 2004: Canine Anatomy 4. Ed., Iowa State University Press,
Spiral-CT an der Veterinarmedizinischen Universitat Wien. Tierarztl.
Ames
Mschr. 89: 70-77
Amman, E., E. Seiferle und G. Pelloni, 1978: Atlas zur chirurgisch-topo-
 Henninger, W. und S. Kneissl, 2004: Seminar Computertomographie. DVG
 graphischen Anatomie des Hundes. Paul Parey, Berlin, Hamburg
Arbeitstagung West ,Kleintierkrankheiten", Hofheim, 30.04.2004,
Anderson, W. D. and Anderson G. B., 1994: Atlas of Canine Anatomy. Lea
S. 11-14 
 and Febinger, Philadelphia, Baltimore
Henninger, W. und M. Pavlicek, 2001: Konventionelle CT-Untersuchungs-
 Barone, R. 1976: Anatomie Comparee des Mammiferes Domestiques; T. 1
 protokolle, erstellt nach Regionen, fir den optimalen Kontra stmittel-
Osteologie; T 2 - Arthrologie et Myologie; T. 3 - Splanchnologie,
einsatz beim Hund. Teil 1 und 2. Kleintierpraxis 46: 685-698, 761-
 Foetus et ses Annexes. Viget Freres, Paris
772
Baum, H., 1917: Die LymphgefaRe der Haut des Hundes. Anat. Anz. 50:
Henschel, E. und W. Gastinger, 1963: Beitrag zur Arteriographie der Aa.
521-539
carotis und vertebralis beim Hund. Berl. Minch. Tierarztl. Wschr.
Baum, H. und O. Zietzschmann, 1936: Handbuch der Anatomie des Hun-
76: 241-243
des, 2. Aufl., Paul Parey, Berlin
Henschel, E., 1971: Zur Anatomie und Klinik der wachsenden Unterarm-
 Berg, R., 1995: Angewandte und topographische Anatomie der Haustiere.
knochen mit Vergleichen zwischen der Distractio cubiti des Hundes
4. Aufl., Gustav Fischer, Jena
und der Madelungschen Deformitat des Menschen. Arch. Experim.
Bohme, G., 1967: Unterschiede am Gehirnventrikelsystem von Hund und
Vet. med. 26: 741-787
Katze nach Untersuchungen an Ausgusspraparaten. Berl. Minch.
Hoerlein, B. F, 1978: Canine Neurology. Diagnosis and Treatment. 3. Ed.,
Tierarztl. Wschr. 80: 195-196
W. B. Saunders Comp., Philadelphia, London, Toronto
Bojrab, M. J., 1981: Praxis der Kleintierchirurgie. Enke, Stuttgart
Hofer, M., 2000: CT-Kursbuch: Ein Arbeitsbuch fir den Einstieg in die
 Bonath, K. H. und W. D. Prieur, 1998: Kleintierkrankheiten Bd 3 Orthopa-
 Computertomographie. 3. Aufl., Mattias Hofer Verlag Didamed
 dische Chirugie und Traumatologie. Ulmer Verlag, Stuttgart
Hyrtl, J., 1880: Onomatologia Anatomica. Braunmiller, Wien
 Boyd, J. S., C. Paterson and A. H. May, 1991: A Colour Atlas of Clinical
International Committee on Gross Anatomical Nomenclature, 2005:
 Anatomy of the Dog and Cat. Wolfe Publ. Ltd., London
Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria, 5. Ed., Nomina Histologica, 3. Ed.,
Bradly, O. Ch., 1959: Topographical Anatomy of the Dog. 6. Ed., Oliver
 and Boyd, Edinburgh, London 
Ithaca, N. Y.
Kadletz, M., 1932: Anatomischer Atlas der Extremitatengelenke von Pferd
 Bucher, O. und W. Wartenberg, 1997: Cytologie, Histologie und mikro-
und Hund. Urban und Schwarzenberg, Berlin, Wien 
 skopische Anatomie des Menschen. 12. Aufl, Hans Huber, Bern,
Kealy, J. K., 1991: Rontgendiagnostik bei Hund und Katze. 2. Auf., Enke,
Stuttgart, Wien
Budras, K.-D., 1972: Zur Homologisierung der Mm. adductores und des
Stuttgart
King, A. S., 1978: A Guide to the Physiological and Clinical Anatomy of
M. pectineus der Haussa ugetiere. Zbl. Vet. Med., C, 1: 73-91
Budras, K.-D., F. Preuf, W. Traeder und E. Henschel, 1972: Der Leisten-
the Thorax. 4. Ed., Dept. Vet. Anat., University of Liverpool, Liver-
pool
Berl. Minch. Wschr. 85: 427-431
King, A. S. and V. A. Riley, 1980: A Guide to the Physiological and Clini-
Budras, K.-D. und E. Seifert, 1972: Die Muskelinsertionsareale des Beckens 
cal Anatomy of the Head. 4. Ed., Dept. Vet. Anat., University of
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX
von Hund und Katze, zugleich ein Beitrag zur Homologisierung der 
Linea glutaeae unserer Haussaugetiere. Anat. Anz. 132: 423-434
Koch, T. und R. Berg, 1981-1985: Lehrbuch der Veterinar-Anatomie. Bd.
 Budras, K.-D. und A. Winsche, 1972: Arcus inguinalis und Fibrae reflexae
1-3, Gustav Fischer, Jena
 des Hundes. Gegenbauers morph. Jb. 1 17: 408-419
Konig, H. E., 1992: Anatomie der Katze. Gustav Fischer, Stuttgart, Jena,
 Dammrich, K., 1981: Zur Pathologie der degenerativen Erkrankungen der 
N. Y.
Wirbelsaule bei Hunden. Kleintierpra xis 26: 467-476
Konig, H. E. und H. G. Liebich, 2006: Veterinary Anatomy of Domestic
Dahme E. und E. Weiss, 2007: Grundriss der speziellen pathologischen
Mammals. 3. Ed., Schattauer, Stuttgart, N. Y.
Anatomie der Haustiere. 6. Aufl., Enke, Stuttgart
 Kraft, W., 1993: Tierarztliche Endoskopie. Schattauer, Stuttgart, N. Y.
De Lahunta, A., 1983: Veterinary Neuroanatomy and Clinical Neurology.
Krstic, R. V., 1988: Die Gewebe des Menschen und der Saugetiere. 2. Aufl.,
2. Ed., W. B. Saunders Comp., Philadelphia
 Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York
 De Lahunta, A. and R. E. Habel, 1986: Applied Veterinary Anatomy. W. B.
Krstic, RV, 1984:llustrated Encyclopediaof Hman HstologySpriner,
Saunders Comp., Philadelphia
 Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Tokyo
Dietz, O. (Hrsg.), 2004: Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Chirurgie fir Tiermedi-
Kriger, G., 1968: Veterinarmedizinische Terminologie. 3. Aufl., Hirzel,
ziner Begr v. W. Bolz, 6. Aufl., Enke, Stuttgart
Leipzig
Donat, K., 1971: Die Fixierung der Clavicula bei Katze und Hund. Anat.
Leonhardt, H., 1990: Histologie, Zytologie und Mikroanatomie des Men-
Anz. 128: 365-374
schen. 8. Aufl., Thieme, Stuttgart
Done, St. H., P C. Goody, S. A. Evans et al., 1996: Colour Atlas of Vete-
Liebich, H.-G., 2004: Funktionelle Histologie. 4. Aufl, Schattauer, Stutt-
rinary Anatomy. Vol. 3: The Dog and Cat. Mosby-Wolfe, London
gart, N. Y.
Dyce, K. M., W. O. Sack and C. J. G. Wensing, 2002: Textbook of vete-
Lippert, H., 2006: Lehrbuch Anatomie. 7. Aufl., Urban und Fischer, Min-
rinary anatomy. 3. Ed., W. B. Saunders Comp., Philadelphia
Ellenberger,WundHBaum,1943:Handbuch der vergleichendenAnat
chen
Nickel, R., A. Schummer und E. Seiferle, 2003: Lehrbuch der Anatomie der
mie der Haustiere. 18. Aufl, Springer, Berlin
 Haustiere. Gesamtausgabe, S Bd., Paul Parey, Berlin, Hamburg 
 Eurell, J. A. (Hrsg.), 2006: Dellmann's textbook of veterinary histology. 6.
Nitschke, Th., 1970: Diaphragma pelvis, Clitoris und Vestibulum vaginae
Ed., Blackwell, Ames, lowa
der Hindin. Anat. Anz. 127: 76-125
Evans, H. E. and A. de Lahunta, 2000: Guide to the Dissection of the Dog.
 Noller, C., 2006 : Klinisch-funktionelle Anatomie und comptertomogra-
5. Ed., W. B. Saunders Comp., Philadelphia, London, Toronto
 phische Darstellung der Nase bei normo- und brachycephalen Kat-
Evans, H. E., 1993: Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. 3. Ed., W. B. Saunders
zen. Diss. med. vet., Berlin
 Comp., Philadelphia, London, Toronto
 Pierard, J, 1972: Anatomie Appliquee des Carnivores Domestiques, Chien
 Franke, H-R., 1970: Zur Anatomie des Organum vomeronasale des Hun-
et Chat. Sornabec, Quebec
des. Diss. med. Vet., Freie Universitat Berlin
 Reese, S., 1995: Untersuchungen am intakten und rupturierten Lig. crucia-
Frewein, J. und B. Vollmerhaus, 1994: Anatomie von Hund und Katze.
 Blackwell Wissenschafts-Verlag, Berlin
tum craniale des Hundes. Diss. med. vet., Berlin
 Rohde, U, U. Wiskott und H. E. Konig, 1980: Computertomographie des
Getty, R., 1975: Sisson and Grossman's Anatomy of the Domestic Animals.
Vol. 2 - Porcine, Carnivore, Aves. 5. Ed., W. B. Saunders Comp., Phi-
Abdomens beim Menschen und Hund - eine vergleichende Studie.
ladelpia, London, Toronto
Kleintierpraxis 25: 135-142
Getty, R., H. L. Foust, E. T. Presley and M. C. Miller, 1956: Macroscopic
 Ruedorffer, N. v., 1996: Morphologische Untersuchungen zur Orthologie
 anatomy of the ear of the dog. Amer. J. Vet. Res. 17: 364-375
und Pathologie der Tuberositas tibiae bei Hunden bis zum Alter von
Gorman, N. T., 1998: Canine Medicine and Therapeutics. 4. Ed., Black-
2 Jahren. Diss. med. vet., Berlin
well, Oxford, London
 Salomon, F-V. und H. Geyer, 2007: Atlas der angewandten Anatomie der
Grandage, J. 1972: The erect dog penis. Vet. Rec. 91: 141-147
Haustiere. 3. erw. Aufl., Enke, Stuttgart 
Habel, R. E., 1985: Applied Veterinary Anatomie. Pub. by author, Ithaca,
Schaller, O., 1992: Illustrated Veterinary Anatomical Nomenclature. Enke,
N. Y.
Stuttgart
Habel, R. und K.-D. Budras, 1992: Anatomy of the praepubic tendon in
Schwarz, T, 2002: General principles in CT imaging planning. The Euro-
horse, cow, sheep, goat and dog. Am. J. Vet. Res. 53: 2183-2195
Hennig, Ch., 1965: Zur Kenntnis des M. retractor ani et penis s. clitoridis
et constrictor recti (M. retractor cloacae) beim Hund. Anat. Anz.
Simoens, P, 1985: Morphologic study of the vasculature in the orbit and
117:201-215
eyeball of the pig. Thesis Fakul. Vet. Med., State Univ. Ghent
Henning, P, 1965: Der M. piriformis und die Nn. clunium medi des Hun-
Suter, P. E. und B. Kohn, 2006: Praktikum der Hundeklinik. Begr. v. H. G.
des.Zbl. Vet. Med., A, 12: 263-275
Niemand, 10. Auf., Paul Parey, Berlin, Hamburg
Henninger, W., 2002: Historischer Rickblick auf die Entwicklung der
Winsche, A. und K.-D. Budras, 1972: Der M. cremaster externus resp.
 Computertomographie anlasslich der Inbetriebnahme eines neuen
compressor mammae des Hundes. Zbl. Vet. Med. C, 1: 138-148
V1
Introduction to Anatomy
The term anatomy stems from the Greek word, anatemnein' which means
only occasionally in human beings. With his study of the human skull he
to dissect, to cut apart. The important anatomist Hyrtl spoke consistently
encountered a specimen with a developed incisive bone. It was by compar-
also of the art of dissection. The original meaning is true even today;
ison with the animal skull that he was able to identify the bone and estab-
although the term has gained a wider meaning. Modern anatomy is not
lish its homology.
limited to mere description but emphasizes the interrelations between form
and function as well as the application of anatomical knowledge in the clin-
 Topographical anatomy emphasizes the varying position-relationship of
ic. Then as today the student gains most of his knowledge by dissection of
anatomical structures and underlines the areas of application for
the animal body in the laboratory, where he lays bare the 'naked truth'
clinical medicine. The relationship of anatomical structures is analyzed step
(Nudas veritas). This practice also serves to obtain a necessary finger-dex-
by step and in doing so the whole structural plan of the body is regarded.
terity, which in later professional life, in the first place in surgery, is of
 Applied anatomy is directed clinically and emphasizes the relationship of
immeasurable value. Beyond that there are hardly any limits to investiga-
anatomical structures from which treatments or diseases of animals can be
tion by enthusiastic dissection. Even the very best anatomical collection of
 determined or explained. In that way not only interdisciplinary coopera-
 outstanding demonstration-dissections cannot replace practical work in
 tion and interest for the veterinary profession are promoted but also the
the laboratory, but can however indeed make it easier and more efficient.
 learning of anatomy is made easier.
The thorough study of anatomical preparations is indispensable like the
industrious use of textbooks and atlases. All of these aids are more impor-
The anatomy of the living dog is undoubtedly a significant part of the
tant today than ever since there is much less time available for practical
whole ofanatomy. It presents the body in its natural condition. In that way
work in the laboratory than formerly. Shortening the teaching time allot-
a significant completion and an adjustment for unavoidable disadvantage
ted to anatomy in favor of newer disciplines was unavoidable.
becomes imperative in the remaining subjets of the whole of anatomy,
which must tolerate postmortem changes such as variations in color, con-
Anatomical study is, unlike any other basic discipline, important in learn-
sistency and character as well as artificial changes resulting from fixation.
ing the language of medicine, the terminology. Many terms for diseases and
 Anatomy of the living dog cannot be given attention here for several rea-
sons. It is adaped even less for rendering in a book, but can be offered to
research and description brought an unforeseen abundance of synonyms.
the students better and more successfully in an exercise under the instruc-
The function of the international nomenclature commission has been to
tion of a clinically experienced anatomist.
thin out the jungle of terms and to publish a recognized list of official terms
with useful synonyms.
 Radiographic anatomy and sonography are directly connected to the clin-
ic. In the teaching of anatomy, the first experiences are obtained in analy-
 In its entirety, anatomy is subdivided into macroscopic (gross) anatomy,
sis of radiographs of the normal animal body. This experience will be uti-
microscopic anatomy and developmental anatomy. However, the areas of
lized and considerably supplemented in the total associated area of study.
 Presentations of abnormal or even pathological changes should awaken the
ing constantly and forcefully advocated by the important Berlin veterinary
 interest and accordingly add *spice' to the teaching of anatomy.
anatomist and, at an earlier time, the professorial chair of our department,
 Professor Preuss. The oldest and most encompassing area is macroscopic
The atlas of anatomy presented here is adapted in special measure to signif-
anatomy, often placed equal to the term anatomy. Where the accessories to
icantly combine and coordinate the different methods of presenting anato-
 observation in macroscopic anatomy, the bare eye and the dissection hand
my and the manner of viewing it. The textual part can be presented in a
lens no longer reach, it passes over into the area of microscopic anatomy
very compressed form since the different anatomical circumstances can be
(histology and cytology), to which the microscope serves as accessory. The
'read off from time to time from the adjacent color-plate. Beyond that, a
boundary between macroscopic and microscopic anatomy is also called
-odot ioy uonpou lapi ue suasand aeid-rojos jedeisodoi poos
mesoscopy, which is gaining more and more in significance. The latter area
 graphical dissection, which is then completed only by brief remarks. Also
deals with the same material and pursues the same goals; it is only the tech-
the requisites of comparative veterinary anatomy are taken into account in
nique that is different. The third area, embryology, is concerned with onto-
this atlas insofar as the simply structured (from many points of view)
 genesis (development of the individual) before and after birth and, in addi-
 canine body is set out as the cornerstone.? Building upon this knowledge,
tion to embryological methods, applies also macroscopic, microscopic and
 the more complicated (from many points of view) anatomy of the remain-
mesoscopic methods.
ing domestic animals can be comprehended from the aspect of comparative 
 Like the remaining disciplines, macroscopic anatomy can be presented
anatomy.
from different points of view with emphasis on special areas of greater dif-
 Art and anatomy with their mutual interrelations are forcefully impressed
ficulty. In so doing, the basic facts remain of course unchanged.
 on us with each visit to a museum. The artist is inspired by the corporeal
beauty, and teachers and students of anatomy enjoy and profit from the tal-
 Systematic, descriptive anatomy describes the animal body with all its parts
as systems of structure and organ-systems, strictly divided from one anoth-
ent and painstaking detail in the artistic presentation. Gifted with genius
er and therefore without attention to their natural interdependence. Expan-
were realized the claims of Leonardo da Vinci, whose abundant anatomi-
sive descriptions treat many particulars and allow some-times the view to
cal drawings came about after basic studies of anatomy. Aristotle published
 the important to be missed; nevertheless they are a necessary prerequisite
among other things an anatomical description of senile sexual reversal in
to the remaining, subsequent kinds of observations to which the descrip-
the bird as well of the horse hoof in regard to founder. What fascination of
tive anatomy has led.
anatomy lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp. The greats of world history gifted
Systematic anatomy can be subdivided further into general and special
with genius like Aristotle, Leonardo da Vinci and Goethe show proof of
anatomy.
their enthusiasm for anatomy with anatomical illustrations, descriptions
General anatomy treats of facts that are generally valid for the entire sys-
 and research results. To Goethe's credit was the promotion of educational
tem of structure or the organ-s ystem.
art and the introduction of plastic wax models in Germany, to which he,
himself, was inspired during his journey to Italy, especially in Florence. The
 Special anatomy provides special data for these structure- and organ-sys-
good qualities of wax models, which is true to an equal measure for well
tems that hold for individual structures, as for one bone.
done true-to-nature illustrations, Goethe expressed in his novel *Wilhelm
 Comparative anatomy emphasizes anatomical correlations, similarities
Meisters Wanderjahre' with the following excellent formulation: If you
 and variations between the individual animal species and human beings.
concede that most physicians and surgeons retain in their minds only a gen-
Comparisons of anatomy between the individual species are very often
 eral impression of the dissected human body and believe that to satisfy the
informative and helpful for homology and determining the function of
 purpose; so such models will certainly suffice, which refresh in his mind
anatomical structure. Already Goethe utilized principles of comparative
again little by litle pictures that are fading and actively retain for him just
anatomy to good advantage with the discovery of the incisive bone of
the necessary. His investigative mind held Goethe, who with his discovery
human beings. This bone occurs regularly in our domestic animals and
:kol alqexadsun, tay auoq aaisouy ueunq aul jo
Topographical Anatomy
Chapter 1: Surface of the Body and Axial Skeleton
1. Division of the animal body
a) SUBDIVISION OF THE BODY
 a different meaning on the limb extremities. The term ventral, in a direc-
The longitudinal lines and planes of the body are useful for the orientation
tion toward the belly (venter), may be used on the proximal parts of the
of the body and of the body surface. The dorsal (a) and ventral midline (b)
limb, but is not used on the free part of the limbs. The terms proximal (i,
toward the attached end) and distal (m, toward the free end) are related to
are the dorsal and ventral median lines of the body, respectively.
the axis of the body (vertebral column and spinal cord with the origin of
The median plane (A) is the plane between the two lines mentioned above.
 spinal nerves). On the limbs, from the carpus distally, the term palmar (l,
It divides the body into right and left halves. Sagittal (paramedian) planes
the surface of the manus that faces caudally in the normal standing atti-
(B) are adjacent planes parallel and lateral to the median plane. They divide
tude) is employed; from the tarsus distally (m, the surface of the pes that
the body longitudinally, but into unequal parts. Transverse planes (C) are
faces caudally inthe normal standing attitude of the animal),the term plan-
planes that divide the body transversely and are perpendicular to the medi-
tar. The term dorsal is utilized alike on the thoracic limb from the carpus
an and sagittal planes. Dorsal planes (D) lie parallel to the dorsal body sur-
 distally and on the pelvic limb from the tarsus distally. It refers to surface
face. They divide the body perpendicular to the longitudinal (median and
 of the manus and pes that is cranial in the normal standing attitude of the
paramedian planes) and transverse planes. In that view, two symmetrical
 animal. Terms like abaxial (n, away from the axis) and axial fo, toward the
body sides appear and it is for that reason that dorsal planes are also called
axis) are related to the central axis of the hand (manus) or foot (pes), in
bilateral planes.
which the axis lies between the third and fourth digits. In front (anterior),
b) TERMS THAT DESCRIBE THE DIRECTION AND TOPOGRAPHICAL RELATIONS OF
behind (posterior), above (superior) and below (inferior) are terms often
 ORGANs derive partially from body parts, e.g., in direction toward the tail
 used in human anatomy and refer to the human body in the normal upright
(caudal —c), partially from landmarks of the body surface, e.g., parallel to
 attitude. To avoid misunderstanding, these terms are not applied to the
the median plane (sagittal —d) or designate with respect to hollow organs
 quadruped animal body. Their use in veterinary anatomy is restricted to
external or internal. Furthermore terms are used as left (sinister) and right
certain areas of the head; e.g., upper and lower eyelids, anterior and pos-
(dexter), short (brevis) and long (longus) or deep (profundus) and superfi-
terior surfaces of the eye.
Cial (superficialis), longitudinal (longitudinalis) or transverse (transversus)
 as well as lateral (lateralis) and toward the median plane (medialis). The
 c) PARTs OF THE BoDY AND BoDY REGIONS subdivide the body, including the
term cranial (e), in a direction toward the head, cannot be applied in the 
surface of the body. Parts of the body are head and trunk with neck, rump,
head region. Here the term rostral is used (f, in a direction toward the tip
 and tail, as well as the limbs. The body regions divide the surface of the
Ofthe nose). The term dorsal (g) relates to the back' or dorsum of the body.
body andcanbesubdividedintubrensIthelattease,hyaa
It may also be used with respect to the proximal parts of the limbs; but has
 indented in the following ta ble.
 REGIONS OF THE BODY
 Regions of the cranium
 Regions of the dorsum
Regions of the thoracic limb
Frontal region
23 Thoracic vertebral region
41 Region of the humeral joint
2
 Parietal region
23＇
 Interscapular region
42 Axillary region
 Occipital region
 24 Lumbar region
42'  Axillary fossa
4
Temporal region
 43 Brachial region
5
Auricular region
Pectoral regions
 44 Tricipital region
 25 Presternal region
45 Cubital region
Regions of the face
 26 Sternal region
46 Region of the olecranon
 Nasal region
 27 Scapular region
47 Antebrachial region
 Dorsal nasal region
 28 Costal region
6
48 Carpal region
6"
 Lateral nasal region
 29 Cardiac region
49 Metacarpal region
6'"
Region of the naris
 50 Phalangeal region
7
Oral region
 Regions of the abdomen
(region of the digits,
7
 Superior labial region
 30 Cranial abdominal region
digital region)
7"
 Inferior labial region
30'  Hypochondriac region
Mental region
 30"" Xiphoid region
 Regions of the pelvic limb
9
 Orbital region
 31 Middle abdominal region
 51 Region of the hip joint
upper palpebral
 31'  Lateral abdominal region
52 Region of the thigh
9
9"
 lower palpebral
31"
Paralumbar fossa
S3 Genual region (region of the
10 Zygomatic region
31 Umbilical region
knee, region of the stifle joint)
11 Infraorbital region
 32 Caudal abdominal region
S3' Patellar region
12 Region of the temporomandibular
32'
 Inguinal region
54 Popliteal region
articulation
 Pubic region and preputial region 
55 Region of the crus
13 Masseteric region
(region of the leg)
14 Buccal region
 Pelvic regions
 56 Tarsal region
15 Maxillary region
33 Sacral region
 57 Calcaneal region
 16 Mandibular region
 34 Gluteal region
 58 Metatarsal region
 17 Intermandi bular region
35 Region of the tuber coxae
59 Phalangeal region (region of the
 36 Ischiorectal fossa
digits, digital region)
Regions of the neck
37 Region of the tuber ischiadicum
18 Dorsal neck region
38 Caudal region (tail region)
19 Lateral neck region
38'  Region of the root of the tail
 20 Parotid region
 39 Perineal region
 21 Pharyngeal region
39
Anal region
 22 Ventral neck region
 39"" Urogenital region
22
 Laryngeal region
40 Scrotal region
22'
 Tracheal region
Body regions and terms of site and direction in relation to parts of the body indicated
(lateral view)
28
22
39
(craniolateral view)
59
(ventral view)
53
47
55
Diaphragm
56
45
46
57
43
28
30'
31
52
26
29
30"
30
31"
25
2. The Skin (Common Integument)
1
 a) The Skin forms the external surface of the body and consists of two lay-
 The lymphatic supply is by lymph capillary networks that begin subepi
ers: I. an epithelial layer designated epidermis and Il. a connective tissue
 dermally and invest the hair follicles and skin glands.
layer designated dermis or corium. The dermis rests upon an underlying
eduasi suonu suaueduas pue Aiosuas aq si Aiddns aaiau au
layer of connective tissue, the subcutaneous layer or subcutis Tela subcu-
 nerve plexuses invest the blood vessels and function to regulate the blood
tanea). The latter consists of a fatty part, the panniculus adiposus, and a
 pressure and in thermoregulation). The skin can be considered as the
supporting fibrous part that, together, constitute the superficial fascia.
largest sensory organ of the body. Numerous nerve terminals (16) and ter-
I. The epidermis (1) is made up of a stratified squamous epithelium that is
minal end corpuscles (e.g., MEIsSNER'S tactile discs, -17, and VATER-
cornified (keratinized) at its surface. Thickness and degree of keratinization
 PACINIAN lamellar corpuscles, —22) serve as receptors for sensory stim-
depend on the mechanical stress to which this layer is subject. The epider-
uli. With loss of their myelin sheaths, free nerve endings penetrate the epi-
mis is composed of a deep, still living, layer, (stratum germinativum =basal
 dermis at particular sites of the body and serve to mediate the sensation of
layer, —27) which, by mitotic division, furnishes cell replacement, a spin-
 pain.
ous layer (26), a cornifying, dying layer (stratum granulosum, —25) as well
 b) The Hains cover nearly the entire body surface, except the plamu
2
 as cornified cell layers, stratum lucidum (24) and stratum corneum (23). In
 nasale, anus, vulvar lips and limb pads. Hairs are cornified filiform struc-
addition to the epidermal cells, there are melanocytes, LANGERHANS*
tures that are formed by the skin. The hair is subdivided into the shaft (15),
 cells, and MERKEL'S tactile discs, especially in the stratum germinativum.
which projects beyond the surface of the skin, the root (21), which is
"Horn’ is cornified epidermis and is of varying quality in the different
obliquely oriented within the dermis and has at its proximal end an
regions of the body. On the pads and in other regions of the skin there is 
 expanded part, the hair bulb (8). Hair root and hair bulb are in a divided
soft horn. Hard horn is found at the claw. In the skin and at the pads, the 
 epithelial root sheath (Vagina epithelialis radicularis). The outer part of the
cornified cells are shed as scales owing to reduced adhesion of membrane
sheath is continuous with the superficial epidermis. Its inner part cornifies
coating materials. At the same time, because of good adhesion as a solid
 above the mouth of the sebaceous gland (18) and will be shed. The con-
 nective tissue root sheath (Vagina dermalis radicularis) is continuous with
individual horn cell of the claw is distinctly harder than that of the skin. In
 the surrounding connective tissue. The epidermal and dermal root sheaths
areas where soft horn is formed, the epidermis exhibits a stratum granulo-
sum between the stratum spinosum and the cornified layers. The stratum
the hair are medulla (12), the cortex (13) and the superficial hair cuticle
 granulosum is so-named because of the keratohyalin granules that it con-
(14), which consists of thin scale-like cornified cells and, the same as the
tains. The proteins within this layer of cells coat and glue' the keratin fil-
 medulla, is used for forensic species identification and individual diagnos-
aments together. At individual sites additionally a stratum lucidum occurs.
tic procedures. The arrector pili muscle (5) terminates below the mouth of
It consists of young, not yet differentiated, cornifying cells, the cytoplasm
 the sebaceous gland, attaching obliquely to the dermal sheath of the root
of which appears somewhat transparent when examined under the micro-
 of the hair. Its contraction results in erection of the hair (in human beings,
 scope, hence the name stratum lucidum. In the areas of formation of hard
this brings about the phenomenon of goose pimples"). Contraction of the
horn, these layers are absent, so that the cells of the stratum spinosum
 arrector pili muscle compresses the sebaceous glands and, in erecting the
cornify directly without intervening strata granulosum and lucidum.
 hair, increases the air space between the hairs and the skin surface for ther-
The function of the epidermis consists of the replacement of cornified cells
mo-isolation.
as a protection from radiation (radiation absorbing pigments; see histol-
 The hair coat depends on the breed and is characterized by the individual
ogy), from the loss and entrance of water into the body, from the entrance 
and group-like arrangement of the hairs, the different portions of the indi-
of parasites and for protection against trauma. With traumatic injury to the
vidual hair types (lead hairs, guard hairs, wool hairs) as well as by the den
 skin, healing is furthered by covering the exposed dermis by epidermal cells 
sity, length and color of the hairs. There are basically three types of hairs:
 as soon as possi ble.
-a s i a aa pue s u s u u, io neu , a
 II. The dermis or corium (6) consists of a thin, loosely arranged papillary
 pendent of other hairs and in the dog occurs only rarely. Guard hairs are
layer (2), the papille of which are seated in corresponding depressions of
shorter than the lead hair, arched near the tip and thickened. Both lead and
the epidermis, and a dense reticular layer (7). The papillary layer contains
guard hair types form the hair coat (Capill). The third and shortest type of
 mainly loosely arranged collagenous fibrils. The reticular layer consists of
hair is the wool hair. It is very thin, pliable and in its course slightly or
 a plexus of coarse nondistensible collagenic fibers with a predominant
strongly undulated. Guard and wool hairs pass in a bundle or tuft togeth-
 course direction. Elastic fibers are present in both layers and function to
er from a compound hair follicle, in which case one guard hair is sur-
restore the typical texture of the tissue following lacerations or other dis-
 rounded by the six to twelve wool hairs that accompany it.
tortion of the skin (with respect to the cells that are found here, especially
The wool hairs (11) predominate in the coat of the puppy. In most canine
fibrocytes, fibroblasts, mast cells, plasma cells, macrophages and pigment
5
breeds they lie under the hair coat and only in a few breeds such as the Puli
cells, see histology).
and Commodore, do they project above the hair coat and form a superfi-
4
 The subcutis (10) (Tela subcutanea) consists mainly of loose connective
cial ‘wool coat.'
and adipose tissue. It is penetrated by connective tissue cords that fix the
Sinus or tactile hairs (19) are remarkably long, special forms of hair in the
skin to the underlying fascia or periosteum. The panniculus adiposus is the
vicinity of the opening of the mouth (Rima oris). To receive tactile stimuli,
layer of fat tissue within the subcutis.
 the root of the hair is ensheathed by a blood sinus (20) that is contacted by
Functionally, the subcutis with its subcutaneous fat tissue serves as a cush-
numerous sensory nerve endings. Owing to the great lever action of this
ioning tissue, serves for the storage of calories and water as well as ther-
long hair even the finest tactile stimuli result in stimulation of this receptor.
moregulation. Its loose connective tissue functions as a gliding layer. Where
 The length of the hairs varies considerably and is dependent on breed. In
the subcutis is lacking (lips, cheeks, and eyelids) this gliding function is
the ancestors of the dog, who lived in the wild, the longest hairs are found
lacking and the striated musculature ends here directly in the dermis.
 on the dorsum and the shorter ones on the belly and head. But this pattern
The blood supply of the skin is provided by larger arteries and veins of the
is mostly lost with domestication. In wild Canidae, the thickness of the
subcutis that, owing to the mobility of the skin, have a tortuous course.
 hairs increases toward the belly (thickness is about 0.1 mm). The color of
They send branches to the dermis that form here two networks. The arter-
the hair is effected by the melanin content of the cornified cells as well as
ial network of the dermis (9) is located at the boundary with the subcutis
the inter- and intracellular air bubbles, especially of the medullary cells.
and the subpapillary network (3) lies between the papillary and reticular
 The direction of the hairs characterizes the coat. That part of the coat in
layers and gives off subepidermal capillary loops into the papillary body.
which the hairs have a uniform direction is called the Flumina pilorum. In
The corresponding venous plexuses have a comparable location. A further 
 a vortex, the hairs are arranged divergently or convergently with respect to
subfascial vascular plexus joins the blood supply of the subcutis. The blood
flow can be cut short by arteriovenous anastomoses (4), thus avoiding the
are formed.
capillary bed, and in this way the vascularization of the skin is regulated.
The papillary layer is especially well supplied with blood. These vessels
 In this way they function like the sweat glands in thermoregulation. The
venous plexuses also function as a place to store blood.
4
Common integument
Legend:
c Elastic fiber 
d Collagenic fiber
e Unilocular adipocyte
f  Dermal root sheath 
Epithelial root sheath
11  Wool hairs
h Hair papilla
12 Medulla of hair
13 Cortex of hair 
14 Hair cuticle
15 Shaft of hair
17MEISSNER'Staailediso
19Taailehair
ermis[Corium]
20 Blood sinus of follicle
1Root of hair
Hair bulb
Arterial network and venous
plexus of the dermis
22 VATER-PACINIAN
lamellar corpuscles
Subcutis
Fibrouslayer
Epidermis
Epidermis of digital pad 
Epidermis of wall of claw
3. Cutaneous Glands, Modifications of the Skin, Digital End-organs
a) The CuTANEous GLANDs comprise sebaceous and sweat glands as well as
subcutis and fix the pad to the underlying fascia and to the skeleton. Well-
the mammary gland, which is a modified sweat gland.
developed connective tissue bands (Tractus tori —15) are present in the
I. The sebaceous glands (see p. 4) open into the hair follicles and are pre-
metacarpal and metatarsal pads. They fix the pads proximaly to the
sent at a few sites of the body independent of the presence of hairs as at the
metacarpal or metatarsal bones, respectively. The dermis has very firm con-
transition of the skin to the cutaneous mucous membrane (lips, anus).
nective tissue bundles and forms a very high papillary body with conical
Sebaceous glands are lobular. The peripheral cells have a high rate of mito-
 papillae. The epidermis of the pad is up to 2 mm in thickness and forms cor-
sis and the daughter cells are pushed centrally to the lumen of the gland.
res ponding depressions in the soft horn (soft cornified epidermis). The pads
Here the enlarged and aging cells break down (holocrine secretion) and the
 are richly supplied with blood and lymph vessels as well as nerves.
sebum thus liberated reaches the lumen of the gland. It passes by way of a
short excretory duct to the lumen of the hair follicle and thus to the skin.
Sebum makes the skin soft and pliable and gives the hairs a natural sheen.
IL. The sweat or sudoriferous glands are classified as merocrine (eccrine)
Cutis of pad
 and apocrine glands (odor glands). This classification was based on a sup-
 posed apocrine secretion of the (apocrine) odor glands; however, this was
subsequently disproven. Both types of sweat glands secrete according to the
merocrine (eccrine) manner of secretion (see histology).
The merocrine sweat glands are usually coiled, unbranched, tubular
glands. They occur in the dog only on the pads of the limbs (see below;
some authors consider these glands to be apocrine sweat glands). In human
beings, real merocrine (eccrine) sweat glands are present in large areas of
the skin surface.
Legend :
Apocrine sweat glands or odor glands (see p. 4) are present over wide areas
of the skin surface, but they are comparatively underdeveloped. These
a   Subcutaneous tissue of pad 
d
tubular glands open usually into the hair follicle. Their thick secretion has
[ digital cushion] :
an alkaline reaction and is responsible for the individual species odor. In
b
 Retinacula 
man, the glands are well developed but limited to a few regions ofthe body:
C
 Panniculus adiposus
anus, vulva, axilla.
d
 Dermis[ Corium Jof pad
Il. Special modifications of the skin occur as the glands of the external
é
 Epidermis of pad 
acoustic meatus, the circumanal glands, glands of the paranal sinus ( “anal
f
 Merocrine sweat gland 
sac') and glands of the dorsal tail organ, glands ofthe eyelids and the mam-
mary glands.
2
 The ceruminal glands of the external acoustic meatus are mainly sebaceous
 glands with fewer apocrine sweat glands. Their brown, oily secretion is
 called cerumen.
c) The DIGITAL END-oRGAN is the bony end of the digit invested by a highly
The circumanal glands surround the anus in the hairless or nearly hairless
modified cutis (skin). Except for the digital pad, a subcutis is lacking. The
3
region of the anal cutaneous area. In the dog, we are dealing with modified
 dermis is developed in the form of papillae, villi or laminae or it has a
sebaceous glands; in other domesticated animals, with modified apocrine
 smooth surface. The inner surface of the epidermis has a corresponding
sweat glands. Superficially located individual glands open into the hair fol.
configuration: depressions that seat the papillae and villi, narrow furrows
licles. Deep glands are also called hepatoid glands as their secretory cells
adaped to the laminae, or a smooth surface where it contacts the smooth
appear similar to hepatocytes. The glands lack an excretory duct and their
surface of the dermis.
function is unclear.
The cornified epidermis of the claw (Unguicula) is conical in form and
7
4
 The glands of the wall of the paranal sinus (see clinical-functional anato-
 invests the unguicular process (11). Dermis and epidermis are segmentally
my, 56.5) are apocrine sweat glands and sebaceous glands. The paranal
similarly differentiated as on the fingernail of the human being and on the
sinus is commonly termed the ^anal sac.'
 equine hoof. Both, dermis and epidermis, are adapted to one another like
the patrix (stamp = dermis) to the matrix (impression = epidermis).
5
 The dorsal caudal (tail) organ is composed of sebaceous and apocrine
 glands and is described more fully in the clinical-functional anatomy (6.5 ).
 The bony unguicular crest is overlain basally by a prominence of the skin,
the vallum (7). The external lamina of the vallum is haired; the unhaired
Glands of the eyelids are described in the clinical-functional anatomy (see 
 inner lamella is comparable to the limbus (periople) of the horse. It forms
also 118.1)
a soft horn (Eponychium, —1) over the hard cornified epidermis of the
Mammary gland; see p. 32.
 claw. The eponychium corresponds to the periople of the horse and, like
b) SkIN MopiFicATioNs are the nasal plane and the limb pads: carpal pad,
the periople, is worn off far proximal to the distal end of the claw. (On the
metacarpal/metatarsal pad, digital pads.
 human fingernail, the soft eponychium is removed at the manicure.)
 In the depth of the unguicular groove is the fold that corresponds to the
I. The nasal plane (see p. 98), depending on breed, varies from unpigment-
 ed to its being strongly pigmented. The dermis forms distinct papillae. The
coronary part of the equine hoof. Its dermis bears papillae (10). Its cover-
epidermis is strikingly thin, and its superficial, cornified layer (stratum
ing epidermis produces a tubular horn that, as a mesonychium (2), pro-
corneum) consists of hard horn' (hard cornified epidermis) that exhibits a
sd remun au uo isog m ai jo ud aais e saa
polygonal pattern. The surface pattern is individually specific and for this
there is a smooth dorsal swelling of the dermis (Dorsum dermale -8), that
reason serves to identify the individual animal. Glands are absent. The nose
is particular to the digital end-organ of the dog and that, according to our
of the dog is kept moist by lacrimal fluid (see p. 98) and the secretion ofthe 
investigations, is not compara ble to the coronary part of the equine hoof.
 On the epidermis covering it, the dorsal horm of the wall (dorsal hypo-
lateral nasal gland, which is located deeply in the maxillary recess of the
nasal cavity. The evaporation ofthe fluid lowers the temperature ofthe nasal
 nychium —3) is formed. In the lateral region of the unguicular process
plane, which ordinarily feels cold to the touch (hence the saying, cold as a
lamellae are present, dermal lamellae (9) and correspondingly formed non-
cornified epidermal lamellae that form the lateral wall horn (Hyponychi-
l.asou s,sop
 um laterale, —4), which is simply layered and forms the internal lining of
6
II. The pads of the dog are the digital pads ( 14) atthe level ofthe distalinter-
the conical claw horn.
 phalangeal joints, the metacarpal (13) or metatarsal pad at the level of the
metacarpophalangeal and metatarsophalangeal joints and the carpal pad
 Palmar (plantar) on the unguicular process is the solear part on which the
(12) that is laterodistal at the carpus. The thick subcutis of the pads has
 dermis bears distinct villi. Here, tubular solear horn (5) is formed, the cells
 of which undergo substa ntial desquamation.
much fat tissue and contains sweat glands. It is subdivided into compart-
ments by radiating strands of collagenous and elastic fibers and is very sen-
 Around the tip of the unguicular process there is present a soft terminal
sitive (painful) if swollen due to increased tissue pressure when inflamed.
 horn (Hyponychium terminale, —6) that fills out the distal part of the con-
The connective tissue strands radiate from the dermis of the pad into the
ical claw horn and serves thus as a filling' horn.
6
Claw and digital pad
Epidermis:
1  Eponychium
 2 Mesonychium
 3 Dorsal hyponychium
 4 Lateral hyponychium
5 Solear horn
6 Terminal hyponychium
 Dermis [Corium] :
7 Vallum
8 Dorsum dermale
9 Dermal lamellae
11
10
5
(cross section)
(palmar view )
(plantar view)
2
15
16
1
Digital pad
Metatarsal pad
Legend :
11  Unguicular process
14 Digital pads
Subcutaneous tissue of pad:
12 Carpal pad
15 Tractus of
16
Retinacula
(see pp. 19, 81, 83)
13 Metacarpal pad
 metatarsal pad
17
 Panniculus adiposus (Fat pad)
7
4. Vertebral Column and Thorax
 The vertebrae are stucied individually and on the mounted skeleton to obtain a total overview of the normal S-shaped curvature with its lordoses (ventral
convexities) and kyphoses (ventral concavities). From a forensic view, particular attention is placed on the identification of individual vertebrae, for which
reason comparison of the different segments of the vertebral column is done.
 a) The VeRTEBRAL CoLuMN encloses and protects the spinal cord. It has a sup-
(31), for this reason contains in its dens (32) the displaced part of the body
porting function with respect to the statics and dynamics of the animal's
of the atlas. The last cervical vertebra differs from the other cervical vertebra
body. For that, stability is assured by the individual vertebrae, and elasticity
 by its large spinous process, its caudal costal foveae for the first ribs and by
as well as pliability by the intervertebral symphyses and the vertebral joints.
the absence of the transverse foramen.
The vertebral column consists of seven cervical vertebrae (vC 1 - 7), thir-
teen thoracic (vT 1 - 13), seven lumbar (vL 1 - 7), three sacral (vS 1 - 3),
which are fused to form the sacrum, and about twenty caudal (coccygeal)
Lumbar vertebra
vertebrae (vCy 1 - 20).
2
 I. The vertebrae (see text-illustration) consist of three basic constituents:
(cranial view)
(caudal view)
 body and its parts, arch and processes, that are modified in different ways
according to the functional requirements of the particular region.
The body of the vertebra (1) has a ventral crest (2), (distinct in the region
3
 of the cervical vertebral column) and cranial (3) and caudal (4) extremities.
Lamin
20
On the thoracic vertebrae, both the caudal (5) and cranial costal foveae (6)
form a common articular facet for the head (Capitulur) of the rib (see
4
below). The vertebral foramen (7) is the space enclosed by the body and
17
 arch. The vertebral canal is formed by the serial vertebral foramina and the
 soft tissues extending between adjacent vertebral arches and bodies. It con-
19
tains the spinal cord with its cauda equina.
 The arch of the vertebra (8) is made up of a pedicle basally and a flattened
5
lamina dorsally. The intervertebral foramina (9) are bounded by the cranial
(10) and caudal (11) vertebral notches of the vertebra of the same and pre-
ceding segments. Excepting the first cervical nerve (see below), these
Pedicle
 foramina are passages for the spinal nerves.
 Of the processes of the vertebrae, the spinous process (12) is most distinct
(exceptions are the first cervical vertebra and the caudal vertebrae). The
transverse processes (13) are well developed on the cervical and lumbar
vertebrae. On the thoracic vertebrae, they have a costal fovea (14) that
 II. The sacrum is formed by the fusion of the three sacral vertebrae. Later-
 ally, it bears the sacral wing (33), whose auricular surface (34) forms a syn-
bears an articular facet for the costal tubercle (see below). From the first to
 ovial joint with the auricular surface of the ilium. The median sacral crest
the sixth cervical vertebrae there are transverse foramina (15) at the base
(35) is formed by an incomplete fusion of the spinous proceses. The later-
ofthe transverse processes, which altogether form the transverse canal that
 transmits the vertebral artery, vein and nerve. The cranial articular process-
 al ends of the fused lateral (transverse) processes form the lateral sacral
6
es (16) and the caudal articular processes (17) form synovial joints between
[nas ar  snsan ( i s a au ae san
the vertebrae. A costal process (18) is present on the 3d - 6ch cervical ver-
arrangement of the fused mamilloarticular processes. The promontory (38)
tebrae as the ventrocranial extremity of the transverse process, which is
forms the cranioventral contour of the sacral bone and takes part in the
u jo spa ai uo pgaa iqui a u unan s ui a
limiting terminal line ofthe pelvic inlet. From the vertebral canal,the sacral
transverse processes represent costal processes that are remnants of the
nerves enter intervertebral foramina and leave the vertebral column after
ribs, and can develop to form lumbar *ribs.' An accessory process (19) is
dividing into dorsal and ventral branches that emerge from the dorsal (39)
lacking or poorly developed in the caudal part of the lumbar vertebral col-
 and ventral sacral foramina (40), respectively, that proceed from each inter-
vertebral foramen.
umn. In the cranial lumbar region it is developed as an independent
process. At the transition to the thoracic vertebral column, it passes onto
the caudal contour of the transverse process and no longer stands inde-
b) Of the 13 RiBs (CosTAE), the first through the ninth are sternal ribs
 pendently. The mamillary process (20) of the lumbar vertebrae is expressed
(41), connected to the sternum by synovial articulation. Ribs 10 - 12 are
 on the cranial articular process (mamiloarticular process) and changes its 
the freely moveable, breathing' asternal ribs (42). By the overlapping of
position at the transition to the thoracic vertebral column, passing onto the
the cartilaginous parts of the asternal ribs, a costal arch is formed on both
transverse process, actually to the cranial contour of the transverse process.
sides of the body. The last rib does not regularly participate in the forma-
Hemal processes (21) are developed from the 4h caudal vertebra and
tion of the arch. It usually terminates freely in the musculature of the
了
become gradually indistinct caudally. On the 4h to the 7h or 8rh caudal ver-
abdominal wall as a "floating' rib (43). Ribs, sternum and thoracic verte-
tebra, they may unite to form a hemal arch (22).
 bral column form the thorax, the inlet of which is bounded by the first
 pair of ribs and the outlet by the costal arches. The dorsal part of the rib
The interarcuate spaces are dorsal and, in life, closed off by the interarcu-
is osseous (Os costae,
44). Its head (45) bears cranial and caudal artic-
ular facets (46). The two articular facets are separated by a rough crest
 caudal) space (24) are especialy wide and of significance in performing
that, in most ribs, is indirectly in contact with the intervertebral disc by
epidural anesthesia. The atlanto-occipital space is suitable for tapping the
 means of the intercapital ligament (see illustration, p. 11). An indistinct
 subarachnoid space, which is filled with cerebrospinal fluid.
neck of the rib (47) connects the head to the body of the rib (48). The prox-
 Special features are present on the following cervical vertebrae: The first 
 imodorsally located costal tubercle (49) bears an articular surface (50) for
cervical vertebra (atlas, 25) has a broad-surfaced lateral process (26), also
 articulation with the costal fovea of the transverse process. The angle of
designated the wing of the atlas (Ala atlantis). The alar notch (27) calar
the rib (51) is only indistinctly recognizable. The costal cartilage (52)
foramen of other domestic mammals) is cranial at the attachment of the
begins at the costochondral junction and, slightly distal to this, there is a
wing of the atlas to the lateral mass (see below) and is occupied by the ven-
distinct bend, the knee of the rib (53) that in other domestic mammals is
tral branch of the first cervical nerve. Contrary to the other spinal nerves,
 in the area of the costochondral junction.
the first cervical nerve does not exit the vertebral canal by an intervertebral
foramen but by the lateral vertebral foramen (28). The vertebral foramen
 c) The STERNUM consists of the manubrium (54), the body of the sternum
of the atlas is also different in that it is bounded dorsally by a dorsal arch
(55) with its six sternebrae (56), and the xiphoid process (57), which is
(29), ventrally by a ventral arch (30). The two arches are joined laterally by
 bony cranially, cartilaginous caudally. The first pair of ribs articulates with
bone designated the lateral mass (Massa lateralis). The atlas is the only ver-
 the manubrium, the second at the synchondrosis that joins the manubrium
tebra to have a ventral arch {30) in the place of the body. This is due to the
to the body of the sternum, the third through the seventh at the following
caudal shit of a great part of the embryonal primordium of its vertebral
 sternal synchondroses, and the eighth and ninth jointly at the synchondro-
body to form the dens of the axis. The second cervical vertebra, the axis
sis joining the body to the xiphoid process.
8
Vertebral column and bones of thorax
(lateral view)
(dorsolateral view)
27
29
vC231
-vC25
41
(dorsal view)
54
Cervical vertebrae vC,,
Thoracic vertebrae  yT-3
VT
Lumbar vertebrae  VL,-7
(caudal view)
Sacral vertebrae vS,4
Coccygeal vertebrae  vCy1x
50
47
Body of vertebra (1)
Ventral crest (2)
46-
Cranial extremity (3)
Caudal extremity (4)
45
11
Caudal costal fovea (5)
Cranial costal fovea (6)
12
55
Vertebral canal (7)
13
Vertebral arch (8)
14
Intervertebral foramen (9)
48-
Cranial vertebral notch (10)
 Caudal vertebral notch (11)
Spinous process (12)
Transverse process (13)
Costal fovea (14)
vT11
Cranial articular process (16)
Costal process (18)
Accessory process (19)
vT13
Mamillary process (20)
Hemal process (21)
3
Hemal arch (22)
vL1
Interarcuate space
Lumbosacral space (23)
 Sacrococcygeal space (24)
Atlas vC, (25)
Transverse process [wing] (26)
Alar notch (27)
20
Lateral vertebral foramen (28)
Dorsal arch (29)
vT1110
Ventral arch (30)
Axis (31)
Dens (32)
(lateral view)
Os sacrum  vS,
17
Sacral wing (33)
20
 Auricular surface (34)
18
Median sacral crest (35)
vL1
Lateral sacral crest (36)
Intermediate sacral crest (37)
18=13
Promontory (38)
Dorsal sacral foramen (39)
( s 
20
VL7
Ribs
Sternal ribs (41)
vS1-3
Asternal ribs (42)
Floating rib (43)
Bony rib (44)
Head of rib (45)
(ventral view)
Articular facets of head of rib (46)
36
Neck of rib (47)
39
24
(t) qu jo Apog
Tubercle of rib (49)
 Articular surface of tubercle of rib (50)
Angle of nib (51)
Costal cartilage (52)
vCy4
Knee of rib (53)
13
Sternum
Manubrium of sternum (54)
CYA
Body of sternum (55)
11
Sternebrae (56)
 Xiphoid process (57)
9
5.
 Articulations of the Vertebral Column and of the Thorax;
Atlanto-Occipital and Atlanto-Axial Joints
a ) JoINTS (ARTICULATIONS)
Name
Participating bones
Form/
Function
Remarks
Composition
1. Atlanto-occipital joint
Occipital condyles and
 Elliptical joint,
Hinge joint,
 Right and left joint cavities 
cranial articular foveae
simple joint
dorsal and ventral
communicate ventrally.
of the atlas
flexion
IIL. Atlanto-axial joint
 Fovea of the dens and
Trochoid joint,
Axial rotation
 The atlanto-axial joint communicates 
 caudal articular fossa of
simple joint
of the head on
with the atlanto-occipital joint.
the atlas, dens and ventral
the neck, head
 articular surface of the dens
'shaking'
II. Joints of the
Articular processes
 Plane joints
 Sliding joints
Considerable mobility in the cervical
 articular processes
of adjacent vertebrae
region, decreasing in the thoracic and
lumbar regions.
IV. Joint of the head of the
Articular surface of the
 Spheroid joint,
Hinge joint that,
 The convex rib-head joint surface is
rib (costovertebral joint)
head of the rib and caudal
composite joint
together with
formed by two articular facets. The
costal fovea of the more
the vertebrae,
 articular depression is formed by the
 cranial vertebra and cranial
 makes possible
 costal foveae of the two vertebral bodies
costal fovea of the more
the variation in
 and the intervening fibrocartilage of the
caudal vertebra with which
thoracic volume
 intervertebral symphysis. The last two to
the rib head articulates 
in respiration 
three ribs articulate only with the cranial
 costal fovea of the same-numbered
(the more caudal) vertebra.
V. Joint of the rib tubercle
 Articular surface of the
 Plane joint,
Hinge joint
 On the last ribs, the costotransverse 
(costotransverse joint)
 costal tubercle and the
 simple joint
joint approaches and then fuses with the
costal fovea of the trans-
costoverte bral joint.
verse process of the same
numbered (the more caudal)
vertebra
Vl. Sternocostal joint
Carilaginous ends of
Condylar joint,
Hinge joint 
The first rib articulates with the manu-
the first to the eighth
 simple joint
brium of the sternum. The ninth {last
ribs and the sternum
sternal) rib is not connected to the sternum
by a synovial joint but by fibrous tissue.
Vll. Costochondral
Costal bone and
Synchondrosis
Nearly rigid and
 Postnatally a true joint may develop
synchondrosis
 costal cartilage
immoveable
from a synchondrosis.
VI. Sternal synchondroses
 Manubrium of the sternum, Synchondrosis
Increasingly
 Of the sternal synchondroses, the
sternebrae of the body of the
pue piau
 manubriosternal and xiphosternal
sternum, xiphoid process 
immoveable
 synchondroses are specially named.
IX. Intervertebral symphysis 
 Bodies of adjacent vertebrae,
 Intervertebral
Slight
 The discs in the intervertebral region
(joints between the
starting with the axis
disc without
mobility
 of the sacrum ossify in the second
bodies of adjacent
and including the
a space
year of life.
vertebrae)
caudal vertebrae
X. Sacroiliac joint
See joints of the pelvic limb.
 b) LiGaMents Of The VerteBRal ColumN 
diagnostic purposes). The ventral atlanto-occipital membrane is a ventral
Three ligaments extend over longer areas of the vertebral column. Short
rein-forcement of the joint capsule. The lateral ligament is a lateral rein-
 forcement of the joint capsule.
ligaments bridge over the space between individual vertebrae.
The ventral longitudinal ligament is attached ventrally to the bodies of the
On the atlanto-axial joint the dens is held to the floor of the vertebral canal
 vertebrae and to the intervertebral discs. It extends from the second cervi-
and to the occipital bone by the apical ligament of the dens, the transverse
 cal vertebra to the sacrum.
 atlantal ligament and the alar ligaments. The transverse atlantal ligament
is underlain by a synovial bursa and is attached to either side of the atlas.
The dorsal longitudinal ligament lies on the floor of the vertebral canal and
 In the case of rupture of these ligaments or fracture of the dens following
attaches at the dorsal border of the intervertebral disc. It extends from the
axis to the first caudal vertebrae.
car accidents or strangulation, damage to the spinal cord may occur with
- iee-ouee pesrop susee au saouanbasuo se yep pue sisked
The nuchal ligament (see p. 29) in the dog consists only of the paired elas-
brane extends from the cranial projection of the spine ofthe axis to the dor-
tic funiculus nuchae. It bridges over the cervical vertebral column from the
sal arch of the atlas.
 caudal end of the spinous process of the axis and extends to the spinous
 process of the first thoracic vertebra. Here it is continued
by
the
 The joints between the articular processes of the vertebrae lack ligaments.
supraspinous ligament with loss of elasticity and attaches to the spinous
The joint capsule is either tightly attached or more loose according to the
process of all the vertebrae up to the third sacral vertebra.
 degree of movement and influences the direction of the movement, which
 The ligamenta flava extend as short elastic ligaments from vertebral arch
 depends on the position of the articular surfaces.
to vertebral arch and thus close the interarcuate spaces dorsally.
 At the joint of the rib-head, the intra-articular ligament of the head of the
Interspinous ligaments are lacking. The M. interspinalis lies between the
rib connects the costal heads of both sides and lies over the intervertebral
spinous processes of adjacent vertebrae.
disc. It is also called the intercapital ligament. It is lacking at the first and
C) LIGAMENTS OF THE ATLANTO-OCCIPITAL AND ATLANTO-AXIAL JOINTS,
the last two pairs of ribs. The radiate ligament of the head of the rib is pre-
AND Of THE THoRAX
sent as a strengthening of the joint ca psule.
At the atlanto-occipital joint, the dorsal atlanto-occipital membrane rein-
At the costotransverse joints, the joint capsule is reinforced by a costo
forces the joint capsule and bridges over the atlanto-occipital space (access
to the cerebellomedullar cistern for withdrawal of cerebrospinal fluid for
transverse ligament.
10
Joints of the vertebral column and the thorax
(dorsal view)
Articular c
Occipitalcondyle
Lat.liga
Apicallig.ofdens
Alar ligg.
sverse atlantal lig.
Articular capsule
Caudal extremity
Atlanto-occipital and atlanto-axial joints
(caudolat. view)
(cranial view)
(craniolat. view)
Supraspinous lig.
 Articular capsule
 Interspinalis m.
Yellow lig.
Joints of articular proc
ointofrib tubercl
Costal fovea
Intercapital lig.
VC5
Joint of head of rib
 Cranial extremity
 Joint of aticular process 
 Costovertebral joints
(lat. view)
(caudolat. view)
 Manubrium sterni
Sternal lig.
Sternocostal joint
Intertransverse lig
 Sternocostal joints and sternal synchondroses
Intervertebral symphysis
Legend :
(see pp. 9, 89, 91)
A Dorsal longitudinal lig.
Intervertebral disc:
 Radiate lig. of head of rib 
H   Costotransverse lig.
B Cran. articular process
M
 Nucleus pulposus
Intra-articular lig. of head of rib
C
Radiate sternocostal lig.
B' Caud. articular process
D
 Anulus fibrosus
G
Cran. costal fovea
Ventral longitudinal lig.
√
11
Chapter 2: Neck and Chest Region (Cervical and Thoracic Region)
1. Cutaneous Muscles and Cutaneous Nerves of the Neck and Thoracic Wall
 To demonstrate the cutaneous muscles a longitudinal incision is made through the skin on the left side of the body. The incision should extend from the
base of the ear to the midlevel of the scapula up to the ventral end of the last rib. In doing this, the cutaneous muscles must be preserved. At the ends of
the incision at the base of the ear and at the level of the last ib, a transverse section is made through the skin, which is then reflected to the dorsal and
ventral miclines. The external jugular and omobrachial veins, which are superficial located, are examined first in order to avoid unintended damage to
the vessels and the smearing of the dissection site with the coagulated blood.
a) The CuTANEous MuscLEs end in the skin with the finest tendinous fibers
The nerve supply of the cervical platysma (3) originates from the
and thus bring about movement of the skin, for example, to ward off
caudal auricular nerve of the seventh cranial nerve (facial nerve). It crosses
insects.
 deep to the muscle in a dorsal paramedian course. The nerve can be iden-
The cutaneus trunci muscle (4) converges in its fiber course to the axillary
 tified by spreading the coarse fiber bundles of the muscle.
fossa and to the ventromedian linea alba and is penetrated by fine cuta-
The superficial sphincter colli muscle (1) is ventral on the neck with trans
neous nerves. Its motor innervation is by the lateral thoracic nerve (5), the
verse fibers that are closely attached to the skin.
branches of which can be seen through the ventral half of this thin muscle.
The platysma (2) can be seen extending from its origin on the dorsal mid-
line to the border between head and neck where it is continued by the cuta-
neus faciei muscle.
 To demonstrate the cervical cutaneous nerves, cut the dorsal linear origin of the platysma and reflect the muscle cranially to the cranial transverse section
 of the skin. To demonstrate the thoracic cutaneous nerves, cut the cutaneus tunci muscle along the caudal transverse section of the skin at the level of
 the last ib as well as at the caudal border of the triceps brachi muscle and reflect it ventrally toward the linea alba. In the ventral thoracic and abdominal
regions in all cases the aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique muscle (34) should be preserved.
b) The CuTANEous NeRvEs supply the skin and are predominantly sensory
IL. The dorsal cutaneous branches of the thoracic nerves appear a hands-
(they also contain autonomic fibers); they are the parts of the spinal nerves
breadth dorsal and paramedian; that is, they are more lateral and are reg-
that are visible subcutaneously. The spinal nerves (e.g., nC4) divide at their
 ularly formed by dl-branches. They are accompanied by cutaneous blood
exit from the intervertebral foramen into a dorsal branch (d) and a ventral
 vessels. The thirteen thoracic nerves leave the vertebral canal caudal to the
branch (v) that further divide into a medial branch (dm or, respectively, vm)
vertebra of the same number and divide into a dorsal and a ventral branch.
and a lateral branch (dl or, respectively, vl). Except for the dorsal cervical
 The ventral branch passes as an intercostal nerve ventrally between the ribs
region, the deeply located medial branches contain predominantly motor
and gives off a vl (prox. or lateral cutaneous)-branch about the middle of
fibers, the lateral branches mainly sensory fibers for the supply of the skin.
the length of the intercostal space and a vl (dist. or ventral cutaneous)-
Of the eight cervical nerves, only nC1 passes through the lateral vertebral
branch at the ventral end of the intercostal space.
foramen ofthe atlas. The second through the seventhcervical nerves leave the
 III. The ventral cutaneous branches of the cervical nerves are in a ventro-
vertebral canal cranial to the vertebra of the same number, and the eighth cer-
lateral row and are formed by vl-branches (nC 2vl to nC 5vl). The nC 2v
vical nerve caudal to the seventh cervical vertebra. The first cervical nerve
through nC Sv communicate with each other and form a cervical plexus in
does not reach the skin of the neck with its dorsomedial branch (nC 1dm).
the depth of the musculature. The ventral cutaneous nerve of C2 runs with
The major ocipital nerve (nC 2dm) runs deep to the superficial cervicoau-
 its great auricular nerve (11) to the base of the ear and with its transverse
ricularis muscle to the occipital region. The following nC 3 dm to nC 6dm are
 cervical nerve (12) to the ventral cervical region and the ca udal part of the
often double. The last two, nC 7dm and nC 8dm are small and do not usual-
 mandibular space. The ventral branches of C6 to T2 join to form the
ly reach the skin but end in the thick muscular layer. The innervation of the
 brachial plexus with their main parts (see p. 19), and it is from this plexus
a   si su aq n ra s r
that the plexus nerves of the thoracic limb originate.
arrangement in other regions of the body in which the skin is supplied by lat-
eral branches, and the musculature by medial. The difference is clear when
 IV. The lateral cutaneous branches of the thoracic nerves are formed by the
one compares sites of emergence of the cutaneous nerves in the dorsal cervi-
 proximal vl-branches (lateral cutaneous branches of the intercostal nerves)
cal and dorsal thoracic regions.
mentioned above.
I. The dorsal cutaneous branches of the cervical nerves reach the dorsal
V. The ventral cutaneous branches of the thoracic nerves are formed by the
midline in the company of cutaneous blood vessels and are formed by dm-
distal vl branches (ventral cutaneous branches of the intercostal nerves).
bra nches.
These nerves are very small.
2. Dorsal Extrinsic Limb Muscles
 Knowledge of the bones of the shoulder girdle is required for the dissection (see p. 17). In the course of the dissection, the cleidocervical and trapezius
muscles are cut along the course of the dorsal branch of the accessory nerve (cranial nerve Xl) and reflected to either side. Following this, the division of
 the accessory nerve into a long dorsal and a short ventral branch can be demonstrated.
The origin of the muscles or, respectively, their attachment to the skull and
which innervates this muscle, appears between the cleidocervical muscle and
the cervical and thoracic parts of the vertebral column, the ribs and ster-
the cervical part of the trapezius muscle at the apex of a muscularly bounded
num (collectively, the trunk) as well as to the thoracic limb is decisive for
triangle, and can be followed further where the transection of the trapezius 
their designation as trunk-limb muscles. Because they insert on part of the
 muscle (see the dissection instructions) begins.
shoulder girdle, it is also justified to designate them synonymously as mus-
 The omotransversarius muscle (14) runs as its name suggests between the 
cles ofthe shoulder girdle. Of these muscles, the serratus ventralis provides
acromion and shoulder (omos) and the transverse process (wing) of the
the main synsarcotic junction between the trunk and the limb, its area of
atlas. Innervation: nC 4vm. Deep to its dorsomedial surface is the superfi-
rotation being found in the middle of the serrate surface of the scapula.
 cial cervical lymph node, which should be preserved.
The trapezius muscle originates with both its parts (according to Donat et al.,
 The latissimus dorsi muscle (8) arises from the broad thoracolumbar fascia
1967, three parts) at the dorsal midline above the spinous processes of the cer-
(9) and ends chiefly on the teres major tuberosity by common tendon with
vical and thoracic vertebrae. Its thoracic part (7) ends in a cranioventral direc-
the teres major. It has attachments to the brachial fascia as well as to the
tion on the dorsal third ofthe spine ofthe scapula. The cervical part (6) inserts
 major and minor tubercular crests of the humerus, by which a broad axil-
after a caudoventral course on the dorsal two-thirds of the spine of the scapu-
lary arch is formed. The thoracodorsal nerve and vessels (see p. 19) enter
la. Despite the different directions of their fiber course, both parts act as pro-
the medial aspect of the muscle.
tractors of the limb. This is because the thoracic part inserts dorsal to and the
 The rhomboideus muscle (10) is covered by the trapezius muscle and con-
cervical part ventral to the area of rotation of the synsarcotic trunk-limb junc-
 sists of the M. rhomboideus capitis (nC vm), M. rhomboideus cervicis (nC
tion. The cleidocervical muscle (15) according to the nomenclature proposal
 vm) and M. rhomboideus thoracis (nT vm). They originate at the nuchal
 of Donat et al., 1967, is considered as a third part (clavicular part) of the
 crest and at the dorsal midline and end on the scapular cartilage. Function:
trapezius muscle. It courses between the clavicular intersection (16) and the
To fix, elevate, and retract the thoracic limb; when the neck is lowered, to
 dorsal midline of the neck. The dorsal branch of the accessory nerve (13),
elevate the neck.
12
Cervical and pectoral regions
Legend :
17 Sternocleidomastoid m.
26 Teat (mammary papilla)
18 Sternum
27 Sternohyoid and
Deltoid muscle:
sternothyroid mm.
19
 Clavicular part (cleido-
28 Parotidoauricularis m.
Superficial sphincter colli m.
brachialis m.)
29 Splenius m.
20
Acromial part
30 Serratus ventr. cervicis m.
21
Scapular part
31 Supraspinatus m.
2 Platysma
 22 Brachialis m.
32 Infraspinatus m.
 3 Platysma branch of
 facial nerve (VII)
 25 Long head of triceps m.
oblique m.
Cedm
T3dl
Legend :
a  Ext. jugular vein 
b Omobrachial vein
c Acc. axillary n. (C)
18
d   Axillobrachial vein
Cephalic vein 
 Superficial br. of radial n.
g  Superficial cervical a. and v.
(prescapular branch)
h
Thoracodorsal a. and v.
(cutaneous branch)
Axillaryn. (cutaneous brr)
 Intercostobrachial nn.
22
23
5 Lateral thoracic n.
4 Cutaneus trunci m.
Trapezius m:.
Cervical part
(Lateral view)
10 Rhomboideus
7   Thoracic part
 11 Great auricu
lar n.
29
8 Latissimus dorsi m.
9 Thoracolumbar fascia
12 Transverse cervi-
cal n.
13 Dorsal branch of-
accessoryn.
14 Omotransversarius m.-
15 Cleidocervical m
16 Clavicular intersection
Legend :
k Mandibular gl.
Superficial cervical Inn.
m Lateral thoracic a., v. and n.
n Int. thoracic a. and y. (cutaneous br.)
and Ts vl (dist.)
0 Intercostai a. and v. (cutaneous brr.)
(see p. 15)
13
3. Ventral Extrinsic Limb Muscles
 In the course of the dissection, the superficial and deep pectoral muscles are transected a fingerbreadth lateral to the ventral midline. In this way, their
 innervation by cranial and caudal pectoral nerves can be observed.
The function of the trumk-limb muscles consists in the movement of the head,
 only be separated artificially. The accessory nerve divides into the previ-
vertebral column and thoracic limb, and in the suspension of the trunk by the
 ously identified dorsal ramus, which communicates with nC 2, and into the
thoracic limbs. The more ventral muscles act more in the suspension of the
short ventral ramus whose three branches end after a short course in the
trunk and therefore are rich in tendinous intersections; whereas, the more
individual muscles that together comprise the sternocleidomastoideus.
 dorsal muscles are more functional in limb movement and the suspension of
 the thoracic limb is an accessory function.
The dehoid muscle has scapular, acromial, and clavicular parts; the clavicular
part is also designated the cleidobrachialis muscle(13) because it extends from
With the clavicular part of the deltoid muscle (cleidobrachialis), the super-
theclavicular intersection tothehumerus, the bone ofthe brachium. The scapu-
  a u  d  a  s d 
lar and acromialparts ofthe deltoid muscle are supplied by the axillary nerve, a
cephalic vein occupies only the most medial part of the groove as, at this
branch of the brachial plexus. The cleidobrachialis muscle is innervated by the
level, it does not pass in the main part of the groove, but medially upon the
accessory axillaryorbrachiocephalicnerve (nC6 - 12),the most cranial branch
superficial pectoral, deep to the cleidobrachialis. The broad transverse pec-
 ofthe brachial plexus. It enters the deep surface of the cleidobrachialis two fin-
toral muscle (14) takes linear origin from the manubrium and cranial part
 gerbreadths distal to the clavicular intersection. The term brachiocephalicus
of the body of the sternum. The more superficial descending pectoral mus-
muscle is a collective term for a continuous muscle that, in domestic mammals,
cle (15) arises only from the manubrium. The two parts of the superficial
is formed byparts ofthedeltoid andsternocleidomastoideus muscles, andby the
 pectoral end on the crest of the major tubercle of the humerus.
cleidocervicalis Its three partshave an attachment to theclavicularintersection
The principal portion of the deep pectoral muscle (17) forms the base for
and arethe cleidobrachialis, cleidomastoideus, andcleidocervicalis. The cleido-
the narrow, laterally located accessory portion (16). The deep pectoral
 brachialis extends from the humerus to the clavicular intersection. The clavicu-
muscle has its origin from the manubrium and body of the sternum and ter-
q  sas i ns o jo ia u e si s e
minates at the major and minor tubercles. The accessory portion inserts on
Cephalicus muscle cranial to the shoulder; at its medial end, it contains a small
the brachial fascia. The nerves that supply the deep pectoral can be seen on
cartilage andoften a smallbone that is visibleradiographically Theintersection
its cut surface.
attaches the fibers of the cleidobrachialis on its distal side; the fibers of the clei-
The serratus ventralis muscle (31) is subdivided into the cervical serratus ven-
 docervicalis and cleidomastoideus on its proximal side, and is a complete parti-
tralis muscle (nCvm) andthe thoracicserratus ventralis muscle(longthoracic
tion between the attaching muscle fibers. The cleidomastoideus arises from the
nerve -30). The two fuse with each other in the area of the thoracic inlet.
 clavicular intersection and joins the sternomastoideus (see above) to insert on
They originate from the transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae or,
the mastoid process of the temporal bone. The cleidocervicalis arises from the
 clavicular intersection superficial to the cleidomastoid. From the intersection,
respectively, the ribs and insert jointly on the facies serrata of the scapula.
the cleidocervicalis extends craniodorsally to the median fibrous seam of the
The sternocleidomastoid muscle (ventral branch of the accessory nerve)
 neck that attaches right and left muscles dorsally. The term cleidocephalicus
consists of three individual muscles: The cleidomastoid (5) and sternomas-
 muscle is applied to the cleidomastoid and cleidocervical muscles togetherand
toid (3) muscles fuse cranially; the sternomastoid muscle and sterno-occip-
the brachiocephalicus may therefore be described as consisting of the cleido-
ital muscle (4) fuse caudally. The lateral surface of the sternocleidomastoid
 brachialis and cleidocephalicus.
muscle forms the jugular furrow for the external jugular vein. The inner-
 The sternohyoid muscle (nC 1vm - 7) and the sternothyroid muscle (nC 1vm
sternomastoid and sterno-occipital muscles caudal to the mandibular
- 2) do not belong to the trunk-limb musculature, but to the long hyoid mus-
 gland. Here, the ventral branch (see p. 13) lies between the sternomastoid
 cles. The right and left sternohyoid muscles contact each other at the ventral
and sterno-occipital muscles, which form a continuous muscle and can
midline of the neck. The sternothyroideus muscle is adjacent laterally.
4. Nerves, Vessels, and Visceral Organs of the Neck
 The jugular furrow and external jugular vein have been dissected. To demonstrate structures of the ventral neck, the sternohyoid muscles are separated
 in the midline and transected jointly with the sternothyroideus muscles.
 a) Like the subclavian and internal jugular veins, the EXTERNAL JuGULAR vEIN
C) Of the LYMPHATic SysTEM, onlythe lymphatictrunks and the lymph nodes
(8) originates from the brachiocephalic vein at the level of the thoracic inlet.
 are considered here. The tracheal (jugular) lymphatic trunk is the large
In caudal-cranial sequence, it gives offthe cephalic, superficial cervical and
 paired lymphatic trunk of the neck. It begins as the efferent drainage ofthe
omobrachial veins. It then divides at the caudal border of the mandibular
medial retropharyngeallymph node, receives afferent vessels fromthe super-
gland into a dorsal branch, the maxillary vein (19), and a ventral branch,the
ficial and deep cervicallymph nodes and empties at the venous angle formed
linguofacial vein (18). At its union with theexternal jugular vein,the cephal-
by the confluence of external and internal jugular veins. At its termination,
ic vein (11) lies in the medial part of the lateral pectoral groove and joins the
 the left racheal lymphatic trunk (28) joins the thoracic duct (29), which con-
external jugular just cranial tothe thoracicinlet. The superficial cervical vein
ducts the lymph from the body cavities. The medial retropharyngeal lymph
(10)is satellite tothe extrathoracic part ofthe same-named artery; itjoins the
node(1) lies at the cranial attachment ofthe sternothyroid muscle. It receives
external jugular near the root of the neck, usually just opposite the cephalic
its lymph from the head. The superficial cervicallymph node (27)lies deep to
3
vein. The omobrachialvein (9)courses superficiallyuponthe deltoid and clei-
the omotransversarius muscle, between it and the serratus ventralis. Its affer-
docervical muscles; it extends between the axillobrachial vein and the exter-
ent vessels pass from the superficial cervical area, and also from the trunk,
nal jugular. The axillobrachial vein passes dorsallyfromthe cephalicalongthe
head, and thoracic limb. The deep cervical lymph nodes lie close to the tra-
lateral border of the cleidobrachialis muscle, then deep to the deltoid muscle
 chea and consist of an inconstant cranial, middle and caudal group. Their
to join the caudal circumflex humeral vein (see p. 21).
afferents are from their immediate surroundings in the neck.
b) Of the NEUROVASCULAR STRUCTURES OF THE VENTRAL NECK, the intermal
jugular vein (22) runs alongthe dorsolateral border ofthe trachea and gives
d) The CERvICAL ViscERAL STRUcTuREs are the esophagus, trachea, thyroid
off branches for the brain, thyroid gland, larynx and pharynx. Thelef and
 and parathyroid glands. The cervical part of the esophagus (25) lies dorsal
4
right common carotid arteries originate atthe level ofthe thoracic inlet from
to the trachea in the middle of the neck and dorsolateral (to the left) at the
the arterial brachiocephalic trunk (see p. 49). The common carotid artery
thoracic inlet. Its reddish color is due to its external coat of striated mus-
(24) courses cranially on the dorsolateral border of the trachea and dis-
 cle. This striated muscle of the visceral type is innervated by the vagus
patches branches to the thyroid gland, larynx and pharynx. The vagosym-
 nerve. The trachea (6) consists of C-shaped incomplete cartilaginous rings
pathetic trunk (23) is a large nerve that lies dorsal to the common carotid
that are closed off by a membranous part that contains transverse bundles
 artery It conducts sympathetic fibers from the thoracolumbar sympathetic
 of trachealis (smooth) muscle. The incomplete cartilaginous rings and their
trunk to the head (see p. 49). Parasympathetic constituents of the vagus
 complementary membranous parts are connected to each other by anular
 nerve (tenth cranial nerve) reach from the head predominantly to the body
ligaments. The tracheal lumen is kept open by the incomplete cartilaginous
cavities. After its separation from the sympathetic trunk, the vagus nerve
rings that are braced by fibroelastic tissue. The tension thus created makes
 gives offthe recurrent laryngeal nerve (see p. 49) within the thoracic cavity
 possible the changes in tracheal length with respiration and swallowing
and after this contains parasympathetic and sensory nerve fibers, and per-
 and is responsible for the typical round cross-section of the trachea, which
2
haps skeletal motor fibers for the esophagus. The recurrent laryngeal nerve
can be narrowed by contraction of the trachealis muscle. The thyroid gland
6
(26) with its skeletal motor, autonomic and sensory fibers turns and passes
(21) lies at the cranial end ofthe trachea with left and right lobes that some-
cranially in the neck. Itlies within the connective tissue laterlly on the trachea
times may be connected by a slight ventral isthmus. The bilateral pairs of
that, like the esophagus, receives branches from it. The recurrent laryngeal
 parathyroid glands (20) lie on the thyroid gland as pale, rounded glands
nerve is easily found as it passes dorsal to the thyroid gland; its terminal part
with a diameter of about three millimeters. They lie on the lateral and
is the ca udal laryngeal nerve that supplies parts of the larynx.
 medial surfaces of the thyroid or in the thyroid parenchyma.
14
Cervical and pectoral regions
(ventral view)
18 Linguofacial v.
19 Maxillary v.
1  Medial retropharyngeal In.
C
 2 Sternothyroid m.
 Sternocleidomastoid m.:
-20 Parathyroid gland 
3 Sternomastoid m.
21  Thyroid gland
4   Sternooccipital m.
22 Internal jugular v.
 5  Cleidomastoid m.
-23 Vagosympathetic trunk
6 Trachea
--24 Common carotid a.
7 Sternohyoid m.
Co
8 Ext. jugular v. -
-25 Esophagus
35
9 Omobrachial v.
26Re
10 Supf. cervical v.
 Supf. cervical
Left trache
11 Cephalic v.
28 lymphatic
12 Acc. axillary n. (C6) -
Deltoid m.:
13 Clavicular part 
Supf. pectoral mm.:
Transv. pectoral m.
15 Desc. pectoral m
Deep pect. mm.:
9
soryportior
17  Principal portion
(see p. 13)
Legend :
32 Thyrohyoid m.
39 Scalenus med.m.
Parotid gland
 Deep cervical Inn.
33 Cricothyroid m.
40 Rectus thoracis m.
 Mandibular gland
Phrenic n.
34 Cleidocervical m
C
Hyoid arch
35 Longus capitis m.
42 Supraspinatus m.
Facial y.
43Subscapular m.
d
36 Clavicular intersection
44 Ext. abdom. oblique m.
Cran. thyroid a.
 Axillary a. and v.
37 Lat. pectoral groove
Intercostobrachial nn.
38 Scalenus dors.m.
15
Chapter 3: Thoracic Limb
1. The Skeleton of the Thoracic Limb
The pectoral (shoulder) girdle consists of scapula, coracoid bone and clavi-
 notch (49), forms the distal articulation with the articular circumference of
cle, which are completely developed as individual bones in many verte-
the ulna. The distal radius ends medially with the medial styloid process
brates below the mammals (e.g., birds). In the domestic mammals there is
(50).
a considerable reduction of the coracoid to a coracoid process of the scapu-
 II. The ulna projects beyond the head of the radius with its olecranon (51), 
la and of the clavicle to the clavicular intersection, a connective tissue strip
3
which is enlarged proximally to form the tuber olecrani (52). The semilu-
within the brachiocephalicus muscle (see p. 14). There often remains as
4
nar trochlear notch (54) begins at the pointed anconeal process (53) from
well a small bony remnant of the clavicle, which may be observed radio-
which it curves distally, medially and laterally, to reach the medial coronoid
 graphically at the medial end of the clavicular intersection. It appears as a
5
lamina of bone and cartilage ca. 10 x 5 mm.
process (55) or, respectively, lateral coronoid process (56). The radial notch
(57) lies at the transition to the body of the ulna (58). The head of the ulna
6
a) The ScAPuLA is the main constituent of the shoulder girdle. The costal
(59) forms the distal (!) end of the bone. It possesses the articular circum-
surface (1) of the scapula is subdivided into a dorsally situated facies
ference (60) medially and ends distally with the lateral styloid process (61).
serrata (2), the area of insertion of the serratus ventralis muscle, and a ven-
 The interosseous space of the antebrachium (62) is especially wide in the 
trally located subscapular fossa (3), the area of attachment of the sub-
 distal third of the antebrachium.
scapularis muscle. The lateral surface (4) is subdivided by the spine of the
-snwu snieuidsedns aul jo uiauo- '9) essoj snoudsedns e oul (s) endens
 d) The CARPAL BoNEs are laid down in the embryo in three rows and are
cle) and an infraspinous fossa (7, -origin of the infraspinatus muscle). At
reduced postnata lly to two rows. The medial radial carpal bone (63) con-
the ventral end of the spine of the scapula is the acromion (8) with a distal
tains the intermediate carpal bone of the proximal row as well as the cen-
tral carpal bone of the middle row and is also called the intermedioradial
1
hamate process (9). The caudal margin (10) of the scapula is nearly
straight; the cranial margin (11) has a scapular notch (12) distally , and the
 carpal bone. The ulnar carpal bone (64), which is distal to the ulna, and the
dorsal margin (13) bears a narrow scapular cartilage (14). Of its three
laterally projecting accessory carpal bone (65) complete the proximal row.
   pe m  a  (   I s 
angles (caudal (15), cranial (16) and ventral (17) angles), the ventral one
has a shallow oval glenoid cavity (18). Caudodistal to the slight neck of the
metacarpal bones.
scapula (19) is the infraglenoid tubercle (20) and craniodistally from the
 Synonyms for the carpal bones:
neck, the supraglenoid tubercle (21) with the craniomedial coracoid
 Radial carpal bone 
Os scaphoideum
process (22).
2
Intermediora dial
 Intermediate carpal bone 
 Os lunatum
b) The HuMERus bears the head of the humerus (23) as an articular promi-
 nence for the shoulder joint. The head is separated distinctly from the neck
 Ulnar carpal bone
Os triquetrum
of the humerus (24) only caudally. The crest of the greater tubercle (26)
 Accessory carpal bone
passes distally from the cranial margin of the greater tubercle (25), and the
Os pisiformis
line of the triceps muscle (27) passes proximocaudally from the deltoid
Carpal bone I
 Os tra pezium
    ai ot r sss i 
 Carpal bone II 
wnapiozaden so
 groove (28) seats the tendon of origin of the biceps brachi muscle and
forms the deep furrow that defines the lesser tubercle (29) medially. From
 Carpal bone IIl
Os ca pitatum
the lesser tubercle, the crest of the lesser tubercle (30) extends distally
Carpal bone IV
Os hamatum
where it passes over into the lateral supracondylar crest. The body of the
humerus (31) bears the deltoid tuberosity (32) laterally at the junction of
e) The METAcARPAL BoNEs I-V have a basis (67) with an articular surface
its proximal and middle thirds. The deltoid tuberosity serves for the inser-
 proximally, a long body (68) and finally a distal (!) head (69). Metacarpal 
tion of the deltoid muscle. From the deltoid tuberosity, the humeral crest
I may be absent or divided into two bones in which case the proximal part
(33) continues distally to the medial epicondyle. The crest bounds cranial-
is fused with the first carpal bone.
ly the spirally coursing groove of the brachialis muscle (34), which is occu-
f) The BoNEs oF THE DIGIT are the proximal, middle and distal phalanges.
pied by the brachialis muscle. The humeral condyle (35) consists of a large
 On digit I, the thumb (pollex), the middle phalanx is usually absent. The
medial trochlea (36) for articulation with the ulna and the small lateral
proximal phalanx (70) and the middle phalanx (71) have a basis (72) prox-
capitulum humeri, which articulates with the radius. The humeral condyle
imally, a body (73) and a distal head (74). The indistinct flexor tuberosity
bears an epicondyle on either side. From the lateral epicondyle (38, bear-
(75) is proximopalmar on the middle phalanx; it serves for the termination
ing roughnesses for the origin of the lateral collateral ligament and lateral
of the superficial flexor tendon. The distal phalanx or unguicular bone (76)
digital extensor, and a caudal facet for the origin of the ulnaris lateralis
has an articular surface (77) proximodorsally, an indistinct extensor
muscle), the distinct lateral supracondylar crest (38') extends proximally.
The medial epicondyle (39) is the process for attachment of the medial col-
an indistinct flexor tubercle (79) for the attachment of the deep flexor ten-
lateral ligament and, caudally, the digital and carpal flexors. The deep, cau-
 don. The sharp-edged unguicular crest (80) overlies the umguicular sulcus
 dal olecranon fossa (40) and the shallow radial fossa (41) communicate by
(81) and the basis of the unguicular process (82), which bears the claw.
the supratrochlear foramen (42), which is closed off in life by membrane.
 g) The SEsAMoip BoNEs of the manus are the sesamoid bone of the abduc-
 C) The BoNEs OF THE ANTEBRACHIUM are the radius and ulna.
tor digiti I muscle (83), which articulates with a small mediopalmar facet
 I. On the radius, the head of the radius (43) has a caudomedial condylar 
 of the radial carpal bone, and proximal sesamoid bones (84), which are
articular circumference (44) for the proximal articulation with the ulna at
[s ajo apis d au u s luo a ne i
its radial notch. The neck of the radius (45) is indistinct and bears caudo-
interphalangeal joint there is a distal sesamoid (85). Dorsally on the prox-
medially a small prominence, the radial tuberosity (46), for the termination
 imal interphalangeal joint there is a dorsal sesamoid (86) that is always car-
of the radial insertion of the biceps brachi muscle. The body of the radius
tilaginous (sesamoid cartilage), and the sesamoid that is dorsal at the
(47) is continued distally by the trochlea of the radius (48), which articu-
lates distally with the carpal bones, and laterally, by means of the ulnar
16
Bones of thoracic limb
16
16
Scapula
Costal surface (1)
Facies serrata (2)
Subscapular fossa (3)
Lateral surface (4)
 Spine of scapula (5)
Supraspinous fossa (6)
Infraspinous fossa (7)
Acromion (8)
Hamate process (9)
Scapular notch (12)
Dorsal margin (13)
Scapular cartilage (14)
Caudal angle (15)
Cranial angle (16)
22
Ventral angle (17)
(medial view)
Glenoid cavity (18)
(lateral view)
20
Neck of scapula (19)
Infraglenoid tubercle (20)
20
Supraglenoid tubercle (21)
Coracoid process (22)
Humerus
Head of humerus(23
Neck of humerus (24)
Greater tubercle (25)
Crest of greater tubercle (26)
Tricipital line (27)
31
Intertubercular groo
ove (28)
Lesser tubercle (29)
 Crest of lesser tubercle (30)
26
Body of humerus (31)
33
Deltoid tuberosity (32)
Humeral crest (33)
Sulcus for brachialis muscle (34)
Humeral condyle (35)
Trochlea humeri (36)
36
Capitulum humeri (37)
Lateral epicondyle (38)
43
Lateral supracondylar crest (38)
Medial epicondyle (39)
Clecranon fossa (40)
Radial fossa (41)
Supratrochlear foramen (42)
Radius
Head of radius (43)
 Articular circumference (44)
Neck of radius (45)
Radial tuberosity (46)
Body of radius (47)
Trochlea of radius (48)
Ulnar notch (49)
Medial styloid process (50)
62
Ulna
Olecranon (51)
Tuber olecrani (52)
Anconeal process (53)
Trochlear notch (54)
Medial coronoid process (55)
Lateral coronoid process (56)
Radial notch (57)
601
Body of ulna (58)
Head of ulna (59)
Articular circumference (60)
Lateral styloid process (61)
.
Carpal bones
Radial carpal bone (63)
Ulnar carpal bone (64)
Carpal bones -IV (66)
 Metacarpal bones HIV
Basis (67)
Body (68)
Head (69)
Bones of digits
Proximal phalanx (70)
Middle phalanx (71)
Basis (72)
Body (73)
Head(74)
Flexor tuberosity (75)
Distal phalanx (76)
(dorsolateral view)
Articular surface (77)
Extensor process (78)
Flexortubercle(79)
Unguicular crest (80)
Unguicular sulcus (81)
(zo) sseoaud leinoingun
Sesamoids (83-86)
17
2. Medial Veins of the Thoracic Limb; Medial Shoulder and Arm Muscles
and their Nerve Supply
 For its further dissection, the thoracic limb is separated from the trunk. To do this, the ceidocephalicus muscle (see p. 14) is cut proximal to the clavicular
 intersection, and the other trunk-limb muscles are severed a few fingerbreadths proximal to their insertion on the thoracic limb. The external jugular vein is
transected craniall from the origin of the omobrachial vein, and the subclavian vein from the brachiocephalic vein shortly after the later's division into sub-
 clavian and external jugular. The axillary artery is cut just lateral to the first rib. The segmental nerve roots (nCv 6 to nTv 2) are sectioned a short distance
before their confluence to form the brachial plexus, in which case the three roots of the phrenic nerve (nCv 5 through 7) should be cut near their origin from 
 plexus nerves nCv 6 - 7, and preserved in their course to the thoracic inlet. With the thoracic limb removed, the skin of the limb is reflected to the levelof the 
sped penoip aul pue jaaa luio! leabueiydodieoeiau e ped jedieoeaw aun sndieo aul ie ped jedieo aui anso siur buiop ul suiol leabueeydodieneiau
us au buaal ul ino bup s pio ot pauasiou pue paddem iday aq in qu aul jo pua peis aui suo jeaueydau jsp aul jo jeaa aui ie
 especially on the flexor aspect of the elbow joint and on the cranial contour of the antebrachium, preserve for later dissection the superficial veins and the
 cutaneous nerves that accompany them. Medially at the elbow joint, the pronator teres muscle (42) is cut in order to demonstrate the veins.
a) The Veins are identified on the basis of their area of drainage. The
verse humeral ligament. Its tendon of insertion (see text-illustration) splits
sequence of branches serves only as an auxiliary criterion because it varies
Y-like distal to the flexor aspect of the elbow joint and inserts on the prox-
considerably in the venous system. In the arterial and nervous systems, the
imal radius (radial tuberosity) and ulna. The brachialis muscle (see text-
variations are less.
The very short subclavian vein is continued at the level of the first rib by
 of the biceps brachii, reaching the proximal medial margin of the ulna and
the radius. The brachialis originates caudal to the head of the humerus,
the axillary vein (21), which releases first the (often doubly developed)
external thoracic vein (22) to the pectoral muscles. A further venous
 winds spirally in the groove of the brachialis muscle from caudal to latero-
branch, the lateral thoracic vein (4), is given off and passes with the same-
cranially around the humerus, then distomedially, and ends on the proxi-
named artery and nerve. It runs along the lateral border of the deep pec-
 mal ulna. The radial nerve (nC 7 - nT 2, —19) passes deeply distal to the
3
toral muscle (see p. 13) or, respectively, of the latissimus dorsi muscle. At
 strong insertion tendon of the teres major muscle, entering between the
its origin, it contacts the axillary lymph node (21) and, at the level of the 
medial and long heads of the triceps brachi muscle, which it innervates.
Before it enters the triceps, it gives off a small branch tothe tensor fasciae
second intercostal space, the accessory axillary lymph node (3). From the
 antebrachi muscle (7). The latter muscle originates from the insertion ten-
axillary vein then the subscapular vein (S) courses to the same-named mus-
cle and the thoracodorsal vein (2) to the medial aspect of the latissimus dor-
 don of the latissimus dorsi muscle and terminates on the olecranon and the
 medial antebrachial fascia. The ulnar nerve (nC 8 - nT 2, —8) and median 
si muscle. The subsca pular vein releases the caudal circumflex humeral vein
(18), which passes deeply, coursing in an arciform manner laterally upon
nerve (nC 8 - nT 2, —24) originate jointly from the brachial plexus and
the caudal aspect of the humeral joint capsule, and anastomosing laterally
separate from each other in the distal arm region, the ulnar inclining cau-
with the cranial circumflex humeral vein (23) (see p. 25). The latter is a
dally. Throughout their course in the proximal arm, the two nerves lie
very slight vein that originates from the axillary vein and courses to the
 together caudal to the brachial artery and in association with the brachial
hilus area of the biceps brachi muscle. After branching off the axillo-
vein. The smaller median nerve is the more cranial. At the distal third of
 the humerus, the ulnar nerve dispatches the caudal cutaneous antebrachial
brachial vein (see p. 25), which can also originate from the caudal circum-
flex humeral vein, the axillary vein is continued by the brachial vein (6). On
 nerve (9), which passes on the extensor aspect of the elbow joint and dis-
the flexor aspect of the elbow joint, the latter gives off the superficial
tally on the caudal forearm. The cranial and caudal pectoral nerves, the
brachial vein (10),the continuation of which, the median cubital vein (27),
 long thoracic nerve, the thoracodorsal nerve and the lateral thoracic nerve
originates from the cephalic vein. The brachial vein passes deep to the
 are also accounted as nerves of the brachial plexus.
pronator teres, gives off the common interosseous vein (12) and is contin-
ued by the median vein (13).
 Biceps brachii, brachialis coracobrachialis mm.
1
 b) The SpINAL NeRves nCv 6 to nTv 2 form the roots of the brachial plexus
in which the ventral branches of these several spinal nerves intermesh with
an exchange of fibers. The major nerves of the thoracic limb originate as
(medial view)
branches of the brachial plexus. In the following identification of nerves
 and muscles, the nerves serve as guiding structures in determining the
homologies of the muscles and, on the other hand, the nerves are identified
Coracoid process
 On the basis of their area of supply.
 Supraglenoid tubercle 
The axillary nerve (nC 7 and 8, —17) sends a branch to the teres major
muscle (1), the muscle arising proximally at the caudal margin of the
Lesser tubercle of humerus
 scapula and terminating, with the latissimus dorsi, on the humerus. The
 Greater tubercle of humerus
axillary nerve innervates additionally the caudal part of the subscapular
Transverse ligament
muscle as well as the shoulder joint. At the caudal border of the subscapu-
lar muscle, the nerve passes deeply, runs laterally ventral to the long head
 26 Biceps brachi m. (origin)
of triceps and appears finally on the lateral surface of the shoulder (see p.
 21). The accessory axillary nerve (brachiocephalic nerve, nC 6 and 7, —15)
is the most cranial branch of the brachial plexus (its origin as a branch of
 20 Coracobrachialis m.
the brachial plexus is disputed by some authors). It extends to the clavicu-
lar part of the deltoid, providing the motor supply tothat muscle, and pen-
etrates the muscle with its sensory cutaneous branch. The subscapular
nerve (nC 6 and 7, —16) enters the subscapular muscle (16) with two
branches. The subscapular muscle originates in the subscapular fossa and
ends on the lesser tubercle of the humerus. The suprascapular nerve (nC 6
and 7, —14) passes laterally, deeply between the subscapular and
supraspinatus muscles. It crosses the cranial aspect of the neck of the
 Brachialis m
scapula and appears on the lateral surface of the scapula deep to the
 supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles (see p. 21). The musculocuta-
neous nerve (nC 6 - nT 1, —25) lies upon the cranial face of the brachial
artery. Its proximal muscular branch supplies the coracobrachialis and
biceps brachii muscles and, a fingerbreadth proximal to the elbow joint,
the musculocutaneous nerve communicates with the median nerve. It then
proceeds craniomedially deep to the biceps brachi and ends in a distal
26 Biceps brachi m. (insertion)
muscular branch for the brachialis (there may be an additional branch to
the biceps brachi muscle) and the medial cutaneous antebrachial nerve
(11). The latter nerve passes craniodistally between the biceps and
Pronator quadratus m.
brachialis muscles, arriving subcutaneously and descending the craniome-
2
 dial forearm. The short, fusiform coracobrachialis muscle (20) originates
 on the coracoid process and terminates at the level of the proximal third of
the humerus caudal to the lesser tubercle. The tendon of origin of the long
biceps brachi muscle (26) arises from the supraglenoid tubercle of the
scapula and, enveloped by a cranial extension of the synovial joint capsule,
 passes in the intertubercular groove where it is held in place by the trans-
18
Thoracic limb
Legend :
Phrenic n.
b
 Deep brachial a. and v.
C
Bicipital a. and v.
28
d
 Collateral ulnar a. and v.
 Transverse cubital a. and v.
F
Recurrent ulnar a. and v.
9
Ulnar a. and v.
14 Suprascapular a., v. and n.
Dors. brr. of ulnar a. v. and n.
Caud. interosseous a. and v.
15 Accessory axillary n.
 Deep brachial a. and v.
Cephalic v.
 16 Subscapular n. and m.
 Medial br. of supf. cran. antebrachial a.
and supf. br. of radial n. (medial br.)
m
Acc. cephalic v.
17 Axillary nerve
n
Radial a. and v.
 18 Caudal circumflex
Dors, carpal br.
Abaxial palmar digital n. I
humeral vein
P
19Radial nerve
 Palm. com. digital aa. and nn.
Supf. palmar arch
 20 Coracobrachialis m.
s Palm. com. digital vy.
 21 Axillary v. and In.
32
Teres major m.
2 Thoracodorsal a., v. and n.
- 22 Ext. thoracic a. and v.
 and cran. pectoral n.
 23 Cranial circumflex
3 Accessory axillary In.-
humeral a. and v.
4 Lateral thoracic a., y. and n.
 24 Median nerve 
(caudomedial view)
5 Subscapular a. and v.-
6 Brachial a. and v.-
-33
- 25 Musculocutaneous n.
7 Tensor fasciae antebrachi m.
34
24
36-
25
37-
 26 Biceps brachii m.
7
26
8 Ulnar nerve
9 Caud. cutaneous antebrachial n.
27
10 Superficial brachial vein -
 27 Median cubital vein
9
43
38-
Medial cu
 antebrachial n.
12 Common interosseous vein 
-42
13 Median vein and artery
43
45
K
48
50
50
40
Legend :
m
m
-k
28 Serratus ventr. thoracis m
29 Serratus ventr cervicis m.
n
39-
30 Latissimus dorsi m.
31 Supraspinatus m.
47-
32 Deep pectoral m. (Section)
33 Pectoralis desc. m. (Section)
44
34 Pectoralis transv. m. (Section)
35 Clavicular part of m. deltoideus 
Triceps brachi muscle:
p
36
 Long head 
52
37
 Medial head 
38 Flexor carpi ulnaris m.
49
49
38
 Ulnar head 
53
39
 Humeral head 
53-
40 Superficial digital flexor m.
41 Tendons
414
42 Pronator teres m.
43 Flexor carpi radialis m.
44
Tendon (Section)
53
45 Pronator quadratus m.
 Deep digital flexor m.:
54
46
Ulnar head
55
47
Humeral head
48
 Radial head 
49
 50 Extensor carpi radialis m.
Tendon
51 Palmar carpal ligament
52 Flexor retinaculum (Section)
53 Palmar anular ligament 
54 Manica flexoria "
55 Prox. and dist. digit. anular lig.
(see pp. 23, 25)
56 Carpal pad
57 Metacarpal pad
 58 Digital pad
19
3. Lateral Veins of the Thoracic Limb; Lateral Shoulder and Arm Muscles
and their Nerve Supply
 To demonstate the anastomoses between the medial deep and the lateral superficial venous systems as well as the muscular branches of the axillary
-snw au ajesuowap ol (uoansnllixal aes gndeos au wo ubuo jiaul ie paaaas ane alosnw piotep aul jo sued jewoioe pue jeindeos aun anau
 cular branches of the racial nerve, the lateral head of the triceps brachi muscle is cut in its midle and the stumps reflected.
a) The LATERAL SUPERFICIAL CuTANEOUs VEINS cCOurse in the SCapular and
chiocephalic nerve, -nC 6). The teres minor muscle (see text-illustration)
arm region unaccompanied by same-named arteries. From the external
 originates at the infraglenoid tubercle and the caudal margin of the scapula
jugular, the cephalic vein (19) passes briefly laterally in the lateral pectoral
 and terminates at the teres minor tuberosity The suprascapular nerve (2),
groove, then deeply between the cleidobrachialis and superficial pectoral
previouslyidentified,innervates the supraspinatus muscle. Itcrosses the neck
muscles to reach the lateral border of the cleidobrachialis. Here it joins the
 ofthe scapula cranially, andturns caudally onthe lateral surface ofthe scapu-
axillobrachial vein (7). Before the axillobrachial vein passes deep to the
la at the base of the acromion, finally entering the deep face of the infra-
scapular part of the deltoid muscle, it receives the omobrachial vein (6). At
 spinatus muscle. The supraspinatus muscle (1) originates in the supraspinous
the flexor aspect of the elbow joint, the cephalic vein gives off the median
fossa and inserts cranially on the greater tubercle of the humerus. The infra-
 spinatus muscle (9) lies deepto the scapular part of the deltoid muscle Its ori-
3
vein, reaches the medially situated brachial vein. The cephalic vein in its
 gin is the infraspinatus fossa and spine and cartilage ofthe scapula. It ends on
course upon the cranial contour of the antebrachium is accompanied by
the infraspinatus facet ofthe humerus, a little distal to the greater tubercle.
both branches of the superficial ramus of the radial nerve and by the distal
Where its tendoncrosses over the cartilage-covered caudal part ofthe greater
continuation (cranial superficial antebrachial artery) of the weak superfi-
tubercle,it is underlain by a subtendinous bursa. The insertion tendons ofthe
cial antebrachial artery. Three fingerbreadths proximal to the carpus, the
 infraspinatus and subscapularis have the function of lateral or, respectively,
cephalic vein passes onto the medial side of the limb, then caudopalmarly
 medial contractile ligaments atthe shoulder joint, which lacks proper collat-
to reach the palmar surface of the manus. Distal to this point, its straight
 eral ligaments. Deep within the fibrous joint capsule there are lateral and
direct-distal course upon the cranial aspect of the limb is continued by the
 medial fibrous reinforcements that are designated glenohumeral ligaments
accessory cephalic vein (21), which dispatches the dorsal common digital
(see p. 26). The radial nerve (15), passing deep to the lateral head of the tri-
veins on the dorsum of the manus.
ceps, supplies with its proximal muscular branches the heads of the triceps
 brachi muscle and the anconeus muscle. The continuing radial nerve passes
b) The NeRvEs that supply the LATERAL MuscLEs of the shoulder and
 distally upon the brachialis muscle and divides into a deep branch (17) for the
brachium originate medially at the shoulder from the brachial plexus,
 digital and carpal joint extensors (and the ulnaris lateralis) and a superficial
where their initial portions were previously identified (see p. 19).
branch (16)that accompanies the cephalic vein on either side with lateral and
The axillary nerve gives off muscular branches to the medial aspect of the
medial branches. These branches continue on the distal limb alongside the
scapular and acromial parts of the deltoid muscle and to the fusiform teres
accessory cephalic vein. Their dorsal common digital nerves supply the dor-
minor muscle. Afterthis, the axillary nerve terminates with its craniallateral
sum of the manus. The triceps brachi muscle (see also the smallillustration)
cutaneous brachial nerve (10) and its cranial cutaneous antebrachial nerve
 originates with its long head (12) on the caudal margin of the scapula, with
(11). These nerves appear subcutaneously atthe caudal border of the deltoid
its accessory head (14) caudally on the humerus, with its lateral head (13)
muscle in the company of the axillobrachial vein. The deltoid muscle origi-
 from the line of triceps and, with its medial head (8), proximomedially from
 nates fromthe sca pular spine with its scapular part (3) and from the acromion
the humerus. Deep to their common termination at the olecranon, a sub-
with its acromial part (4). Both parts end on a common tendon that inserts on
tendinous bursa is present laterally. Proximal to the olecranon there is an
the deltoid tuberosity of the humerus. The clavicular part of the deltoid (5,
 inconstant subcutaneous olecranon bursa. The anconeus (18) originates at
cleidobrachial muscle), runs between the clavicular intersection and the dis-
the margins ofthe olecranon fossa andends with a fleshyattachment lateral-
tal end ofthe humeral crest. It is supplied by the accessory axillary nerve (bra-
ly on the olecranon.
Muscles of scapula
(lateral view)
Supraspinatus m.
 9 Infraspinatus m.
Deltoid m.:
3  Scapular part
4  Acromial part
Teres minor m.
20
Thoracic limb
23
 9 Infraspinatus m.
 2 Suprascapular a., v. and n.
Deltoid muscle:
25
 10 Cranial lateral cutaneous brachial nerve
 Scapular part 
 4   Acromial part 
 5   Clavicular part (cleidobrachialis m.)
11 Cranial cutaneous antebrachial nerve 
 6 Omobrachial vein
Triceps brachi muscle:
7 Axillobrachial vein
12  Long head
13  Lateral head
-14  Accessory head
- 15 Radial nerve
16   Superficial branch
17 Deep br. and collateral radial a. and v.
18 Anconeus m.
19 Cephalic vein
- 20 Median cubital vein
29
30-
33
(craniolateral view)
 8 Medial head of
triceps bra chi m.
34
19
essory cephalic vein
35
36
Legend :
Legend :
22
 Cervical part of trapezius m. (section)
23 Thoracic part of trapezius m.(section)
 Cutaneous brr. of thoracodorsal a. and v.
24 Teres major m.
Accessory axillary n. (C6)
Y
 25 Cleidocervicalis m. (section)
Supf. brachial a. and v.
6
 Clavicular intersection
内
Cran. supf. antebrachial a.
27 Brachialis m.
 Medial branch
28 Biceps brachi m.
Lateral branch
29 Pronator teres m.
Lat. cutaneous antebrachial n. of radial n.
30
 Extensor carpi radialis m.
Medial br. of radial n. (supf. br.)
1
 Extensor dig. com. m.
Lateral br. of radial n. (supf. br.)
32
 Extensor dig. lat. m.
Dors. com. digitalI a.. y. and n.
 Extensor carpi ulnaris m.
Dors. br. of ulnar a. and n.
34 Abductor pollicis longus m.
IAbaxial dors. dig. a., v. and n.
35 Extensor pollicis m.
m Dorsal com. dig. aa., v. and nn.I-IV
(see pp. 23, 25)
 36 Extensor retinaculum
21
4. Antebrachial (Forearm) Muscles and their Nerve Supply
 To clearly differentiate between the individual carpal and digital flexor muscles, the termination of their tendinous insertions has to be identified. To do this,
 the carpal canal, passage for the two digital fexor tendons and associated structures on the palmar carpus, must be opened. First, the superficial lamina
 of the flexor retinaculum extending between the accessory carpal bone and the medial styloid process is cut. The superficial flexor tendon is lifted up from
 the carpal canal. Then the deep lamina of the flexor retinaculum, which lies between the fexor tendons, is cut. Afterlifing up the deep flexor tendon, the 
palmar carpal ligament, which forms the deep boundary of the canal, can be seen. To see the insertions of the extensor and flexor tendons, the skin of the
second digit wil be completely reflected. The manica fexoria of the superficial flexor tendon is incised laterally and the passage of the deep fexor tendon
 through the manica can then be more easily observed.
1
a) The CAUDoMEDIAL FoREARM MusCLES are the two digital flexOrs, the two
the extensor process of the distal phalanx, the pollex muscles between the
flexors of the carpal joint and the two pronators of the radioulnar joints.
metacarpus and the distal phalanx of digit I, the carpal extensors directly
The origin of all of these muscles except one pronator quadratus) is from the
distally to the carpus and the metacarpus, and the supinators on the radius.
medial epicondyle ofthe humerus; additional toits origin from the medial epi-
I. Of the two digital extensors, the common digital extensor muscle (13)
condyle,the deep digital flexor has radial and ulnar heads. The pronator quad
 ends on digits II - V and the lateral digital extensor muscle (16) on digits
ratus muscle is composed of horizontal fibers that occupy the antebrachial
III -V.
interosseous space. Two ofthe muscles have,in additiontotheir origin fromthe
 II. Of the two pollx (digit I) muscles, the long abductor of digit I (11)
medial epicondyle, an origin from the ulna (flexor carpi ulnaris muscle) and an
 inserts proximally on the first metacarpal bone, and the extensor of digit I
origin from the ulna and radius (deep digital flexor muscle). Thus, the flexor
(12) ends with two very weak tendons on the first and second digits.
carpi ulnaris has two heads of origin,the deep digital flexor, three.
tosua, puu ae qoq sot iede ai jo sosuixa oi l jo 
The insertion of the two digital flexors is on the digital bones; of the two
a t  jo osa ue s su sn i nosxa a a
carpal joint flexors, at the carpus or proximal metacarpus; of the two
leui suopuai omi ous supiaip Aq spua (e) aosnu seei idren rosuixa
pronators on the radius and ulna (these are things to consider in identify-
insert proximally on metacarpal bones IIl and Ill. The extensor carpi ulnaris
ing the different muscles).
(ulnaris lateralis,
18), which acts chiefly as an abductor of the paw and
I. Of the two digital flexor muscles, the superficial digital flexor(10) is con-
 partial flexor of the carpus ends on the proximal lateral prominence of
tinued at the distal third ofthe antebrachium by its tendon, which divides in
 metacarpal V and with a transverse branch that attaches to the accessory
the proximal metacarpus into four branches, each inserting on a digit (II- V).
carpal bone.
 Proximal to their termination on the flexor tuberosity of the middle phalanx
IV. Of the two supinators (see text-illustration), the supinator muscle lies
the tendon is modified to form a tunnel or sleeve-like manica flexoria (20) for
 deep to the origins of the digital extensors and terminates proximocranial-
the corresponding tendon-branch of the deep digital flexor. The deep digital
ly on the radius. The brachioradialis muscle passes superficially on the flex-
flexor muscle has a strong humeral head (8) and weak ulnar (7) and radial (6)
 or aspect of the elbow joint and inserts on the craniomedial margin of the
headsthat join inthe distal third ofthe antebrachiumto form the deepflexor
radius at the junction of its middle and distal thirds.
tendon. The deep flexor tendon then divides at the distal carpus and proximal
The nerve supply of these muscles is by the radial nerve, which, by its deep
metacarpus into five tendons of insertion (I - V), four of which pass through
 branch (1), supplies all of the craniolateral forearm muscles. The superficial
the sleeve ofthe corresponding manica flexoria and end on the flexor tubercle
branch (see p. 21) lies on both sides of the cephalic vein with its medial and
ofthe distal phalanx of digits I - V. The bra nch ofthe deepflexor to the distal
lateral branches, and gives offthe lateral cutaneous antebrachial nerve as the
 phalanx of digit I is unaccompanied by a tendon of the superficial flexor.
several branches that extend caudally from the lateral branch onto the cran-
II. Of the two carpal joint flexors, the two heads of the flexor carpi ulnaris
iolateral antebrachium. In the company of the accessory cephalic vein, both
muscle (15) remain separate up to their insertion on the accessory carpal
the medial and lateral branches continue distally onto the dorsum of the
bone. The ulnar head is mainly tendinous, the humeral head predominant-
 manus and branch here into the dorsal common digital nerves (19), each of
ly fleshy. The fexor carpi radialis muscle (2) has a divided terminal tendon
which ends by dividing proximal to the metacarpophalangeal joints into dor-
and inserts on the proximopalmar aspect of metacarpal bones II and IIl.
sal proper digital nerves that extend toward the ends of neighboring digits.
II. Of the two pronator muscles of the radioulnar joints, the pronator teres 
 Antebrachial muscles
muscle (see text-illustration) inserts craniomedially on the proximal radius.
The pronator quadratus muscle (4) occupies the antebrachial interosseous
 space palmarly, and extends between the radius and ulna.
The nerve supply is by the median (5) and ulnar nerves (9), in which case
the more medially located muscles (pronator teres, pronator quadratus and
flexor carpi radialis muscles as well as the radial head of the deep digital
Lat. epicondyle of humerus
flexor muscle) are supplied alone by the median nerve. The median nerve
also supplies the superficial digital flexor, the most caudal of the medial
muscles. The more caudally located muscles (flexor carpi ulnaris muscle
 Supinator m.
and ulnar head of the deep digital flexor muscle) are supplied only by the 
Pronator teres m.-
ulnar nerve. The humeral head of the deep digital flexor muscle, consisting
of three bellies and found in the middle of both areas of supply is inner-
Brachioradialis m.
vated by both the ulnar and median nerves. The ulnar nerve divides in the
proximal antebrachial third into the palmar branch and the dorsal branch.
 3 Extensor carpi radialis m.
The dorsal branch of the ulnar nerve (14) runs distally along the caudolat-
eral border of the ulnaris lateralis muscle (extensor carpi ulnaris muscle),
crosses the accessory carpal bone laterally, and ends as abaxial dorsal dig-
ital nerve V on the dorsum of the manus. The palmar branch of the ulnar
nerve (17) courses deeply, within the carpal canal medial to the accessory
18 Extensor carpi ulnaris m
 carpal bone and between the accessorometacarpal ligaments (ligaments
tA pue Ai sauogq iedieoeiaw oi suoq ledieo Aiossaoe aui woy puaixa yeu
11 Abductor pollicis longus m.
13 Common digital extensor m.
see illustration on p. 27), to reach the lateral palmar surface of the manus.
12 Extensor pollicis m.
16 Lateral digital extensor m.
b) The CRANIOLATERAL FoREARM MusCLES are the digital extensOrs, twO
muscles of the pollex (digit I, homologous to the thumb of human beings),
two carpal extensors and two supinators of the radioulnar joints (see text-
illustration).
The origin of the craniolateral forearm muscles is predominantly from the lat-
eral supracondylar crest (brachioradialis, extensor carpi radialis, common
 digital extensor), the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the lateral collat-
eral ligament of the elbow joint (supinator, lateral digital extensor, extensor
carpi ulnaris or ulnaris lateralis). The long abductor of digit I (m. abductor
pollicis longus) and the extensor of digit I (m. extensor policis) arise from the
cranial surface of the ulna and radius and the interosseous ligament that joins
the two bones.
The insertion of these muscles is brought into play in distinguishing the dif.
ferent muscles of the craniolateral group. Of the four muscle groups, each
consisting of two individual muscles, the digital extensors insert distally on
22
Antebrachium or Forearm
( caudomedial view)
(craniolateral view)
1 Deep branch of radial n. 
2 Flexor carpi radialis m. (section)
 3 Extensor carpi radialis m.
4 Pronator quadratus m.
5 Median a., v. and nerve 
 Deep digital flexor m.:
 Radial head
Ulnar head
 Humeral head 
 9 Ulnar nerve
10 Superficial digital flexor m.
Abductor pollicis longus m.
12 Extensor of digit I m.
13 Common digital extensor m.
14 Dorsal branch of ulnar nerve -
15 Flexor carpi ulnaris m.
16 Lateral digital extensor m.
17 Palmar branch of ulnar nerve
18 Extensor carpi ulnaris m.
19 Dorsal common digital a., v. and nn. I-IV
Digit III
(medial view)
(see pp. 19, 21, 25)
3
Legend :
27
21  Tendon of supf. digital flexor
27 Collateralig. of prox. interphalangeal joint 
22
 Tendon of deep digital flexor
28 Dorsa ligament
23 Interosseus m.
29 Prox. sesamoid bone
24 Tendon of com. dig. ext. m.
28
30 Dorsal sesamoid bone
25 Palmar anular ligament 
31  Dorsal sesamoid cartilage 
26 Prox. and dist digital anula ligg.
32 Distal palmar sesamoid cartilage
23
5. Vessels and Nerves of the Thoracic Limb
a) SHOULDER, BRACHIUm (ARM) AND ANTEBRACHIUM (FOREARM) are Supplied
 interosseous space and supply the craniolateral forearm muscles. The medi-
by blood vessels and nerves that run mainly medially and cranially on the
an artery and vein (12) arise as end-branches of the brachial vessels. In the
limb. At the joints they are generally found on the protected, flexor, aspect
of the joint. The blood supply of the thoracic limb is by a single artery, the
brachial vessels (13) for the caudomedial forearm muscles and, a finger-
axillary artery. The venous drainage is by several veins: the medially situ-
 breadth distal, the small radial artery and vein (14) that pass along the
ated axillary vein, the craniolaterally located cephalic and the axillo-
 medial margin of the radius. After this, the median artery (the satellite veins
brachial and omobrachial veins.
become very small) passes in the carpal canal and reaches the palmar sur-
The axillary artery and vein (15) lie at the bend of the shoulder joint, super-
face of the deep digital flexor tendon.
ficial to the axillary nerve. At the level of the first rib, they continue the
b) The VessEL AND NERvE SuPPLY OF THE MANUs is by deep and superficial
long subclavian artery or, respectively, the very short subclavian vein and
 arteries, veins and nerves. On the dorsal and palmar surfaces of the manus,
 give off the external thoracic and lateral thoracic vessels before ending by
the deeply located vessels and nerves are designated metacarpal arteries,
dividing into the subscapular artery and vein and the brachial artery and
 veins, and nerves; dorsal or palmar according to the surface of the manus
vein. The cranial circumfex humeral vessels usually arise at the terminal
supplied. The superficially located vessels and nerves are designated com-
division of the axillary vessels or from the brachial artery and vein. With
mon digital arteries, veins, and nerves; again, dorsal or palmar according
the cranial pectoral nerve, the external thoracic artery and vein (16) enter
to the surface of the manus. The common digital vessels and nerves divide
the superficial pectoral muscle. The lateral thoracic artery and vein (3) pass
distally into proper digital vessels and nerves.
with the same-named nerve on the lateral border ofthe deep pectoral mus-
 I. On the dorsum of the manus, the dorsal common digital arteries I - IV
 cle; they supply the axillary lymph node and the inconstant accessory axil-
 proceed from the two branches of the superficial antebrachial artery. Dor-
lary lymph node and the thoracic mammae. Branches of the lateral thoracic
 sal common digital veins I - IV are from the accessory cephalic vein. Dor-
vessels, joined by caudal pectoral nerves, pass to the deep face of the deep
 sal common digital nerves I - IV are from the medial and lateral branches
 pectoral muscle. The subscapular artery and vein (1) course at the caudal
 (rami) of the superficial ramus of the radial nerve. The dorsal branch ofthe 
border of the subscapular muscle. The subscapular artery gives off caudal-
 ulnar nerve ends on the dorsum of the manus as the dorsal abaxial digital
ly the thoracodorsal artery (2); whereas, the thoracodorsal vein (2) usual-
nerve of digit V. The deeply located dorsal metacarpal arteries and veins I
ly arises from the axillary vein. With the same-named nerve, both vessels
- IV originate from the respective arterial and venous rete carpi dorsale.
enter the medial aspect of the latissimus dorsi muscle. Additional branches
 The venous carpal rete (carpal network) is formed by dorsal carpal branch-
 of the subsca pular artery and vein are the caudal circumfex humeral artery
es of the accessory cephalic and radial veins. The arterial carpal rete is
and vein (4), which run deeply, passing laterally caudal to the shoulder
formed by dorsal carpal branches of the caudal interosseous, ulnar and
joint, ventral to the long head of triceps, and anastomose with the weak
radial arteries.
cranial circumflex humeral vessels. The cranial circumfex humeral artery
and vein (17) pass cranially from the axillary or brachial vessels and enter
 II. On the palmar surface of the manus, the palmar common digital arter-
the biceps brachi muscle at its hilus. The brachial artery and vein (5),
ies and veins I - IV arise from the respective arterial and venous superficial
which proceed as end-branches of the axillary vessels, give off the deep
 palmar arches. The arterial superficial palmar arch is formed in the proxi-
brachial, bicipital, collateral ulnar, superficial brachial and transverse
mal metacarpus. The medial arm of the arch is from the median and radi-
cubital arteries and veins. After passing deep to the pronator teres muscle,
 al arteries; its lateral arm proceeds from the union of the ulnar artery and
the brachial vessels end at the level of the proximal interosseous space by
 palmar carpal branch of the caudal interosseous artery. The venous super-
dividing into common interosseous and median vessels. About the middle
ficial palmar arch lies farther distally, at the proximal margin of the
 of the brachium, accompanied by the radial nerve, the deep brachial artery
 metacarpal pad. It is formed by a confluence of the cephalic and radial
and vein (6) pass deeply between the medial and long heads of the triceps,
 veins medially, by the ulnar and caudal interosseous veins laterally. The
which they supply. In the distal brachium, the bicipital artery and vein (18)
 palmar metacarpal arteries and veins I - IV originate in the proximal
pass cranially to supply the biceps brachi muscle. The collateral ulnar
 metacarpus from the respective arterial and venous deep palmar arches.
artery and vein (7) accompany the ulnar nerve to the extensor aspect of the
 The arterial arch is formed medially by the radial artery and laterally by a
elbow joint and anastomose distally with the recurrent ulnar vessels that
 confluence of the ulnar and caudal interosseous arteries. The venous arch
proceed from the ulnar artery and vein. The superficial brachial artery (8)
is formed by the cephalic and radial veins medially and laterally by a con-
 originates in the distal third of the brachium; the same-named vein closer
fluence of the ulnar and caudal interosseous veins. The palmar common
to the level of the elbow joint. The artery and vein pass first superficially
 digital nerves I - III arise from the median nerve, palmar common digital
 and transversely across the flexor aspect ofthe elbow joint. The superficial
nerve IV from the superficial branch of the palmar branch of the ulnar
brachial artery passes over distally into the superficial antebrachial artery,
 nerve. Palmar metacarpal nerves I - IV originate from the deep branch of
whose branches initially join the cephalic vein and, continuing, pass onto
the palmar branch of the ulnar nerve.
the dorsum of the manus, with the accessory cephalic vein. On the flexor
c) The LYMPH DRAINAGE ofthe thoracic limb (see pp. 15 and 19) is by super-
-s ig aa  n hus aia a  m a jo s
ficially and deeply locatedlymph vessels. The superficial lymph vessels pre-
tinued by the median cubital vein. The arrangement of the veins here is like
 dominantly accompany the superficial lateral cutaneous veins and pass to
the letter H. The superficial brachial and median cubital veins form the
the superficial cervical lymph nodes from which the lymph drains to the
bar of the H. The longitudinal branches of the H are formed medially by
venous angle at the junction of internal and external jugular veins. The
the brachial vein, laterally by the cephalic vein. The transverse cubital
 deep lymph vessels accompany the deep blood vessels and pass to the axil-
artery and vein (9) pass deep to the terminal part ofthe biceps brachi mus-
lary and accessory axillary lymph nodes, which also drain the lymph from
cle at the level of the flexor aspect of the elbow joint. The common
the thoracic wall and the three cranial mammae. The disc-shaped axillary
interosseous artery and vein (10) give off the ulnar artery and vein (11),
 lymph node, about 2 cm in diameter, can be palpated in the caudal angle
which pass distally with the ulnar nerve. The common interosseous vessels
between the lateral thoracic and axillary vessels. The accessory axillary
end by dividing into cranial and caudal interosseous vessels. The caudal
lymph node is located one intercostal space farther caudal on the course of
interosseous vessels run distally deep to the pronator quadratus muscle.
the lateral thoracic artery and vein. The lymph passes from the axillary and
The cranial interosseous vessels emerge cranially from the proximal
 accessory axillary lymph nodes to the venous angle also.
Legend (see figure on opposite page)
35 Recurrent ulnar a. and v.
55 External jugular v.
36 Cranial interosseous a. and v.
56
 Cephalic v.
 19 Circumflex scapular a. and v.
37 Caudal interosseous a. and v.
57
 Median cubital v.
 20 Brachiocephalic v.
38
Interosseous branch
58
 Accessory cephalic v.
Subclavian v.
39 Dorsal branch of the ulnar a. and n.
59
 Omobrachial v.
 22 Collateral radial a. and .
40 Deep palmar arch
60 Palmar metacarpal aa., v. and nn. I - IV 
23 UInar n.
41 Musculocutaneous n.
61 Dorsal abaxial n. of digit I (dorsal view)
24
 Caudal cutaneous antebrachial n.
42
 Medial cutaneous antebrachial n.
 Palmar abaxial n. of digit I (palmar view)
25
 Palmar branch
43 Radial n.
 62 Dorsal carpal branch of the radial a. and v.
26
 Deep branch
44
 Supericial ramus
63 Dorsal carpal branch of the caudal interos-
27
 Superficial branch
45
Lateral branch (ramus)
seous a.
 28 Palmar abaxial a. and n. of digit V
46
Medial branch (ramus) 
 64 Dorsal carpal branch of the accessory
 29 Superficial palmar arch
47
 Deep branch
cephalic v.
 30 Dorsal common digital aa., w. and nn. (dorsal view)
48 Cranial superficial antebrachial a.
65 Dorsal carpal branch of the ulnar a.
Palmar common digital aa., vv. and nn. (palmar view)
49
Lateral branch (ramus) 
 66 Rete carpi dorsale
 Dorsal proper digital a., v. and nn. (dorsal view)
50
Medial branch (ramus)
 Dorsal metacarpal aa. and vv. I - IV
 Palmar proper digital a, v. and nn. (palmar view)
51 Axillary n.
68 Abaxial dorsal digital a., v. and n. of digit V
 32 Phrenic nerve 
52
 Cranial cutaneous antebrachial n.
33 Axillobrachial v.
 53 Suprascapular n.
34 Median n.
54 Accessory axilary (brachiocephalic) n. (C6)
24
Arteries, Veins, Nerves of thoracic limb
(Basset Artesien - Normand)
(medial view)
4
1 Subscapular a., v. and r
 2 Thoracodorsal a
59
15 Axillary a. and v.
 16 External thoracic
4Caudalcircumflexhumerala.and
a. and v.
5Brachial a
17 Cranial circumflex
humeral a. and v.
Bicipitala.and v
(dorsal view)
46
50.
49
56
36
12 Median a. and v
chial a.and
38
58
39
58
14 Radial a. and v.
63
56
25
62
64
65
(palmar view)
66
62
26
27
67
60
68
61
30
29
30
25
6.
 Synovial Structures of the Thoracic Limb
a) JoINTS OF THE THORACIC LiMB
Name
 Participating bones
Form/
Function
Comments
Composition
1. Shoulder (humeral) joint 
Glenoid cavity of the scapula, Spheroid joint/
Movement in all
 A capsular synovial sheath invests the
head of the humerus
Simple joint
 directions, chiefly
 tendon of origin of the biceps brachii
a hinge joint
muscle, which is kept in position by the
(ginglymus)
 transverse retinaculum that bridges the
intertubercular groove.
II. Elbow (cubital) joint
a) Humero-ulnar joint
Humeral condyle,
Compound joint/
 Snapping hinge
Craniolateral recess deep to the common
 trochlear notch
Ginglymus
joint
digital extensor muscle; 2. Craniomedial
of the ulna
recess deep to the biceps brachi muscle;
3. Caudal recess between the lateral epi-
b) Humero-radial joint 
Humeral condyle, head
Ginglymus
 dondyle and the olecr anon.
of the radius
c) Proximal radio-ulnar
Articular circumference
Trochoid joint
Rotation of the
joint
of the radius, radial notch
radius on its long
of the ulna
a xis
 Il. Distal radioulnar joint
Ulnar notch of the radius,
Trochoid joint/
Rotation of the
 The joint cavity communicates with the
radial circumference
 Simple joint
radius on its
 carpal joint. For treatment of growth
of the ulna
long axis
 disturbances, the radioulnar ligament may
be cut.
 Joints of the Manus
IV. Carpal joint
 a) Antebrachiocarpal joint
Trochlea of the radius, ulna,
 Ellipsoid joint,
 Predominantly a
The joint cavity consists of two parts that
radial carpal bone,
compound joint 
hinge joint with
 communicate with each other. Proximal
ulnar carpal bone 
slight abduction/
 part: a) and e), which communicate with
the radioulnar joint. Distal part: b) and c).
movement
The carpal joint has dorsal fascial rein-
forcement, the extensor retinaculum,
b) Middle carpal joint
 Proximal and distal rows
Condylar joint/
which retains the extensor tendons in
of the carpal bones
Compound joint
position. On the palmar aspect, the flexor
retinaculum bridges the carpal canal. The
c) Carpometacarpal joint 
Carpal bones I - IV
 Plane joint/
lateral and medial collateral ligaments are
and MC I-V
Compound joint
relatively short ligaments since they bridge
only the antebrachiocarpal joint.
d) Intercarpal joints
Joints between the carpal
 Plane joint/
bones of a row
 Compound joint
(perpendicular joints)
e) Joints of the accessory
Accessory carpal bone, 
 Plane joint!
Amphiarthrosis
carpal bone
ulnar carpal bone, ulna
Compound joint 
(little movement)
V. Metacarpophalangeal
 Proximal phalanges;
Compound joint
Mainly a hinge
 Metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal
joints
proximal sesamoid bones; 
joint with slight
 joints have each in their joint capsules a
 dorsal sesamoid bones;
abduction and
 dorsal and a palmar outpouching. The
metacarpal bones
adduction as well
joint capsule attaches at the margin of the
as axial rotation
 articular surfaces of the participating
sesamoids. At the metacarpophalangeal
 joint there are proximal sesa moids palmarly
and a single dorsal sesamoid.
Vl. Proximal interphalangeal
 Proximal and middle
Saddle joint/
 Dorsal sesamoid is present.
joints of the manus
 phalanges 
 Simple joint
VIl. Distal interphalangeal
 Middle phalanges and
Saddle joint/
Distal sesamoid is present.
joints of the manus
 distal phalanges
 Simple joint
The shoulder joint lacks typical ligaments external to the joint capsule.
 The bicipitoradial bursa lies between the tendon of the biceps and the
Their function is taken over by contractile tension-bands, the tendons of
 radius and is frequently fused with the subtendinous bursa of the brachialis
the infraspinatus and subscapular muscles. The lateral and medial gleno-
muscle.
humeral ligaments are internal capsular reinforcements.
 The subtendinous bursa of the brachialis muscle is located between the
At the elbow joint the collateral ligaments bifurcate, forming radial and
 end-tendon of the brachialis and the radius.
ulnar attachments. The anular ligament of the radius grips around the head
 c) SynoviaL SHEaTHs 
 of the radius and extends from the medial coronoid process of the ulna to
the lateral collateral ligament.
 Synovial sheaths protect the tendon of origin of the coracobrachial muscle
b) SYNOVIAL BURSAE
(Vagina synovialis m. coracobrachialis), and ofthe biceps brachi muscle in
the intertubercular groove (Vagina synovialis intertubercularis). The latter
The subtendinous bursa of the infraspinatus muscle is located between its
 is an extension of the shoulder joint capsule with which it communicates.
terminal tendon and the carilage-covered lateral surface of the greater
 The end-tendons of the carpal joint extensors are protected by a synovial
tubercle.
 sheath (long abductor of digit I) or by synovial sheaths and bursae (exten-
The subtendinous bursa of the subscapularis muscle lies between the inser-
sor carpi radialis). The ulnaris lateralis end-tendon and its caudal extension
tional tendon of its muscle and the shoulder joint capsule.
[edies leper aui esinq leaous e Aq paaioud are ledies Aossme aui o
flexor end-tendon is protected by a synovial sheath; the ulnar carpal flex-
The subtendinous bursa of the triceps brachi muscle is expanded between
 Or by a bursa. The digital extensors are protected by synovial sheaths at the
the olecranon and the insertion of the triceps brachi muscle.
carpus, the digital flexors on the digits. The deep flexor usually has a syn-
5
 The subcutaneous olecranon bursa is an acquired synovial bursa.
 ovial sheath at the carpus.
26
Joints, synovial bursae and sheaths
(lateral view)
(medial view)
(medial view)
 Med. glenohumeral lig.
Synovial bursa
 Subtendinous bursa of
subscapular m.
 Articular capsule 
Articular capsule 
Subtendinous bursa of infraspinatus m.
Transverse retinaculum
Intertubercular synovial sheath
 Shoulder joint
 Shoulder joint
Legend :
1  Infraspinatus m.
4 Biceps brachii m.
5
 Long head 
6 Brachialis m.
2 Subscapular m.
Triceps brachii m.:
5"
Accessory head
Medial head
8 Ext. carpi radialis m.
7Anconeus m.
3 Coracobrachialis m.
5
Lateral head 
5"
lateralview)
(medial view)
Subtendinous bursa
of triceps brachi m.
Subcutaneous
 olecranon bursa
Articular capsule
Lat.and med.
 collateral lig. of 
elbow
Bicipito-radial bursa 2
subtendinous bursa of
brachialis m.
 Elbow joint 
Elbow joint
Legend :
9 Extensor digitalis com. m.
12 Ulnaris lateralis m.
13' Humeral head
16 Supf. digital flexor m.
10 Supinator m.
 Flexor carpi ulnaris m.:
14 Abductor pollicis longus m.
17 Deep digital flexor m.
11 Extensor digitalis lat. m.
13 Unar head
15 Extensor pollicis m.
18 Flexor carpiradialis m.
19 Interflexor mm.
(dorsal view)
(palmar view)
(medial view)
11
17
 Synovial sheaths
18
Articular capsules
 Synovial sheath
Collateral lig. of med. carpus
14
Flexor retinaculum
Sesamoid boneof
 abductor pollicis longus m
9
Articular capsules
Carpal joint
Legend :
(see pp. 18, 23, 143)
A
 Anular lig. of radius
D
 Deep palmar carpal lig.
Dorsal lig.
B
 Palm. carpometacarpal lig.
 Carpal joint
C
Accessoro-metacarpal lig
E
Dors. carpometacarpalig.
27
Chapter 4: Thoracic and Abdominal Wall
1. Muscles of the Vertebral Column, Nuchal Ligament, and Lumbar Cutaneous Nerves
To demonstrate the muscles of the vertebral column, the skin is removed from the lateral body wall, the dorsum, and the sacral region as far as the cau-
dal end of the sacrum. Then one removes the remnants of the extrinsic muscles of the thoracic limb. The m. serratus dorsalis cranialis (33) is detached 
 from its rib insertions and reflected dorsally. The thoracolumbar fascia (22, see also text-illustration p. 30) is incised longitudinally along a line parallel to
and 2 cm from the dorsal midline. In the lumbosacral area, the underlying lumbodorsal tendon (39) is incised longitudinally at the same level as the fascia,
 and a transverse incision is made at the caudal end of the parent cut. Then the tendon is detached from the underlying musculature. The lumbodorsal ten-
 don divides at the lateral border of the m. longissimus lumborum. The deep lamina is directed between the mm. iliocostalis and longissimus lumborum as
 an intermuscular septum (see text-illustration p. 30) and the superficial lamina runs over the m. liocostalis. In the neck, the m. splenius and m. semispinalis
"Mojaq alqel ayl u uojelewunu aul ol spuodsaon salpsnw ayl jo uooessip ayl u pamolloy aq ol aouanbes aul pesodxa buaq jee peloesuel ane
a) The MuscLEs OF THE VERTEBRAL CoLUMN are subdivided into a dorsal
 The ventral vertebral muscles (Nos. XI to XIll) flex the vertebral column
and a ventral group, and a specific epaxial group that moves the head. All
and incline it laterally. The innervation of all ventral vertebral muscles is by
the dorsal vertebral muscles (Nos. I to X) function in the extension and lat-
ventral rami of the segmental spinal nerves. The muscles situated ventral to
eral movement or inclination of the vertebral column. The innervation of
the lumbar part of the vertebral column, namely the mm. quadratus lum-
all dorsal vertebral muscles and the dorsal muscles that act on the atlanto-
borum, psoas major and psoas minor, belong to the sublumbar or inner
occipital and atlanto-axial joints (*head movers", —Nos. XIV to XVIl) is by
loin muscles and are dealt with on p. 60.
the dorsal rami of the spinal nerves.
 MusCles OF THe VeRteBRaL ColumN
 Dorsal muscles of the vertebral column 
Ventral muscles of the
 Dorsal muscles moving the head
vertebral column
I.
m. splenius
VI.
 mm. multifidi
XI.
mm. scaleni
XIV. m. rectus capitis dors. major
II
m. iliocostalis
VII.
m. sacrococcygeus (-caud.) dors. med.
'IIX
XV.
 m. rectus capitis dors. minor
II.
m. longissimus 
VIII.
m. sacrococcygeus (-caud.) dors. lat.
XIl. m. longus colli
XVI. r
m. obliquus ca pitis caud.
IV.
 m. semispinalis capitis
IX.
mm. interspinales
XVll m. obliquus capitis cran.
V.
 m. spinalis et semispinalis
X.
mm. intertransversari
cervicis et thoracis
I. The m. splenius (1), previously transected in its middle, extends from the
 processes of the second cervical and first thoracic vertebrae. Caudally it
spinous processes of the first three thoracic vertebrae to the nuchal crest of
passes over into the supraspinous ligament. The yellow color of the nuchal
the skull. Il. The m. iliocostalis arises from the wing ofthe ilium and inserts
ligament indicates a predomina nce of elastic fibers.
onto the lumbar transverse process (m. iliocostalis lumborum, -24), the
c) The LuMBAR CuTANEous NERvEs form a dorsal, a lateral and a ventral
angles of the ribs, and the transverse processes of the last two cervical ver-
series of cutaneous nerves by means of their serial passage through the stra-
tebrae (m. iliocostalis thoracis, —17). Ill. Also extending caudally to the
ta of skeletal muscles.
wing of the ilium, the m. longissimus is divided along its length into the mm.
longissimus lumborum (23),thoracis (16), cervicis ( 12) and capitis (2). Cor-
 I. The series of dorsal lumbar cutaneous nerves is formed from nL1 to 4 dl
responding to their region, these muscles insert onto lumbar transverse
(dorsal clunial nn.) and becomes subcutaneous approximately 8 cm from
processes, tubercles of the ribs, cervical transverse processes and the mas-
the dorsal midline. As a rule the nLS to 7 dl do not reach the cutaneous 
toid process of the cranium respectively. IV. The m. semispinalis capitis lies
field of innervation.
in the neck region dorsal to the m. longissimus and consists of a dorsal m.
 II. The series of lateral lumbar cutaneous nerves arises from branches of the
biventer cervicis (4), characterized by tendinous intersections directed trans-
 cranial iliohypogastric (nL1 vl), caudal iliohypogastric (nL2 vl), ilioinguinal.
versely, and a ventral m. complexus (3). Both muscles extend from the cer-
 (nL2 and 3 vl) and lateral cutaneous femoral (nL3 and 4 vl) nn. These nerves
vico-thoracic boundary to the cranium. V. The m. spinalis et semispinalis
 pass through the abdominal muscles on a line directed caudodorsally from
thoracis et cervicis (15) lies medial and adjacent to the m. longissimus and
the ventral end of the last rib to the tuber coxae. The cranial iliohypogastric
courses between the second cervical and eleventh thoracic vertebrae. VI.
n. (18, -with accompanying blood vesses), and the caudal liohypogastricn.
The multipennate mm. multifidi extend from the axis to the sacrum. In the
(19) pierce the m. obliquus externus abdominis. The ilioinguinal n. (20,
caudal half of the neck, the m. multifidus cervicis (10) lies deep to the m.
-sometimes absent) and the lateral cutaneous femoral n. (21, -with accom-
complexus and is traversed by dorsal branches of cervical nerves on its ven-
 panying blood vessels) become subcutaneous over the dorsal border of the
trolateral aspect. The m. multifidus thoracis is situated deeply, and the m.
m. obliquus externus abdominis.
multifidus lumborum (26) lies deep to the thoracolumbar fascia, adjacentto
lumbar vertebrae and their spinous processes. VIl Atthelevel ofthe seventh
umbar vertebra the m. sacrococcygeus (-caud.) dorsalis medialis (27) con-
tinues the oblique pennate m. multifidus by means of an approximating
fiber-flow directed caudally. VIll. The m. sacrococcygeus (-caud.) dorsalis
Muscles of the vertebral column
lateralis (25) begins acutely at the fourth lumbar vertebra and, as the cau-
(Cervical and thoracic part)
 domedial continuation ofthe m.longissimus, proceeds to the tail bya strong
(ventral view)
terminal tendon. IX. The mm. interspinales lie deeply between the spinous
processes. X. The mm. intertransversari (8) are superficial in the neck;
whereas, in thethoracolumbar region they are situated deeply alongthe ver-
9 Longus capitis m.
tebral column. The mm. intertransversari cervicis are located ventral to the
line of insertion of the m. longissimus cervicis. Xl. The mm. scaleni extend
from the fourth or fifth cervical vertebra to the eighth rib (m. scalenus dor-
Longus colli m. -
salis, 14) and the first rib (m. scalenus ventralis, m. scalenus medius, —13).
XIL. The m. longus capitis (9) lying adjacent and ventromedial to the mm.
13 Scalenus medius m.
scaleni is situated ventrolateral to the cervical vertebrae. Arising from the
sixth cervical vertebra it inserts on the muscular tubercle of the occipital
 bone. Xlll. The m. longus colli (see text-illustration), which appears plait-
ed, is situated ventromedially on the cervical and thoracic parts of the ver-
tebral column. Arising on the first cervical vertebra it extends to the sixth
 ss () r ssp se sa  a x o
from the spinous process of the axis. Between the spinous process ofthe axis
Intercostales intt. mm.
and the occipital bone it overlies the deeper m. rectus capitis dorsalis minor
(XV.). XV1. The m. obliquus capitis caudals (7) extends from the lateral sur-
face ofthe spinous process ofthe axis to the dorsal surface of the wing of the
atlas. XVll. The m. obliquus capitis cranialis (5) runs from the wing of the
atlas to the occipital bone.
 b) The NucHAL LIGAMENT (11), which is paired, lies dorsomedian above the
 spinous processes of the cervical vertebrae and connects the spinous
28
Cervical and thoracic muscles
1  Splenius m.
 2 Longissimus
(lateral view)
 capitis m. 
5 Obliqus capitis cran. m.
6 Rectus capitis dors. major m.
7 Obliquus capitis cran. m.
 8 Intertransversari mm.
 9 Longus capitis m.
10 Multifidus cervicis m.
 11  Nuchal ligament 
12 Longissimus cervicis m.
33
13 Scalenus medius m.
14 Scalenus dorsalis m.
15 Spinalis and semispinalis
thoracis and cervicis m.
16 Longissimus thoracis m.
17 lliocostalis thoracis m.
Legend :
 28 Omotransversarius m.
35 Ext. intercostal mm
29 First rib 
36 Int. intercostal mm.
30 Rectus thoracis m.
37 Levatores costarum m.
31 Rectus abdominis m.
38Ext.abdominal oblique m.
32 Serratus ventr. m.
39 Int. abdominal oblique m.
33 Serratus dors.cran.m.
 40 Lumbodorsal tendon (section)
34 Serratus dors. caud. m.
 41  Cranial clunial nn.
40
 Semispinalis capitis m.:
3 Complexus m.
26
 4   Biventer cervicis m.
18 Crania iliohypogastric n.
19 Caudal iliohypogastric n.
 20 llioinguinal n.
 21 Lateral cutaneous femoral n.
22 Thoracolumbar fascia (section)
 23 Longissimus lumborum m.
 24 lliocostalis lumborum m. 
 25 Sacrococcygeus (- caud.) dors.lat. m.
 26 Multifidus lumborum m. 
 27 Sacrococcygeus (- caud.) dors. med. m.
(see p. 31)
29
2. Respiratory Muscles
ae salosn oisuae st pue qu oiio uu eun sun are oi salosnu Aoendsal peaxa au buidsip jee pauado si Ao oiiu aul 
removed and the following structures are severed or transected on both sides of the body: The mm. obliquus externus abdominis and scalenus dorsalis
-uen ane uojisanb u squ aul Ajesjog aaisnjou! yal aul jo yruu ol puooes ayl pue apis jyby aul jo squ yuu ol sy ayl pue sujbiew snouipual jiaul 1e
 sected along the lateral border of the m. iliocostalis and ventrally along that of the m. rectus abdominis. In this way the line of insertion of the diaphragm
remains intact. This runs from the ninth costal cartilage, across the eleventh costochondral articulation and caudodorsally to the middle of the thirteenth
 rib, and represents the boundary between the thoracic and pleural cavities on the one side and the abdominal and peritoneal cavities on the other. With
the thoracic cavity opened, the five layers of the thoracic wall can be studied; namely, skin, external fascia of the trunk, a musculoskeletal layer, internal
 fascia of the trunk, and pleura. To expose the m. intercostalis internus, the m. intercostalis externus is removed from the tenth intercostal space.
The respiratory muscles lie upon the thorax and are known therefore as
 serratus ventralis are auxiliary inspiratory muscles and the m. iliocostalis
muscles of the thorax. From the functional viewpoint they are divided into
 and abdominal muscles are auxiliary expiratory muscles, although some
 an expiratory and an inspiratory group.
 authors consider the mm. scalenus to be obligatory. Keeping in mind their 
The main respiratory muscle, the diaphragm, and the other obligatory res-
 positional relationship to the thorax, the obligatory respiratory muscles are
 also divided into external, middle and internal respiratory muscles.
piratory muscles, are supported functionally by auxiliary respiratory mus-
 cles, which have been discussed in connection with other muscle groups,
 The innervation of the diaphragm is provided by the phrenic n. of its respec-
for example the muscles of the vertebral column. The mm. scalenus and
tive side and that ofthe remaining respiratory muscles by intercostal nn.
 RESPIRATORY MuSCLES 
Expiratory Muscles
 Inspiratory Muscles
I.
 m. serratus dorsalis caudalis
external respiratory muscles
IV.
 m. serratus dorsalis cranialis
V.
m. rectus thoracis
I1.
mm. intercostales interni incl. mm.
middle respiratory muscles 
VI.
 mm. intercostales externi incl.
subcostales and retractor costae
mm. levatores costarum
II.
m. transversus thoracis
internal respiratory muscles 
VII. Diaphragm
1
 a) The ExPIRAToRy MuscLEs run to the caudal borders of the ribs, their
consists of a sternal part (15) inserting onto the sternum, a costal part (13)
fibers being directed cranioventrally. They draw the ribs caudomedially
 inserting onto ribs nine to thirteen inclusive, and a lumbar part, the crura
and in so doing narrow the thorax.
 of which insert onto the third and fourth lumbar vertebrae. The free medi-
I. The m. serratus dorsalis caudalis (2) takes origin from the thoracolum-
al border of the weak left crus (8) and that of the stronger right crus (7)
bar fascia (see text-illustration) and its fibers course cranioventrally to
 bound the aortic hiatus (9). This affords passage tothe aorta, thoracic duct
 and right azygos v. The free dorsolateral borders ofthe crura form the lum-
insert on the caudal borders of the last three ribs.
 bocostal arches, which are crossed dorsally by the sympathetic trunk and
II. The mm. intercostales interni (5) lie dorsal to the costochondral articu-
the ramifying greater splanchnic n. The slit-like esophageal hiatus 10) pro-
lations and deep to the mm. intercostales externi. They also appear deepto
vides a transit for the esophagus and the accompanying dorsal and ventral
the m. rectus abdominis in the spaces between the costal cartilages. The
vagal trunks. It lies in the muscular part of the diaphragm bordering the
mm. subcostales and the m. retractor costae (34) belong to the system of
 central tendon. The central tendon (14) is V-shaped and exhibits the fora-
internal intercostal muscles. As a longer muscle portion, each of the mm.
 men venae cavae (11) to the right, in the region of the cupola. The foramen
subcostales passes over the medial surface of a rib to insert onto the next
 gives passage to the caudal vena cava.
or the next but one. The m. retractor costae extends from the transverse
 Innervation is by the phrenic n. (12), which arises by three roots from the
processes of the first three lumbar vertebrae to the caudal border of the last
fifth to seventh cervical nerves. The nerve passes over the pericardium and
rib.
 heart at the level of the coronary groove. The right phrenic n. accompanies
Ill. The m. transversus thoracis (13), situated cranial to the diaphragm, is
the caudal vena cava, both lying within the plica venae cavae that extends
the cranial continuation of the m. transversus abdominis. It arises on the
between the heart and the diaphragm. The left phrenic n. reaches the
internal surface of the sternum and inserts in a crenate manner onto the
 diaphragm in a short fold of the mediastinal pleura of the left pleural sac.
medial surface of each genu costae (bend of the costal cartilage).
1
 b) The INsPIRAToRY MuscLEs run to the cranial borders of the ribs, the fiber 
bundles being directed caudoventrally. They draw the ribs craniolaterally
and widen the thorax.
Thoracolumbar fascia
IV. The m. serratus dorsalis cranialis (3) takes origin from the supraspinous
ligament dorsal to the first eight thoracic spinous processes and terminates
(transverse section)
by seven to nine feshy insertions onto the cranial borders of ribs three to
ten.
V. At the level of the fourth costal cartilage, the m. rectus thoracis (6) con-
tinues the m. rectus abdominis cranially. It runs obliquely over the aponeu-
 rotic origin of the latter as far as the first rib.
VI. The mm. intercostales extermi (4) are situated mainly between the
osseous ribs, and extend ventrally as far as the costochondral articulations
 at the approximate level of the lateral border of the m. rectus abdominis.
Only sparse muscle bundles lie further ventrally. As the vertebral portions
of the mm. intercostals externi, the mm. levatores costarum (1) can also be
classified with the system of external intercostal muscles. Each of the mm.
levatores costarum runs in approximately the same direction from the
transverse process of one thoracic vertebra over the angle of the rib to the
cranial border of the subsequent caudal rib. The mm. levatores are largely
covered by the mm. iliocostalis and serratus dorsalis caudalis.
2
VIl. The diaphragm is a musculotendinous septum between the thoracic
 and abdominal cavities. Its tendinous cupola situated ventrally projects a
ai se suuy wue ai aaeo ooi aui o aem aais
Thoracolumbar fascia
Longissimus lumborum m.
main respiratory muscle, the contraction of which flattens the cupola lat-
b  Latissimus dorsi m.
h
 Intermuscular septum 
erally. The crown of the cupola is fixed at the caval foramen and during res-
C
 Ext. abdom. oblique m.
liocostalis lumborum m.
piration, its position remains largely constant.
d
 Serratus dors. caud.
 Quadratus lumborum and 
The diaphragm is divided into a peripheral muscular portion and a cen-
Int. abdom. oblique m.
 psoas minor mm.
trally placed tendinous portion, the central tendon. The muscular portion
 Transversus abdominis m.
30
Thoracic muscles
(left lateral view)
20
17
26
1 Levatores costarum mm.
- 2 Serratus dors. caud. m.
(section)
3Serratus dors.cran.m
- 4 Ext. intercostal mm.
23
5Int.inte
ostal mm.
6 Rectus thoracis m.
(cranial surface)
 Diaphragma
(caudal surface)
Lumbal part:
7  Right cus
Left crus
Aortic hiatus
1Foramenvenaecavae
ndphrenic
2Costal part
Transversus thoracis m
4Centraltendon
15 Sternal part
Legend :
16 Splenius m.
28 Rectus abdominis m.
17 Spinalis and semispinalis thoracis m.
29 Serosal cavity of medliastinum
18 Longissimus capitis m.
30 Mediastinum
19 Longissimus cervicis m.
31 Plica venae cavae 
20 Longissimus thoracis m.
32 Sternum
21
Intertransverse m.
33 Transversus abdominis m.
22
Longus capitis m.
34 Retractor costae m.
23
 Scalenus dorsalis m.
35 Psoas minor m.
 24 Scalenus medialis m.
36 Quadratus lumborum m.
25Serratusventralis m.
37 Lumbocostal arch
26  lliocostalis thoracis m.
38 Xiphoid process 
27 Ext. abdom. oblique m.
Legend :
Sympathetic trunk
f
Dorsal vagal trunk
Greater splanchnic n.
Ventral vagal trunk
Right azygos v.
C
Esophagus
Thoracic duct
i
 Caudal vena cava
Aorta
31
3. Body Wall, Prepuce and Mammary Glands (Mammae)
 The remaining skin of the abdomen is removed from both sides of the body, keeping intact the mammae or the penis as the case may be. In the bitch, the
mammae of the left side are preserved by incising the skin abound the base of each teat. Beginning lateraly, the mammae of the right side are removed
 after cuting through the right m. supramammarius and the suspensory ligament of the mammae. In the male one removes the hairy outer skin adjacent
to the penis and its cranial continuation, the external lamina of the prepuce, while keeping intact the m. preputialis cranialis and the suspensory ligament
 of the penis. The preputial laminae will be cut as shown in the accompanying figure.
a) The PREPuce (PREpuTIuM) covers the glans penis. The caudal part, which
With respect to the blood and lymph vascular and nerve supply, there is a
passes over into the haired skin in the region of the body of the penis, is
cranial field of supply for the two thoracic mammae and the cranial
attached to the ventral body wall. The cranial part reaches nearly to the
abdominal mamma as well as a caudal supply field for the caudal abdom-
umbilicus and ends freely, ring-like, passing over at the preputial orifice
inal and inguinal mammae, or, respectively, for the prepuce, the skin in the
into the internal lamina that lines the preputial cavity. The prepuce consists
region of the penis, and the scrotum. Anastomoses occur between the two
 of a haired external lamina (7), which is continuous atthe preputial ostium
fields of supply at the level of the umbilicus.
(1) with the hairless cutaneous mucous membrane of the internal lamina
(8). At the preputial fundus (10), at the level of the greatest circumference
IL. For the cranial thoracic mammae, the blood vessels of the cranial sup-
of the bulbus glandis, the internal lamina is reflected onto the glans penis
 ply field arise from the lateral thoracic artery and vein (13) and from the
as the penile lamina (9), which clothes the glans. In the fundus region, the
 internal thoracic artery and vein. Perforating branches of the latter vessels
internal lamina and the penile lamina exhibit numerous lymph nodules.
 emerge near the linea alba to supply the two thoracic mammae and end
With erection of the penis, the penis lengthens, emerging from the prepuce.
with the cranial superficial epigastric artery and vein (17). The cranial
The internal lamina is drawn cranially onto the lengthened penis, and the
superficial epigastric vessels perforate the thoracic wall at the level of the
fundus and preputial cavity are then no longer present.
costal arch and, after supplying the cranial abdominal mammae, anasto-
mose with the like-named caudal vessels at the level of the umbilicus. The
2
 b) The MAMMAE lie on both sides of the median intermammary groove and
blood vessels of the caudal supply field arise from the external pudendal
as a rule consist of five mammary gland complexes per side; namely, a cra-
artery and vein (26), which, after traversing the inguinal rings and canal,
nial and caudal thoracic mammary gland complex, a cranial and caudal
divide at the level of the inguinal teat into the ventral labial or, respective-
abdominal mammary gland complex, and an inguinal mammary gland
ly, ventral scrotal artery and vein (27) and the caudal superficial epigastric
complex. The mammae of the male are characterized by insignificant mam-
s d  o a sasa as e) a e Ae
 mary papillae or teats. A mammary gland complex consists of the body of
preputial branchesThe cranial andcaudal superficalepgastricveselsare
the mamma with about eight to twenty mammary glands usually about 12
the main vessels and also take over the supply of the teats. Additional con-
 glands are developed) and a teat (Papilla mammae).
tributing vessels are the intercostal arteries and veins, the cranial abdomi
Before birth, from the tip of each teat-anlage, at first several solid epider-
 nal vessels and the deep circumflex iliac vessels. Individual vessel-branches 
mal buds sprout deeply into the subcutaneous tissue, a process which takes
(predominantly veins) can cross the midline (Linea alba) and take part in
 place in the male sex without recognizable differences. At the time of birth,
the supply of the contralateral mammae.
the epithelial buds contain a lumen.
II. The lymph vessels of the cranial supply field run to the axillary (11) and
A sex-specific difference becomes distinct only with sexual maturity and
accessory axillary (12) lymph nodes. The lymph vessels of the caudal sup-
the first estrus. Especially under the effect of estrogen, the epithelial sprouts
 ply field drain both caudal mammae and the prepuce, the external skin cov-
divide and form a partial lumen. Moreover, estrogen brings about the
 ering the penis and the scrotum. They run to the superficial inguinal lymph
deposition of fat within the mammary gland. This is transitory and later
 nodes situated at the base of the inguinal mamma where the external
the fat tissue is replaced by the further development of the epithelial
 pudendal artery and vein divide into ventral labial or scrotal branches and
 sprouts into well developed glands. In the non-lactating bitch the glandu-
 the ca udal superficial epigastric artery and vein.
lar and adipose tissue are so slightly developed that the bodies ofthe glands
exhibit no swelling and can scarcely be separated from one another.
 IV. The sensory nerve supply is derived from the intercostal nerves cranial-
ly and the cranial and caudal iliohypogastric nerves caudally. These
With pregnancy, sprouting, ramification and lumen-formation increase.
 approach the mammae by means of lateral cutaneous branches (15 and 21
This is induced by an elevated blood-estrogen level. In the second half of
pregnancy alveoli develop at the ends of these mammary gland canals; this
 of the lateral series of thoracic and lumbar cutaneous nerves) and by ven-
tral cutaneous branches (14 and 22) near the linea alba. Caudal to the 10th
is brought about especially by the effect of progesterone.
 intercostal nerve, no ventral cutaneous branch is dispatched by the thoracic
 During the lactation period, about thirty days in length, the alveoli guar-
 or cranial lumbar spinal nerves, the ventral skin being supplied by the ven-
ante the secretion of milk. Thus, from an individual epidermal sprout a
tral extension of the lateral cutaneous branch and, the inguinal mamma
large gland with alveoli, lactiferous ducts, lactiferous sinus and papillary
 caudally, by the genitofemoral nerve (24), which traverses the inguinal
duct develops. From the alveoli the milk reaches the lactiferous sinus (4)
 canal in the company of the external pudendal artery and vein.
first by smaller and then by larger lactiferous ducts (3). The sinus is with-
out subdivision by a transverse fold as is typical for larger animals. Its pre-
c) Before commencing the dissection, details should be provided on the
dominant part is in the papilla (Pars papilaris) and extends only with its
RELATIONSHIP oF THE FAsCIAE (see also pp. 36 and 146).
initial part, which receives the lactiferous ducts, into the body of the gland
I. The superficial and deep fasciae of the trunk are classified as the exter-
( Pars glandularis). The lactiferous sinus reaches the surface of the body as
 nal fasciae of the trunk. The superficial trunk fascia is closely united to the
a more narrow papilary duct (S). The duct is located in the distal third of
 skin and ensheathes the cutaneous muscles of the abdomen by means of
the teat and, usually independent of neighboring glands, opens by a papil-
two laminae. The deep trunk fascia (19) is intimately united to the surface
lary ostium (6) on the end of the teat (Papilla mammae, —2). Erectile blood
 of the external abdominal muscle. Dorsally, in the lumbar region, it is
vessels of the teat with typical thick-walled (muscular) veins are less devel-
known as the thoracolumbar fascia (see p. 30), which courses over the
oped in the bitch. Smooth muscle cell bundles surround the individual pap-
muscles of the vertebral column between spinous and transverse processes.
illary ducts circularly as sphincters.
 In the midline ventrally, the deep fascia fuses with the linea alba, and there
After the lactation period a large part of the duct system, and especially the
the suspensory ligament of the mammae separates off from it. In the
 glandular alveoli, undergoes involution.
inguinal region the external fascia of the trunk (comprising the superficial
The fascial and muscular suspensory apparatus as wellas the vascular and
and deep fasciae of the trunk) continues as the external spermatic fascia.
 This envelops the vaginal tunic of the peritoneum externally, and at the 
nerve supply of the mammae and prepuce are alike in many ways and, for
that reason, are studied together.
inguinal groove passes onto the thigh as the fascia lata (28).
1. The suspensory ligament of the mammae or, respectively, of the penis
 Il. By and large, the internal fascia of the trunk is adherent to the serosa
(20) as the continuation of the deep fascia of the trunk splits off at the lev-
 and is known by different terms depending on its location. In the thoracic
el of the linea alba and passes around the mammary complex or into the
 cavity it is known as the endothoracic fascia, in the abdominal cavity as
 prepuce and around the penis as the fascia penis. The cranial supramam-
transversalis fascia, on the ventral surface of the sublumbar muscles as the
mary muscle (female) or cranial preputial muscle (18, —male) arises from
iliac fascia, and within the pelvic cavity as the pelvic fascia. The internal
the linea alba at the level of the xiphoid cartilage and extends onto the basis
fascia of the trunk, or more particularly the transversalis fascia, continues
of the abdominal mammae or, respectively, into the prepuce. The caudal
 as the internal spermatic fascia that invests the vaginal tunic of the peri-
muscles of the same name are inapparent.
toneum.
32
Mammary region and Preputial region
Mammary gland
 Prepuce
1  Preputial ostium
2 Papilla mammae 
3
 Lactiferous duct 
Lactiferous sinus
 Papillary duct 
 Papillary ostium 
Preputium:
7
 External lamina
Internal lamina
9 Penile lamina
10  Preputial fundus
Legend :
29 Deep pectoral m.
34 Linea alba
 39 Intern. spermatic fascia and
30
Cutaneous trunci m
35 Umbilicus
vaginal process of peritoneum
31E
Ext. abdominal oblique m.
36 Fascia of penis
40Vulva
Ext. (supf.) inguinal ring 
37 Lymphatic vessels
41 Scrotum
38 Ext. spermatic fascia
preputialis
(ventral surface)
11 Axillary ln.
12 Acc. axillary lIn.
13 Lat. thoracic
a.and v.
stalnerve:
14 Ventr. cutaneous brr.-
 15 Lat. cutaneous brr.
Int. thoracic a. and v:
16 Perforating brr.
 17 Cran. supf. epigastric 
a. and v.
18 Cranial supra
nary m.
 or cranial preputial m.-
19 Deep fascia of trunk
 20  Suspensory lig. of
mamma or of prepuce
Cran. and caud.
lastric nerve:
21
Lat. cutaneous brr.
- 22 Ventr. cutaneous brr.-
- 23 Caud. supf epigastric
a. and v. -
 24 Genitofemoral nerve
 25 Supf. inguinal In.-
26 Ext. pudendal
a. and v. -
27
Ventr. labial or
scrotal brr.
28 Fascia lata
40
(see pp. 35, 37, 67, 69)
41
33
4. Abdominal Muscles, Rectus Sheath, Prepubic Tendon
 To expose the abdominal muscles and the sheath of the m. rectus abdominis, the m. obliquus externus abdominis and the overlying deep fascia of the
trunk on the left side are transected 2 cm ventral and parallel to the origin of the external oblique muscle from the ribs and thoracolumbar fascia (see text-
snbao 'w aun uau 'siuopge snioan 'w un jo japiog lelael aul se jel se Aieuan paoaan s juuwal alosn jean au oe d uo uoansni!
 internus abdominis is transected 2 cm dorsal and parallel to the border between the muscle and its aponeurosis, and also reflected.
 a) Taking into consideration their sites of origin, the ABDoMINAL MuscLES
 Rectus sheaths
are subdivided into parts; namely, thecostal parttaking origin fromthe ribs,
(middle abdominal region)
the sternal part from the sternum, the lumbar part from the thoracolumbar
fascia (see text-illustration p. 30), and the inguinal part from the inguinal
Deep fascia of trunk 
ligament (7). With the exception of the m. rectus abdominis, each inserts at
Ext. lamina
the linea alba in the ventral midline by means of an aponeurosis or abdom-
-8
inal tendon. The m. obliquus internus abdominis also inserts along the
 costal arch by means of a costal tendon and the m. obliquus externus abdo-
12
snd sisso uaad au ie s aie o uuat siad eaq sai su
10—
-5 Int. lamina
Lateral to their midventral insertions the aponeuroses of the abdominal
muscles form the sheath of the m. rectus abdominis (rectus sheath, 
—see
also p. 36), the layers passing external to the rectus abdominis forming the
external lamina of the sheath, the layers passing internal to the rectus form-
(transverse section)
~ Transversalis fascia
ing the internal lamina. Ventral and paramedian, the aponeuroses of the
external lamina of the sheath form a meshlike zone that is anchored to the
tendinous intersections (2) of the m. rectus abdominis. Midventrally, the
Ill. The m. transversus abdominis (5) contributes to the sheath in a manner
2
linea alba (10) arises as a consecutive series of crossing, interweaving, ten-
 similar to the m. obliquus internus abdominis. However, its contribution to
 Sououe, ueipauouusa e se wnuaisosau aul e suaaq il 'suaqy uop
both laminae occurs approximately one to two vertebral lengths more cau-
raphe' for the aponeuroses of the abdominal muscles. At its widest, it encir-
 dally. On the lateral surface of the muscle, ventromedial branches of tho-
3
 cles the umbilical ring (11) by means of two umbilical crura and terminates
racic and lumbar nn. (cranial and caudal iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal
by tapering abruptly at the cranial end of the pelvic symphysis.
 nn.) run ventrally, parallel to the muscle fibers.
I. The m. obliquus extermus abdominis (8) arises as costal and lumbar parts 
that pass over into an abdominal and a pelvic tendon. Known respectively
 Rectus sheaths
as the abdominal tendon or medial crus (8') and the pelvic tendon or lat-
(caudal abdominal region)
eral crus (8"), they bound the external (superficial) inguinal ring (see p.
 37). The aponeurosis of the muscle contributes entirely to the external lam-
 Deep fascia of trunk
ina of the rectus sheath and inserts caudally with the abdominal and pelvic
tendon at the pelvis, joining the prepubic tendon. Deep fibers of the
 abdominal tendon of the contralateral external abdominal oblique muscle
Ext.lamina
 also end on the prepubic tendon as fbrae reflexae (13).
12
Rectus sheath
10-
Int. lamina
(cranial abd ominal region)
Deep fascia of trunk
(transverse section)
Transversalis fascia
Ext.lamina
-8]
12
10-
-5
 Int. lamina
 IV. The m. rectus abdominis (1) arises from the first rib and the first four
sternebrae and could therefore be said to have a costal and a sternal part.
It ends on the pecten ossis pubis. Caudal to the sternal ribs it is enclosed in
-- Transversalis fascia
 its sheath formed from the aponeuroses of the remaining three abdominal
(transverse section)
 muscles and the internal and external fasciae of the trunk. The external
trunk fascia contributes entirely to the external lamina and internal trunk
II. The m. obliquus internus abdominis (12) has lumbar and inguinal parts.
fascia to the internal lamina of the rectus sheath except caudally where it
 is double-layered.
Its aponeurosis participates in the sheath of the m. rectus abdominis in
three ways: 1) A cranial 2 cm-wide section of aponeurosis subscribes to the
internal lamina only. 2) A subsequent 2-4 cm-wide section participates in
nial (3) and caudal (4) iliohypogastric nn., and by the ilioinguinal n. (6). By
forming both external and internal laminae in the umbilical region.
means of their vm branches, all such nerves course across the lateral sur-
3) Caudally the aponeurosis only passes to the external surface of the m.
 face of the m. transversus abdominis. The vl branches of the nerves run on
rectus abdominis.
 the external abdominal oblique muscle to the mammae (see p. 33).
(saew u ajeisoid aul pue) jappeg Aeuun ayi jano lem jeuwopqe aul apis jyou ayf uo anby buuedwoooe aut u! 'uopual siqndaid au ajesuowap ol
was fenestrated. The external and internal oblique abdominal muscles, including the transversalis fascia and parietal peritoneum, are cut at the lateral bor-
 der of the rectus abdominis muscle and the latter is lifted caudally after being sectioned transversely at the level of the tuber coxae. In the caudal region 
 of the left side, the abdominal tendon of the external abdominal oblique muscle is removed. The prepubic tendon is split parallel to the muscle fbers by
 a section between the pelvic tendon of the external abdominal oblique muscle and the medial and lateral tendons of origin of the pectineus (and long
 adductor) muscle. This section also cuts through the iliopubic cartilage.
b) The PREPuBic TENDoN (9) is represented by a stout tendinous mass
serves as a medial, superficial origin for the pectineus muscle. An addi
extending ventrally from the brim of the pelvis. It consists mainly of the
tional, strong, fleshy origin of the pectineus muscle is present as a medial,
tendons of insertion of the right and left rectus abdominis muscles, and of
the lateral and medial tendons of origin of the (ipsilateral) pectineus mus-
 origin comes from the psoas minor tubercle. The medial tendon of origin
cle (and long adductor, -15) (see under IV.) as well as the cranially bor-
 of the ipsilateral pectineus (long adductor) muscle does not cross the medi-
 dering pelvic tendon of the external abdominal oblique muscle (lateral
al tendon of origin of the contralateral muscle ofthe same name. Thus, the
dog lacks a bilateral attachment of the pectineus muscle, which for the
(14). The externally palpable iliopubic cartilage reinforces the caudal angle
large domestic animals is of paramount significance in safeguarding the
 of the external (superficial) inguinal ring that connects the abdominal and
 connection of both pelvic halves at the pelvic symphysis.
 pelvic tendons of the external abdominal oblique muscle. The cartilage also
34
Abdominal muscles and Inguinal region
(caudoventral view)
10 Linea alba
- 11  Umbilical ring 
12 Int. abdominal ablique m.:
1  Rectus abdominis m.
 Int. lamina
2 Tendinous intersection
 Int. and ext. laminae
Ext. lamina
3 Crania iliohypogastric n. and
 Cranial abdominal a. and v. -
4 Caudal liohypogastric n.
5 Transversus abdominis m.
Int. lamina 
Int. and ext. lamina
 Ext. lamina
6 llioinguinal nerve
7 Inguinal ligament:
8 Ext. abdom. oblique m.:
8'Medial crus
8" Lateral crus
Legend :
Int. abdom. oblique m.:
 20 Adductor brevis m.
 a   Lat. cutaneous femoral n. and
f  Genitofemoral n. and 
Costal tendon
21
 Adductor magnus m.
deep circumflex iliac a. and v.
Sartorius m.:
22
Gracilis m.
b
Lat. circumflex femoral a. and v.
17
 Cranial part
23 Ext. inguinal ring (supf.)
Saphenous n.
6
Caudal part
h
Femoral a., v. and n.
17
24 Int.inguinal ring (deep)
Prox. caud. femoral a. and v.
Urinary bladder
18 Ext. iliac fascia
25 Transversalis fascia of trunk and
e
Vaginal process of peritoneum and
Prostate
19 lliopsoas m.
Peritoneum
ext.cremaster m.
(caudoventral view)
Ext. abdom. oblique m.
13  Fibrae reflexae
14 lliopubic cartilage
15 Pectineus muscle (and long adductor)
9 Prepubic tendon 
(see p. 37)
35
5. Inguinal Region, Inguinal Space (Inguinal Canal), Neuromuscular and Vascular Lacunae
 In the inguinal region three conduits are exposed, namely the inguinal space (canal), the lacuna neuromusculorum and the lacuna vasorum. Initially, the
right inguinal mamma is reflected medially, and following this, one is able to study the participation of the five layers of the abdominal wall in the forma-
 tion of the inguinal space. This begins at the internal or deep inguinal ring and ends at the external or superficial inguinal ring. Observe the continuation of
the external fascia of the trunk as the tubelike external spermatic fascia. Externally, this envelops the vaginal process and its covering of internal spermatic
fascia. Then on the right side, the external trunk fascia, the three expansive abdominal muscles, the transversalis fascia and the peritoneum are transect-
ed and refected. This incision is made along the long axis of the external inguinal ing as far as the costal arch. In so doing, each individual abdominal lay-
er is studied.
1
a) The INGUINAL SPACE (INGUINAL CANAL} extends from the internal to the
b) The NEuRoMUscULAR LAcuNA (see also text-illustration) is passage for
external inguinal ring. The caudal angles of both rings lie one above the
the m. iliopsoas and the femoral n. contained within it. At the level of the
other, whereas the cranial angle of the internal ring lies approximately
lacuna and the transition from lateral to dorsal body wall, the transversalis
 2 cm craniolateral to that of the external ring. This results in a corre-
sponding lengthening of the inguinal space.
I. The skin does not participate in the formation of the inguinal space and
26-
merges with the integument of the scrotum (male) or of the labia of the vul-
va (female).
II. The external fascia of the trunk (5) turns at the external inguinal ring
to envelop the vaginal process of the peritoneum (24) with its tubular
 content and is then known as the external spermatic fascia (21). The
14
vaginal process is designated the vaginal tunic in the male (24), and con-
tains the spermatic cord; whereas, in the bitch, it houses the round liga-
18
ment ofthe uterus and its enveloping body of fat. In contrast to most oth-
 er female mammals, the bitch possesses a vaginal process of peritoneum
and an accompanying external spermatic fascia in most of the cases. The
extemal pudendal a. and v. (20), the genitofemoral n. and the m. cre-
master (externus) pass through the space on the outside of the vaginal
process and then enter the tubular external spermatic fascia. Within a
few millimeters the two blood vessels and nerve pierce the fascia and the
vessels branch into the caudal superficial epigastric a. and v. (see p. 14A
- 9) and the ventral scrotal or ventral labial rami (see p. 33) in the vicin-
ity of the superficial inguinal lymph node.
I. By a cleavage in its aponeurosis, the m. obliquus externus adominis
forms the lateral crus (16) and medial crus (15) of the external (superficial)
fascia (7) extends over the m. iliopsoas (4) and is designated here as the ili-
ac fascia. The inguinal ligament is woven into this fascial covering and sub-
inguinal ring (17).
divides the iliac fascia into an internaliliac fascia (1) on the abdominal cav-
The free caudal border of the m. obliquus internus abdominis (14) con-
ity side and an external iliac fascia (2, —iliac lamina) on the femoral side.
tributes to the formation of the internal (deep) inguinal ring (18) together
The two layers of fascia end on the ilium. Occasionally absent, the very weak
with the lateral border of the m. rectus abdominis (19) and the internal sur-
inguinal ligament (3) arises at the tuber coxae. In the region of the lacuna
face of the inguinal ligament.
neuromusculorum it is interwoven with the iliac fascia to provide a con-
The m. cremaster (extermus, —22) is distinct in the male; whereas it seems
nective tissue reinforcement for the origin of the m. obliquus internus
weaker in the bitch. In rodents the m. cremaster (externus, —22) is divid-
abdominis. At the level of the inguinal space more ventrally, the ligament
ed into a primary part derived from the m. transversus abdominis and a
unites with the lateral crus of the m. obliquus externus abdominis; both
secondary part from the m. obliquus internus abdominis. To a large degree
radiate into the prepubic tendon and end on the pecten ossis pubis. With
in domestic mammals, the united m. cremaster (externus) has lost its direct
the m. iliopsoas, the femoral n. (10) and its branch, the saphenous n. (11),
connection with the two abdominal muscles. The resulting independent
pass through the lacuna neuromusculorum. This is bounded by the
muscle takes origin from the inguinal ligament and passes through the
 inguinal ligament ventrally and the ilium dorsally. Subsequently, the saphe-
inguinal space outside the vaginal process.
 nous n. attains the femoral trigone (12), whose boundaries are formed by
the inguinal ligament, the m. pectineus, and the caudal part of the m. sar-
The m. transversus abdominis (6) does not contribute to the formation of
torius. The femoral trigone forms the borders of the femoral space (13.
the inguinal space since its free caudal border is at the level of the tuber
femoral canal), which is bounded deeply by the m. iliopsoas and covered
coxae.
 superficially by the medial femoral fascia. Besides the saphenous n. the
 IV. The internal fascia of the trumk (7, —trans versalis fascia) is adherent to
 space houses the femoral a. and v.
the peritoneum. It protrudes through the inguinal space as the tubular
 c) The VascuLAR LAcuNA (see also text-illustration) is the passage for the
internal spermatic fascia (23) and envelops the vaginal tunic.
 femoral vessels. It is bounded by the lacuna neuromusculorum dorsolater-
V. The peritoneum (8) evaginates as a tubular vaginal process, penetrates
 ally, by the body of the ilium dorsomedially, and by the inguinal ligament
the inguinal space and is adherent to the enveloping internal spermatic fas-
 ventrally. The medial section of the lacuna vasorum that is not occupied by
cia. The vaginal ring (9) in the caudolateral part of the abdominal cavity is
 blood vessels is known as the femoral ring. Due to its covering of peri-
the site of evagination and remains as the entrance into the vaginal process;
toneum and transversalis fascia, the femoral ring is a self-contained access
it does not belong to the inguinal space.
 to the femoral space (femoral canal) and is the site of femoral hernia.
 PARTICIPATION OF LAYERS OF THE ABDOMINAL WALL IN FORMING THE INGUINAL SPACE (INGUINAL CaNAL) AND RECTUS SHEaTH
Abdomen
Ring
Process
Rectus Sheath
I.
Skin
 Skin of scrotum
II.  External trunk fascia
 Ext. spermatic fascia
Ext. lamina
Ill. M. obl. ext. abdom.
 Ext. inguinal ring
Ext. lamina
Ing. space (canal)
Il. M. obl. int. abdom.
 Int. inguinal ring
Ext. lam.; ext. and int. lam.; int.
M. cremaster (ext.)
III  M. transv. abdom.
Ext. lam., ext. and int. lam.; int.
IV. Internal trunk fascia
Int. spermatic fascia
Lam. int.
V. Peritoneum
Vaginal ring
Vaginal process (female)
Vaginal tunic (male)
36
Inguinal region (o)
liac fa scia:
1 Int. iliac fascia
2 Ext. iliac fascia (lliac lamina)
 3 Inguinal ligament
27
17
10
18
8
24
22
20
( caudoventral view)
5 Ext. (deep) fascia
of trunk
 14 Int. abdom. oblique m.
 Ext. abdom. oblique m.
6 Transversus abdom. m
15  Medial crus
7 Int. transversalis 
16  Lateral crus
fascia of trunk-
-17 Ext. inguinal ring (supf.)
8 Peritoneum
9 Vaginal ring 
18 Int. inguinal ring (deep)
19 Rectus abdominis m.
20 Ext. pudendal a. and v.
 and genitofemoral n.
10 Femoral n.
- 21 Ext. spermatic fascia
 22 Cremaster m. (ext.)
12 Femoral trigone
 23 Spermatic fascia
 24 Vaginal process of
peritoneum
13 Femoral spac
(femoral canal)
(see p. 35)
Legend :
25 Skin of scrotum
28
Lacuna musculorum
lliopsoas m.:
 33 Testicular a. and v. and
26 Linea alba
29
 Lacuna vasorum
32
Illiacus m.
Deferent duct 
27 Ext.iliac a. and .
30 Femoral ring
Psoas minor m.
 34 Supf. inguinal In.
37
Chapter 5: Thoracic Cavity
1. Lungs, Tracheal Bifurcation and Bronchi
1 In the lung field, the triangular field that projects the lung onto the lateral
IL. The left lung (Pulmo sinister) has a cranial lobe (7) that is subdivided
thoracic wall of its respective side, this main res piratory organ is external-
into a cranial part (8) and caudal part (9). The cranial part overlaps later-
ly accessible for auscultation and percussion. In a dog in the normal stand-
 ally the cranial portion of the caudal part or the latter overlaps laterally the
ing attitude, the cranial border of the triangle is at the level of the Sth rib.
 caudal portion of the cranial part. The intralobar fissure that separates cra-
Pa aq u  i a mg u ql un au 
nial and caudal pars opens at the ventral border of the lung into the shal-
about the width of two ribs. The dorsal border of the triangle is the later-
low left cardiac notch (10). The caudal lobe (11) is undivided and with its
al border of the iliocostalis muscle, and the caudoventral (basal) border
 diaphragmatic surface lies upon the diaphragm.
ascends from the costochondral junction of the sixth rib to the middle of
the eighth rib to the vertebral end of the 11eh rib.
Bronchial tree and pulmonary vessels
The external form of the lungs is inconstant as the lungs necessarily follow
(dorsal view)
the varying dimensions of the thoracic cavity in the movements of respira-
u u  q su 
(left)
(right)
cone') with a cranially situated apex of the lung (Apex pulmonis) that pro-
jects slightly beyond the thoracic inlet, and a large base (Basis pulmonis)
that abuts the diaphragm.
The lung surface is covered by pulmonary (visceral) pleura (see p. 42).
After embalming the cadaver, as a reflection of the plasticity of the lung
parenchyma, the costal surface in situ shows distinct costal impressions.
The medial surface (see text-illustration) extends dorsally with its vertebral
part up to the vertebral column; ventrally, in its mediastinal part, the fol-
lowing can be identified: the aortic impression (12), esophageal impression
(13) as wellas the sulcus for the caudal vena cava (14), and continuing ven-
trally from the caval sulcus, the cardiac impression. The diaphragmatic sur-
face (16) lies smoothly upon the diaphragm.
2
 a) The LuNGs (see text-illustration) of the dog are distinctly asymmetrical
beca use the right lung with its four lobes is considerably larger than the left
lung with only two lobes.
Externally the pulmonary lobes in the dog are subdivided or set off by
interlobar fissures that are very deep and in part reach to the subdivision
of the bronchi.
1. The right lung (Pulmo dexter) is divided by cranial (2) and caudal (3)
interlobar fissures into cranial (5), middle (4), and caudal (1) lobes, and the
small accessory lobe (see text-illustration, —17) that extends from the
cannot be seen in lateral view. It partly passes over the caudal vena cava,
forming the sulcus venae cavae caudalis. On the ventral border of the lung,
the cranial interlobar fissure passes over into the right cardiac notch (6).
The caudal interlobar fissure separates the middle lobe from the caudal
lobe, which, medially, is fused with the accessory lobe.
Right and left lung (medial aspect)
b) The BiFURcATIoN oF THE TRACHEA (see text-illustration, above —A) and
 its division into the principal bronchi (B) determines the subdivision into
right and left lung. The subdivision of the principal bronchi into lobar
(cranial)
(caudal)
bronchi, which cannot be discerned externally, is more significant in defin-
ing the lobes of the lung than the visible fissures, which are partly between
12
the lobes, partly within a lobe.
The tracheal bifurcation is ventral to the esophagus, and is about halfway
 between the thoracic inlet and the diaphragm. For the ventilation of each
13
lobe of the lung the principal bronchi divide into two lobar bronchi for the
left lung (cranial lobar bronchus —C and caudal lobar bronchus —D), and
 'g sq q e uq e  ou    
dle —F, caudal —G and accessory —H).
16
The lobar bronchi give off segmental bronchi (I), which are designated
according to their position as dorsal, ventral, lateral, and medial segmen-
tal bronchi. The segments can be defined, for example, by anatomical cor-
 rosion casts. In the dog, the branches of the pulmonary artery accompany
the segmental bronchus (bronchoarterial type of supply) in the caudal lobe.
They run in the center of the segments and the branches of the pulmonary
 veins mark the periphery of the segments. In the cranial and middle lobes 
the segmental bronchi are not only accompanied by arterial branches but
(caudal)
(crania)
also by venous ones (bronchovascular type of supply). Because the pul-
monary segment is ventilated by only one segmental bronchus, in case of
bronchial oclusion, on a radiograph the segment is visible as a wedge-like
shadow with a central wedge-shaped tip and a peripheral base. There,
s ajo sug ras a tde s rq a aa
mental bronchi continue as bronchioles, which are smaller than 1 mm in
diameter. The terminal parts of the air conducting system, the terminal
bronchioles, continue as the gas-exchange system, to which belong the res-
 piratory bronchioles (diameter smaller than 0.5 mm), the alveolar ducts
 and alveolar sacs, and finally the alveolus.
38
Thoracic cavity and lungs
(right lung)
1  Caudal lobe
2 Cranial interlobar fissure
 3 Caudal interlobar fissure
4 Middle lobe
5Cranial lobe
 6 Right cardiac notch
(left lung)
 7 Cranial lobe
1  Caudal lobe
9Caudal part
10 Left cardiac notch
(see p. 29)
39
2.
 Blood Vessels, Nerves and Lymphatic System of the Lungs; Aortic Arch, Lymph Nodes of the
Thoracic Cavity, Thymus
1  a) The BLoop SupPLY OF THE LuNGs is furnished by the pulmonary circula-
reaches the Canalis transversarius of the cervical vertebral column. The
tion (pulmonary arteries and veins) and the broncho-esophageal artery and
internal thoracic artery (5, -see also p. 49) passes caudoventrally, then
vein.
 deep to the transverse thoracic muscle. Its branches perforate the thoracic
In contrast to the systemic circulation with its higher blood pressures, the
wall and send mammary branches to the thoracic mammary gland
pulmonary circulation is called the low pressure system. This is due to the
 complexuses. At the level of the xiphosternum, it gives off an artery to the
diaphragm before dividing into the cranial epigastric and cranial superf-
lower blood pressures in its vessels, which facilitate the functional supply
 cial epigastric arteries. The latter vessels run caudally on the internal sur-
of the lungs. From the right ventricle of the heart, the venous blood reach-
face of therectus abdominis muscle or,respectively,n the superfiial
es the hilus of the right and left lungs by way of the arterial pulmonary
 aspect ofthe external lamina of the rectus sheath and anastomose with the
trumk (10) and its principal branches, the right and left pulmonary arteries.
same-named caudal vessels. The superfcial cervical artery dispatches the
atrium of the heart by 5 - 8 pulmonary veins (14).
 deltoid branch to the lateral pectoral sulcus and ramifies in the lateral cer-
vical region in relation to the superficial cervical lymph nodes. The bron-
 o      ros-r d a
 cho-esophageal arteries proceed directly from the descending aorta ( 12) or
originating intercostal artery at the level of the Sth - 7zh ribs. They enter the
 from intercostal arteries V - VIl. The intercostal arteries (11) pass with the 
hilus of the right or, respectively, left lung and provide the nutritive supply
same-named veins and nerves directly caudal to the ribs and connect the
 of the bronchial tree and its immediate environs. In the border region
 aorta with the internal thoracic artery.
between the air-conducting and gas exchange systems in some species,
anastomoses of broncho-esophageal and pulmonary capillaries have been
e) The LYMPH NoDEs OF THE THoRACIc CAvITY COmprise the Cranial media-
 observed. The mixing of functional and nutritive blood in the dog is dis-
stinal lymph nodes (6, A; middle and caudal mediastinal lymph nodes are
puted. The broncho-esophageal vein usualy opens into the right vena azy-
absent in the dog; see also the text-illustration). The cranial mediastinal
gos.
 nodes are located in the precardial mediastinum, especially attached to the
 great vessels or the viscera. The cranial stermal lymph nodes (4; caudal ster-
2
 b) The NERvE SuPPLY oF THE LuNGs is provided by the plexus of autonomic
 nal lymph nodes are absent in the dog) are at the cranial border of the
fibers from the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. There
 tra nsverse thoracic muscle. Intercostal lymph nodes are inconstant. When
 are also visceral sensory fibers with the autonomic nerves. These enter the
present, they are proximal atthe Seh or 6h intercostal space. Their tributary
root of the lung without, however, supplying the pulmonary parenchyma
areas are in the direct neighborhood of the particular lymph node. Efferent
with pain conducting fibers.
lymphatic vessels of the cranial mediastinal lymph nodes pass to the venous
 c) The LuMPHATIc SYsTEM OF THE LuNGs (see text-illustration) cOmprises
 angle. Efferents from the cranial sternal and intercostal lymph nodes pass 
the pulmonary lymph nodes (E), which belong to the bronchial lymph cen-
to the cranial mediastinal lymph nodes or directly to the venous angle.
ter and lie within the pulmonary parenchyma, and the tracheobronchial
f) The THyMus (8) produces T-lymphocytes. Corresponding to its origin
lymph nodes: right (D), middle (C), and left (13, B). The latter are found at
 from the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches, the thymus is regarded as a
the cranial border of the right principal bronchus, dorsal at the tracheal
 lymph-epithelial organ which, on the cut surface, shows an arrangment
bifurcation, and caudodorsal at the left principal bronchus. Their tribu-
taries pass from the lung and the heart. Their efferent lymphatic vessels go
 medulla are covered by cortex and surrounded by a connective tissue cap-
 directly, or indirectly after traversing the cranial mediastinal lymph nodes,
sule, thus presenting a pseudo-lobation.
to the large lymphatic trunks that end in the venous angle between the
internal and external jugular veins.
 The thymus is fully developed in the perinatal phase. Its involution com-
 mences at the age of 4 - 6 months. In this process the parenchyma is more
3
 d) The aortic arch first gives ofthe brachiocephalic trunk (7), which gives
 and more replaced by fat tissue. However, there remain always tiny active
 off the left common carotid artery (1) and right common carotid artery,
 thymic islands, even in old age.
and the right subclavian artery. The left subclavian artery (9) leaves the
convexity of the aortic arch a fingerbreadth distal. Right and left subcla-
 The thymus of the newborn extends from the heart to a few millimeters
vian arteries each give offour arteries: The vertebral artery (3) crosses the
 cranial to the thoracic inlet. The paired organ is fused medially and is locat-
costocervical trunk (2) medially and, with the same-named nerve and vein, 
 ed in the mediastinal space.
Lungs and bronchial Ic. (dorsal view)
Lungs (ventral view)
(left)
(right)
(right)
(left)
Legend :
A  Cran. mediastinal In.
B
 Left tracheobronchial In.
 Middle tracheobronchial In
D
 Right tracheobronchial In.
E
 Pulmonary Inn.
Trachea 
 Bifurcation of trachea
Left lung:
C
 Cran. lobe
d
 Cran. part
 Caud. part
+
 Caud. lobe
Right lung:
Cran. lobe
Middle lobe
Caud. lobe
Acc. lobe
40
Thoracic cavity (left side)
1  Left common carotid artery
 2 Costocervical trunk 
 3 Vertebral a. and n.
4 Cran. sternal In.
 5 Internal thoracic a.
 6 Cran. mediastinal In.
 7 Brachiocephalic trunk 
8 Thymus -
 9 Left subclavian a.
10 Pulmonary trunk
11 Intercostal aa
 12 Descending aorta 
 13 Left tracheobronchial
lymphnodes
14 Pulmonary veins
- 15 Bronchoesophagal a. + v.
Legend:
Jugular trunk (tracheal trunk)
Recurrent laryngeal n.
Int. jugular v.
A lenon i
Subclavian v.
f
Dorsal scapular a.
Deep cervical a.
9
Thoracic vertebral a.
Cervicothoracic ggl.
Ansa subclavia
Middle cervical gl.
Costocervical v
m
 Cardiac nn. of sympathetic trunk 
Thoracic duct
Sympathetic trunk
Ganglion of sympathetic trunk
Gray and white ramus
 communicans 
Vagus n.
 Cardiac and bronchial brr.
S
Right ventricle
Conus arteriosus
Auricle of left atrium
 Paraconal interventricular groove 
W
Left ventricle
(see pp. 31, 49)
 Greater splanchnic n.
41
3. Thoracic Cavity, Pleura and Veins of the Thoracic Cavity
a) The THORACIC CAvITY (CAvUM THORACIS; see also text-illustration) is
costomediastinal recess (P). In contrast, the right pleural cavity has a left
cranial to the diaphragm. It is enclosed by the thorax comprising the tho-
 mediastinodiaphragmatic recess (O). The caudal vena cava traverses the
racic vertebrae, ribs and sternum. Caudal to the diaphragm, the thorax
right pleural cavity in a proper plica venae cavae, a folded part of the
encloses the intrathoracic part of the abdominal cavity. The thoracic cav-
mediastinum. The latter produces a further niche, the mediastinal recess
ity is lined with serous membrane, the pleura, which also covers the organs
(15), for the accessory lobe of the right lung. An additional cavity, the
within the thoracic cavity. The pleural lining of the thoracic wall is
serous cavity of the mediastinum (16) is situated within the mediastinum
referred to as parietal pleura, the parts of which, depending on their loca-
 to the right of the esophagus and caudal to the bifurcation of the trachea.
tion, are designated costal pleura (F), diaphragmatic pleura (H) and medi-
This is the result of a pinching off of a part of the peritoneal cavity dur-
astinal pleura (G). The visceral pleura covers the lung and is therefore
ing ontogenesis. The serous cavity of the mediastinum and accompanying
named pulmonary pleura (D). The mediastinal pleura of each side togeth-
 tension in the pulmonary ligament can be seen by raising the caudal lobe
2
 er with an intermediate fibrous layer form the mediastinum (8), corre-
 of the right lung. The serous cavity of the mediastinum is opened by an inci-
 sponding to the mesentery of the abdominal cavity, q.v. The mediastinum 
 sion directed ventroparallel to the line of insertion of the pulmonary liga-
may be regarded as the mesentery of the esophagus. It inserts onto the ver-
ment. One is able to probe its extent with the index finger from the
tebral bodies dorsally, the sternum ventrally and the diaphragm caudally.
diaphragm to the root of the lung. The pericardial cavity (J), containing the
5
There the line of insertion is pushed farther to the left of the midine. The
heart, is situated in the mediastinum ventral to the esophagus and the bifur-
following structures pass through the mediastinum in a craniocaudal
cation of the trachea. With the pericardium opened, one recognizes the
direction: right azygos vein (10), thoracic duct (12), descending aorta (C),
 serous pericardium and its parietal lamina (K). At the base ofthe heart this
dorsal vagal trunk (13), esophagus (19), ventral vagal trunk (18) and tra-
becomes the visceral lamina ( epicardium -
1 L), which invests the heart sur-
chea (9) with tracheal bifurcation. The pulmonary ligament (17) extends
face. The fibrous pericardium (M) is the outer enveloping connective tissue
from the caudal lobe of the lung to the mediastinum, and thus connects
foundation of the pericardium. It is continuous with the phrenicopericar-
the pulmonary pleura with the mediastinal pleura.
 diac ligament (N) and the endothoracic fascia (E), which is the connective
Within the thoracic cavity the pleura forms two pleural cavities (B), which
tissue base of the parietal pleura. The portion of the mediastinal pleura
3
pass through the thoracic inlet into the neck region as pleural cupulae (A).
" emald opad a pai si alae unuad au suaao 
That of the left extends about the width of two ribs cranial to the thoracic
b) VEINS OF THE THORACIC CAVITY
inlet; the right cupula about one rib-width. The most caudal part of the
 Near the heart, the cranial vena cava (7) gives offthe right azygos vein (10)
 pleural cavity is the costodiaphragmatic recess (20), which lies immediate-
4
ly cranial to the line of insertion of the diaphragm. The pleural cavities are
 and at the thoracic inlet in sequence the costocervical vein (5) and internal
fluid-filled crevices of capillary dimension. Pulmonary and parietal pleura
thoracic vein (6), before it divides into left and right brachiocephalic veins
(4). The brachiocephalic vein gives off the subclavian, external jugular (1)
forces, so that the lung must follow the thoracic wall. As a result, inspira-
 and intermal jugular (2) veins. The caudal vena cava (11) has its own pleur-
 al covering, the plica venae cavae, which is split off from the mediastinum.
tion develops by enlargement of the thorax. In addition, due to the asym-
metrical caudal insertion of the mediastinum, the left pleural cavity has a
Thoracic cavity
(transverse section)
(longitudinal section)
(caudal view)
(dorsal view)
(left)
(right)
(left)
(right)
A
R
3
19
18
E
F
G
H
K
P
20
M
Legend :
N Phrenicopericardiac lig.
a  Lef lung 
 Pleural cupulae
Costal pleura 
Serous pericard 
B
 Pleural cavities 
G
 Mediastinal pleura 
K
 Parietal lamina
 O Left mediastinodiaphragmatic
b
 Right lung
C
 Descending aorta
H
 Diaphragmatic pleura
Visceral lamina
recess
Acc.lobe
Pulmonary pleura
 Pericardiac pleura
M Fibrous pericardium
 P Costomediastinal recess 
Right phrenic n.
E
 Endothoracic fascia
J
 Pericardial cavity
Left phrenic n.
42
Thoracic cavity (right side)
1  Ext. jugular v.
 2 Int. jugular v.
3 Subclavian v.
4 Brachiocephalic v.
5 Costocervical v.
6 Int. thoracic v.
7 Cranial vena cava
8 Mediastinum
 9 Trachea
0Right azygosV
-11  Caudal vena cava
-12 Thoracic duct
13 Dors. vagal trunk
14 Plica venae cavae
15 Mediastinalrecess
 16 Serous cavity of mediastinum 
17Pulmonary lig
18 Ventr. vagal trunk
-19Esophagus
-20 Costodiaphragmatic recess
Legend :
Vagosympathetic trunk and
right common carotid a.
Recurrent laryngeal n.
6
C
Jugular trunk
Supf. cervical a.
Vertebral a., v. and n.
F
Middle cervical gl.
Ansa subclavia
Cervicothoracic ggl.
 Cardiac nn. of sympathetic trunk 
Cran. mediastinal In.
Cran. sternal In.
Right trachebronchial In.
m
Mid dle trachebronchial Iin.
n
Phrenic n.
Atrial surface of heart
Diaphragm
Tendinous centre
(see p. 29)
Foramen of caudal v. cava 
43
4. Heart, Surface of the Heart, Heart Wall and Relationships in the Interior of the Heart
 On the isolated heart, the pericardium is opened by a circular section at the level of the coronary sulcus. The aorta should be cut close enough to the heart
so that the aortic valve is visible. The pulmonary trunk should be cut in small steps until the pulmonary trunk valve is visible. After this dissection, the sur-
face of the heart should be examined. To study the internal relationships of the heart the right atrium is opened by scissors. Begin the section at the tip of
the right auricle, follow the ventral border of the auricle and, at the coronary groove, continue it farther through the atrial wall to the interatrial septum. The
left atrium is opened in a like manner. The ventricles are opened by different sections. The right ventricle is opened by a longitudinal section that starts at
 the pulmonary trunk valve, uns parall to the interventricular septum and ends halfway to the apex of the heart. From this point a cross-section is made
 through the total right ventricle, but without damaging the papillary muscles. To open the left ventricle, a longitudinal section is conducted alongside the
 left ventricular border, thus bisecting the parietal cusp of the bicuspid valve.
1; 2   The heart combines the functions of a pressure and suction pump to main-
 cusp (e's) mainly to the unremarkable small papillary muscles (mm. papil-
tain the circulation of the blood. It is situated in the mediastinal space and
lares parvi, -e"2), and from the indistinct angular cusp (e's) situated in the
forms a caudally open angle of 4s-50 degrees with its longitudinal axis.
angle between the other two cusps, mainly to the subarterial papillary
The apex of the heart extends to the ventral insertion of the diaphragm.
muscle (e"s) lying ventral to the arterial pulmonary trunk. The pulmonary
The heart lies between the 3rd and 7zh ribs, 4/7 on the left, and 3/7 to the
 trunk valve (f) is characterized by having three cusps that, corresponding
right of the midline.
to their positions relative to right and left sides of the heart, are designated
 a) The HEART SuRFAcE is characterized by a base, at which the great vessels
right (f,), left (f,) and intermediate (fs) semilunar valvules.
3
- e allpasue aosu sh um () xade ue pue eo aui otiou
 In the atrial region between the two halves of the heart, is the interatrial
tex. The apices of the auricles (2, —right auricle; 4, —left auricle) of the
septum (g). If the septum is held against a light source, the translucent fos-
right and left atria respectively denote the auricular surface (8). The surface
sa ovalis (h) can be discerned. Since the epicardium and myocardium are 
10
opposite, where the auricles are absent, is designated the atrial surface (12).
lacking here, the fossa ovalis consists only of a duplicature of the endo-
Externally, the left or arterial side of the heart is differentiated from the
 cardium. Blood flows into the two ventricles through a right and a left
right or venous side by its greater extent, the left ventricle alone forming
 atrioventricular ostium (1) respectively. The two ventricles are separated
the apex. Apart from this it has a thicker, more compact ventricular wall.
 completely from one another by a thick interventricular septum (m). In
The right (3) and left (5) ventricular margins lie between the two heart sur-
 both ventricles, tendon-like septomarginal trabeculae (n), conduction mus-
faces in the region of the respective ventricles of the heart. Between the
culature, extend from the septum to the marginal region, particularly to the
apices of the two auricles is the curved outflow tract of the right ventricle,
 papillary muscles. Trabeculae carneae (o), particularly distinct in the
4
the conus arteriosus (9), that propels blood from the right ventricle to the
region of the apex of both ventricles, project into the ventricular lumen as 
pulmonary trunk. At the level of the line of reflection of the pericardium,
fleshy trabeculae. The chordae tendineae (p) are tendinous filaments that
the ligamentum arteriosum (1) travels between aorta and pulmonary trunk;
 connect each cusp of the atrioventricular valves with each of two papillary
it is the remnant of the embryonic ductus arteriosus. The paraconal inter-
muscles.
ventricular groove (6) lies beside the conus arteriosus and represents the
 Five to eight ostia of the pulmonary vv. (q) are present in the left atrium
boundary between the ventricles externally It contains the paraconal inter-
(C). At its entrance, the left ventricle (D) has the bicuspid valve (r), whose
ventricular branch or long limb' ofthe left coronary artery and its satellite
12
parietal cusp (r') is connected by chordae tendineae chiefly to the subau-
vein. The indistinct subsinuosal interventricular groove (11) lies opposite.
ricular papillary muscle (r",) and with its septal cusp (r'2) mainly to the
It runs ventrally from the origin of the coronary sinus (at the area of dis-
subatrial papillary muscle (r"2). The route of expulsion of the blood to the
 charge of the great and middle cardiac veins) toward the heart's apex. The
 aortic valve (s) lies between the septal cusp and the ventricular septum. The
coronary groove (10), which contains the *circular limbs' of the coronary
13
 crescent-shaped valvules of the aortic valve are denoted according to their
arteries, is the externally recognizable boundary between the atria and the
 positions with reference to right and left sides of the heart and the ventric-
ventricles.
ular septum. They are designated the right (s,), the left (s2) and the septal
 b) The HEART WALL consists of the very thin endocardium, the strong
5
(s) semilunar valvules.
 myocardium and the very thin epicardium. The endocardium (k) lines the
internal surface and continues as the inner lining of the large blood vessels
6
that lead to the heart or carry blood from the heart. The myocardium (j) is 
-snnws, e pue wnipieooau (sunouo) yuom, e ou papiaipqns
Legend (see figures on opposite page)
conducting' myocardium. The contracting myocardium far outweighs the 
conducting myocardium. Its thickness is adapted to local pressure differ-
A Right atrium
C Left atrium
ences. It consists of striated cardiac muscle cells that are attached end-to-
a Sinus venarum cavarum
g Interatrial septum
q Openings of the pumonary
end, forming an acute-angled network. The cardiac muscle cells are
[Sinus venosus] 
arranged in three layers (external, middle and internal) which mix with
veins
each other in the form of a whorl at the tip of the heart. In the area of the
h Fossa ovalis
b Coronary sinus
i Epicardium
conus arteriosus there are circularly arranged muscle cell bundles. The
musculature of the atria and the ventricles is not a continuum but, coming
c Pectinate muscles
jMyocardium
from the corresponding direction (the atrial musculature from dorsal; the
(Musculi pectinati)
ventricular muscle from ventral), insert on the heart skeleton (see p. 46).
d  Right cardiac veins
k  Endocardium
The myocardial cells of the internal conducting system have only very few
myofibrils and, as a result of their specialization for conducting impulses,
B  Right ventricle
D Left ventricle
7
have lost their ability to contract. The epicardium (i) is a serosal layer on
the heart that corresponds to the visceral lamina ofthe serous pericardium.
eTricuspid valve
Atrioventricular
r Bicuspid (mitral valve
(Right atroventricular valve)
ostium
(Left atrioventricular valve)
c) The INTERNAL RELATIONSHIPs OF THE HEART are described accOrding to the
direction of blood flow. Within the right atrium (A) is a smooth walled
e', Parietal cusp
r', Parietal cusp
region, the sinus venarum cavarum or sinus venosus) (a), into which the
e', Septal cusp
 m Interventricular
r', Septal cusp
cranial and caudal caval veins open. This is separated indistinctly from the
septum
 atrial region proper with its furrowed, reticulate internal relief. The heart
e's Angular cusp
veins open ventral to the opening of the caudal vena cava into the coronary
e" Large papillary muscle
n Septomarginal
r", Subauricular papillary
sinus (b) (great cardiac v. and the middle cardiac v.), which represents a
trabeculae
muscle
tubular outpouching of the right atrium. The right cardiac vv. (d) and the
 e"s Small papilay muscles
r"s Subatrial papillary muscle
vv. cordis minimae are located in the right atrium, between the mm. pecti-
e"s Subarterial papillary muscle 
0 Trabeculae
nati (c), which project into the atrial lumen in a comb-like manner. A few-
carneae
er number of vv. cordis minimae appear in the left atrium and the left and
f Pulmonary trunk valve
p  Chordae tendineae  s  Aortic valve
right ventricles. At the entrance to the right ventricle (B),the three cusps of
the tricuspid valve (e) are anchored to the anulus fibrosus of the cardiac
f  Right semilunar valvule
s, Right semilunar valvule
skeleton. From the parietal cusp (e'), chordae tendineae extend chiefly to
f. Left semilunar valvule 
s2 Left semilunar valvule
the great papilary muscle (m. papillaris magnus, —e"), from the septal 
f。 Intermediate semilunar valvule 
s, Septal semilunar valvule
44
Right ventricle
(Auricular surface)
1 Lig. arteriosum
2 Right auricle
4 Left auricle
1
5 Left ventricular margin
6 Paraconal interventricular groove
Apexofheart
Legend :
13 Cran. vena cava
18 Pulmonary trunk
23 Left coronary a.
28 Caud. vena cava
14Aorta
 Right pulmonary a.
24
 Paraconal interventricular br.
15 Brachiocephalic trunk
29 Pulmonary w.
Left pulmonary a.
26 
Subsinuosal interventricular br.
Circumflexbranch
16 Left subclavian a.
 21 Great cardiac v.
17 Intercostal aa.
 22 Right coronary a.
27 Middle cardiac v.
 Base of heart
Left atrium and left ventricle
Auricular surface
9 Conus arteriosus
22
12 Atrial surface
(see p.47)
45
5. Heart, Coronary Vessels, Heart Valves, Cardiac Conduction System
a) The HEART VessELs are the coronary arteries and the cardiac veins. The
 Instead their free borders contact to complete valve closure. The papillary
arteries are termed coronary arteries because their main branches run in the
muscles do not serve to open the valves, which are opened passively by the
 coronary groove. They lie beneath the epicardium and are surrounded by
 blood-flow similar to the opening of a door by a gust of wind.
adipose tissue. Left and right coronary arteries originate from the first part
 The semilunar valves ( Valva trunci pulmonalis and Valva aortae, see also
of the aorta, opposite the left and right semilunar cusps. The coronary
p. 45) consist of three individual cusps, each shaped like a pocket. They
function strictly passively. The free border of each cusp, which projects
heart supplied, and may, in the diagnosis of blood vascular disturbances,
 contribute to disorders.
 into the lumen of the vessel, flutters with the physiological direction of the
blood stream. With reversal of blood flow, the cusp is expanded by the
1 1. The two coronary arteries (Aa. coronariae) convey about 10 % of the
inflow of blood; their free borders contact one another and close the valvu-
 stroke-volume of blood to the heart muscle. The left coronary artery (5.
 lar orifice.
-see also p. 45)leaves the first part ofthe aorta and, crossing ventral to the
left auricle, divides into two principal branches: The first principal branch,
 c) The CARDIAC STIMULUS-GENERATING AND STIMULUS-CONDUCTION SYSTEM
2
- pwu as an ui ssnoo ) yuq r ed s
 enables the heart to have an independent heart-action that, even with loss of
gitudinal groove, where it releases a proximal and distal collateral vessel to
consciousness, continues to function. This system consists of modified car-
the left ventricular wall. The second principal branch, the circumflex
diac cells, the myocardium of the conducting system, which, gross-anatomi-
branch (6), after passing ventral to the left auricle runs in the coronary sul-
 cally, is difficult to demonstrate. It is not a nervous tissue, but is regulated by
the autonomic nervous system, which accelerates the stimulus generation
 groove where in most cases it continues as the subsinuosal interventricular
 (sympathetic nerves) or slows it down (parasympathetic nerves).
branch (8).
 The sinoatrial node (10), the normal pacemaker, is the superintending stim-
The right coronary artery (2, -see also page 45) originates from the aorta
ulus-generating center and is located in the region of the sinus venosus, be-
between the origin of the pulmonary trunk and the right auricle. With its
tween the mouth of the cranial vena cava and the right auricle. The rhyth-
circumfex branch (3), after passing ventral to the right auricle, it runs in
 mic impulses formed here first reach the atrial myocardial cells and finally
the right semicircumference of the coronary groove.
the atrioventricular node (11), where conduction of the stimulus is retard-
ed. The atrioventricular bundle (16),the bundle of HIS, passes through an
IL. The cardiac veins are subdivided into one large, one middle-sized, small
 opening in the heart skeleton to reach the interventricular septum where it
(right) and minimal veins. The great cardiac vein (1, V. cordis magna;
 divides into two branches (right bundle-branch —17 and left bundle-branch
also called the great coronary vein) at first courses in the paraconal inter-
18). The two bundle-branches extend subendocardially in the corre-
ventricular groove and, after this, in the coronary groove with the circum-
 sponding ventricle toward the apex ofthe heart. Some fibers take an abbre-
flex branch of the left coronary artery. It continues, without changing its
viated course, passing by way of septomarginal trabeculae (19) to the ordi-
direction, into the coronary sinus of the right atrium. The middle cardiac
nary myocardium and papillary muscles of the free wall,thus bypassing the
vein (V. cordis media —9) accompanies the subsinuosal interventricular
 hearts apex. Both branches divide into finer fibers (PURKINJE-fibers),
ramus and empties into the coronary sinus. The small right cardiac veins
which conduct impulses to the contractile myocardium and the papillary
(Vv. cordis dextrae -4) conduct blood from the right ventricular wall
 muscles of the ventricles.
directly to the right atrium. The minimal cardiac veins (Vv. cordis minimae)
drain the blood from the subendocardial tissue directly into the four inter-
d) The CARDIAc NERvEs (see p. 49) of the autonomic nervous system mod-
nal chambers of the heart, especially into the atria.
ify the inherent rhythm of the heart. Sympathetic fibers in the cardiac
 nerves originate from the cervicothoracic ganglion (stellate ganglion) and
 b) The VALvULAR APPARATUs consists of the cardiac skeleton and the heart
the middle cervical ganglion. With the parasympathetic cardiac fibers of
valves, which are formed as atrioventricular and semilunar valves. The car-
the vagus nerve (X) or of its recurrent laryngeal branch, they form the car-
diac skeleton is formed by fibrous rings (Anul fbrosi), which surround the
diac plexus. From the plexus, nerves pass to the heart, especially the blood
openings between atrium and ventricle and the openings of the aorta and
vessels as well as the myocardial cells ofthe conducting system and the con-
pulmonary trunk. In places the rings contain embedded cartilage. Between
 tractile myocardium. In addition, they form a subendocardial nerve plexus.
the atrioventricular openings and the aorta the heart skeleton is formed as a
 Sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers are antagonistic with respect to
right trigone cartilage and as a septal carilage. In addition to serving as the
 their action on the heart. Sympathetic stimulation increases the frequency
place of insertion for the myocardium, the heart skeleton functions as the 
 of heart contractions (positive chronotropic effect), shortens the conduc.
 attachment ofthe heart valves and, in the electrophysiological view, to sep-
tion time for the spread of excitation (positive dromotropic effect) and
arate the atrial musculature from the ventricular muscle sothat atrial excita-
increases the strength of heart contraction (positive inotropic effect).
tion does not pass diffusely into the ventricles. An opening isleft only for the
 Parasympathetic stimulation has negative chrono-, dromo-, and inotropic
 passage of the atrioventricular bundle of the cardiac conduction system.
action.
Since the four heart valves are nearly in a single plane, one speaks of a
 Efferent neurons of the sympathetic cardiac nerves are predominantly post
'valvular plane.' Externally, the valvular plane is marked by the circular
 ganglionic; their synapses take place predominantly in the ganglia of the
coronary groove. The valvular plane changes its position during contrac-
 sympathetic trunk. Efferent parasympathetic neurons extending to the car-
tion of the heart. With ventricular systole (contraction) it is moved toward
 diac plexus and to the heart are presynaptic neurons. Their synapses take
the apex of the heart and during diastole (relaxation) of the ventricular
 place in the small ganglia that are located predominantly subepicardially in
muscle it is returned to its original position. During systole blood is eject-
the atrial walls.
ed, and by lowering the valvular plane, blood is at the same time sucked in
from the atrium and the large veins near the heart (functions as a pressure
Afferent fibers also pass with the sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers.
 and a suction pump).
Afferents passing with the sympathetic fibers are pain fibers, and those
 passing with the parasympathetic fibers lead from stretch receptors.
The atrioventricular valves (bicuspid valve —15 and tricuspid valve —12),
which close the atrioventricular ostia, are kept on a level with the valvular
 Endocrine (modified) myocardial cells are present in the wall of the atria.
plane by the chordae tendineae (13) and the papillary muscles (14), so that
 They secrete the natriuretic peptide hormone cardiodilatin, which serves to
the cusps are not everted into the atrium with reversal of blood flow.
regulate blood pressure and blood volume.
46
Coronary arteries and veins of heart
(Auricular surface)
26
1  Great cardiac vein
28
2 Right coronary 8
3Circumflex
4 Right cardiac
9Middlecardiac
Legend :
20 Cran. vena cava
24 Pulmonary trunk 
28 Caudal vena cava
 32 Aortic valve
21Aorta
25Auricleofrightatrium
29 Coronary sinus
33 Left ventricle
 22 Brachiocephalic trunk
 26 Auricle of left atrium
30 Right atrium 
23 Left subclavian a.
27 Pulmonary veins
  n
Conducting system of heart
20
10 Sinoatrial node
RI
28
 15 Bicuspid valve
11  Atrioventricular node
12 Tricuspid valve
16Atrioventricular bundle
13 Chordae tendineae
17   Right crus
18
Left crus
14 Papillary muscles
marginal trabeculae
(see p. 45)
47
6. Autonomic Nervous System
1
 The autonomic (vegetative) nervous system is composed of a sympathetic
contributions from the spinal cord. Thus a segmental subdivision is lack-
 part (sympathetic nervous system) and a paras ympathetic part (parasym-
ing.
pathetic nervous system). The intramural (intestinal) system is considered
 The first three paravertebral ganglia of the thoracic sympathetic nerve
a part of the autonomic nervous system and is observed in the gastroin-
 trunk, together with the caudal cervical ganglion, form the cervicothoracic
testinal tract, e.g., as submucosal, myenteric, and subserosal plexuses. The
2
(stellate) ganglion (5). From the latter the two branches of the ansa sub-
 autonomic (vegetative) nervous system regulates the internal functions of
 clavia (6) are released. After having embraced the left or, respective, right
the body autonomously; that is, without conscious control. For example,
subclavian artery both branches reunite at the small middle cervical gan-
the smooth musculature of the glands, vessels and organ systems, by which
 glion (4). From here the sympathetic fibers within the vagosympathetic
metabolic activities, water and heat balance as well as other different body
trunk conduct impulses that, by way of the cranial cervical ganglion (k),
functions are carried out, is regulated and coordinated (e.g., circulatory
 pass to the head (see p. 102). From the cervicothoracic ganglion the fol-
and respiratory systems) without conscious control. The autonomic ner-
lowing groups of branches are given off First, unmyelinated nerve branch-
vous system regulates the autonomy of the stimulus-generating and con-
es pass to the thoracic viscera and are named according to the viscus inner-
ducting system within the heart. Contrary to the somatic nervous system,
vated (e.g., cardiac nerves —7). These branches receive also contributions
the autonomic nervous system is autonomous, not completely, but in a lim-
 from the ansa subclavia and the middle cervical ganglion. The sympathet-
ited manner. It can fulfill its functions, which are partially essential for life,
ic nerves of the thoracic organs mix with parasympathetic fibers from the
for example, during sleep, unconsciousness and general anesthesia. A lim-
vagus and, with these, form mixed plexuses for the thoracic viscera (car-
q a jo s aaaaa au o ueau ui oe sisxa ane pi
 diac, esophageal and pulmonary plexuses). Secondly, the vertebral nerve
(e.g., of the diencephalon) and the humoral coordinating systems (e.g., of
(2), with the accompanying vertebral artery and vein, reaches the trans-
the pituitary gland). As in the somatic nervous system with its sensory
verse canal of the cervical verebral column and here gives off its sympa-
afferents and motor efferents, there are afferent fibers (visceral afferent
thetic fibers to the cervical nerves.Thirdly, slender grey communicating
 neurons) associated with the autonomic nervous system; but today most
branches (3) pass to the brachial plexus and to the first four intercostal
regard the autonomic nervous system as an efferent system of fibers that
 nerves and furnish sympathetic fibers to them.
pass from the brain and spinal cord to smooth muscle, heart muscle and
gland. Visceral sensory (afferent) fibers conduct visceral pain and other
 From the thoracic sympathetic nerve trunk, before its transition into the
modalities and regulate the graduation and modification of peripheral
lumbar sympathetic trunk, at the level of the 1oeh to the 13h thoracic ver-
 Stimuli. The cell bodies of afferent visceral neurons of the sympathetic ner-
tebra, the strong major splanchnic nerve (13) is given off. It runs over the
vous system are located in the spinal ganglia, and their nerve fibers run
lumbocostal arch of the diaphragm into the abdominal cavity to the solar
within the dorsal root of the spinal nerves to the spinal cord. In the sym-
(celiacomesenteric) plexus (see p. 60). After the major splanchnic nerve is
pathetic part, it is only in the dorsal root that visceral afferent fibers are
given off the thoracic sympathetic trunk becomes very thin and continues
separate from the autonomic efferent nerve fibers. In the sympathetic part,
into the lumbar sympathetic nerve trunk, where it increases in thickness
the efferent pathway leaves the spinal cord by the ventral root of a spinal
(see p. 61).
 nerve, and consists of two neurons that synapse in sequence. The first neu-
ron has its cell body in the spinal cord, its axon pasing in the ventral root;
 posed of a cranial, cerebral, part and a caudal, sacral, part. Of the cranial
the second neuron has its cell body in a peripheral ganglion, and its axon
nerves IIl, VIl, IX and X, which carry parasympathetic fibers, the vagus
reaches the organ innervated.
nerve (X —8) passes to the body cavities. In the cervical region it is joined 
The main parts of the autonomic system the sympathetic and parasympa-
to the sympathetic trunk, forming the vagosympathetic trunk. At the level
thetic, differ from each other in their topography and histochemically by
 of the sympathetic middle cervical ganglion the vagus nerve separates from
their transmitter substances. As transmitter substance (neurotransmitter),
the sympathetic trunk and accompanies the trachea to the root of the lung
in the parasympathetic part, acetylcholine is released atthe ends of the pre-
where it gives off cardiac and bronchial branches (9) to the cardiac and pul-
as well as the postsynaptic parasympathetic fibers. In the sympathetic part,
 monary plexuses. Caudal to the root of the lung, the right and left vagus
acetylcholine is released by the presynaptic nerve fibers but predominantly
 nerves divide each intoa long dorsal and a short ventral branch which, dor
 norepinephrine by the postsynaptic fibers. Functionally, the sympathetic
sal and ventralto the esophagus, unite to form the dorsal vagal and ventral
part and the parasympathetic part are predominantly antagonistic. The
arrector pili muscles and the smooth muscle of the vessels of the skin are
esophageal hiatus into the abdominal cavity where they supply the abdom-
exclusively supplied by the sympathetic part. The sympathetic part is func-
 inal viscera up to the transverse colon inclusively. Within the thoracic cav-
tionally activating, increasing the utilization of energy, the blood pressure
ity the vagus nerve gives off the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The right recur-
and the heart rate, and other functions. The parasympathetic part furthers 
leu ieau Aiae ueiaeqns jua au punoue sdool aaiau leauahel nua
the recovery and maintenance of the body, building up energy reserves by
 artery's origin, and the left recurrent laryngeal nerve (1) loops medially
activating the digestive system. The autonomic nervous system forms nerve
around the aortic arch at the base of the heart. After this,the nerves of both
ais ia pue au aus au go euel uio sasnxad au sasnxad
sides return ventral to the common carotid artery and alongside the trachea
icantly from the plexuses of the somatic nervous system (brachial and lum-
to the larynx. Each recurrent laryngeal nerve gives off tracheal and
 esophageal branches and ends as the caudal laryngeal nerve of its side.
the synapse from the myelinated preganglionic to the unmyelinated post-
After the origin of the recurrent laryngeal nerve with its motor and senso-
 ganglionic nerve fiber takes place.
ry branches the vagus nerve contains, beside visceral sensory fibers, exclu-
 sively parasympathetic fibers. The synapse of parasympathetic fibers, from
The intramural (gastrointestinal) system consists of nerve fibers and nerve
the myelinated preganglionic fiber to the non-myelinated postganglionic
cells. A part of the nerve cells is responsible for the synapsing from the cen-
fiber, takes place near the organ innervated, predominantly in the intra-
tral to the peripheral neuron of the parasympathetic part. Other nerve cells
 mural ganglia (for the parasympathetic pathways from the sacral spinal
belong to the short intramural reflex arcs that regulate the glandular activ-
cord, see pp. 60 and 70).
ity and the motor activity of the intestines by neuropeptide transmitters.
a) The sympathetic nervous system with its paired sympathetic trunks
extends from the head-neck border to the tail. Caudal to the thoracic inlet
Legend (see opposite illustrations):
the sympathetic trunk is roughly segmented by its ganglia (sympathetic
a  Ciliary ganglion
p  Adrenal branch
trumk ganglia —10) with their communicating branches. By longitudinal
 b Pterygopalatine ganglion 
 q  Cran. mesenteric ganglion 
inter-ganglionic branches (11 a chain of ganglia is formed that lies ven-
c  Lacrimal gland
 Abdominal aortic plexus 
trolaterally on the vertebral bodies. For this reason, the ganglia are also
d  Mandibular ganglion and 
sLumbar splanchnic nn.
called paravertebral ganglia. The original perikarya are within the lateral
 sublingual ganglion
t   Caud. mesenteric ganglion 
horn of the thoracolumbar part of the spinal cord. Their central myelinat-
e Sublingual gland 
U Hypogastric n.
ed nerve fibers leave the spinal nerve in the white communicating branch-
f   Mandibular gland 
V  Sacral splanchnic nn.
es (rami) and, as efferent fibers, reach the ganglia ofthe sympathetic trunk.
g  Otic ganglion
w Pelvic nn.
A part of these nerve fibers will synapse within the ganglia of the sympa-
h  Zygomatic gland
× Pelvic plexus
thetic trunk. From the ganglia, peripheral unmyelinated nerve fibers pass
iParotid gland 
y  Esophageal hiatus
in the grey communicating branches (rami) to the somatic spinal nerves
 j  Distal (nodose) ganglion 
(details, see p. 60). Unmyelinated and myelinated nerve fibers are often
k Cran. cervical ganglion
found jointly in mixed communicating branches. The cervical sympathetic
 I  Vagosympathetic trunk 
nerve trunk is different from the other parts of the trunk in that it lies at a
m White ramus communicans
 distinct distance from the vertebral column united with the cervical part of
(white communicating branch) 
the vagus nerve to form the vagosympathetic trunk. Also, at its three gan-
n  Celiac ganglion
 glia (cranial, middle and caudal cervical ganglia), it does not here receive
 0 Minor splanchnic nerve 
48
Cervical and thoracic arteries, veins and nerves
(Left surface)
14
15
Legend :
14 Spinal ggl.
15 Greater occipital n. (C2dm)
16 Vagosympathetic trunk
17 Phrenic n.
Int. jugular .
Right and left common carotid a.
Aenin xe yei pue ua
Supf. cervical a.
Subclavianv
Brachiocephalic v.
Left subclavian a.
Cran. vena cava 
 Brachiocephalic trunk 
Caudal vena cav
Pulmonary trunk
Int. thoracic a. and v.
Right azygos v.
Mammary branches
Q
Desc. aorta
Intercostal a., v and n.
Right and let pulmonary a.
W
Cran. epigastric a. and v
Pulmonaryvv.
Supf. cran. epigastric a. and v.
Bronchoesophageal a. and v.
Esophagus
Autonomic nervous system
(see pp. 41, 61)
 Parasympathetic part:
Preganglionic nerve fiber
Postganglionic nerve fiber
Sympathetic part:
 Preganglionic nerve fiber
 Postganglionic nerve fiber
Legend :
C1, C8
Cervical segments
T1, T6T13
Thoracic segments
Li, L7
Lumbar segments
S1, S3
Sacral segments 
II
Oculomotor n.
×x
Vagus n.
49
Chapter 6: Abdominal Cavity
 Avoiding damage to abdominal organs, the abdominal cavity is opened by a paramedian section from the diaphragm to the pecten ossis pubis and by a
transverse section at the level of the last rib. After this, the position of those abdominal organs that are not covered by the greater omentum should be
 studied. Then, beginning caudally, the greater omentum is lifed up and pulled cranially over the stomach. Most abdominal organs can now be viewed in
 their normal position.
a) The ABpoMEN is subdivided by natural borders into abdominal regions
 omentum. Where the abdominal organs develop in the ventral mesogastri-
which can be projected onto the abdominal wall and which are made up of
um (liver) or in the dorsal mesogastrium (pancreas, spleen) the reticular
those organs lying underneath. The cranial abdominalregion extends from
ls e Auo si aaui pue ueao aui jo ans au uo suaoel si aunns
the diaphragm to a transverse plane that connects the most caudal points
amount of subserous fat.
of both costal arches. The middle abdominal region lies between this cra-
 The extent to which the abdominal organs are covered by the peritoneum
nial transverse plane and a caudal transverse plane that connects right and
left tubera coxarum. The caudal abdominal region extends from this cau-
depends on their position. According to one point of view, chiefly used by
dal transverse plane tothe terminal line of the pelvic inlet. The terminal line
the continental European countries, abdominal organs are intraperitoneal
(within the peritoneal cavity), retroperitoneal (outside the peritoneal cavi-
starts at the sacral promontory dorsally and extends by way of the arcuate
line laterally to the pecten ossis pubis ventrally. These regions are addi-
 ty but invested in part by peritoneum), or extraperitoneal (entirely external.
tionally subdivided into subregions.
to the peritoneum and having no part covered by peritoneum). In this view,
however, organs like the intestine that are invested by peritoneum except at
I. In the cranial abdominal region are the liver (1), which covers the gall 
the narrow line of attachment of the mesentery are regarded as intraperi-
bladder (see p. S9), the first part of the duodenum, the main part of the
 toneal; that is, as lying within the peritoneal cavity. In this view, an organ
pancreas (5) and the spleen. If the stomach is not very full, the entire stom-
like the liver is also regarded as intraperitoneal as it is invested by peri-
ach (2) will also be in the cranial abdomen.
toneum except at the narrow line of attachment of the ligaments of the liv-
er. In another view, employed in many countries of the western hemi-
of the falciform ligament (10) -
- are the quadrate lobe and portions of the
 sphere, no abdominal organ is regarded as intraperitoneal—located within
left and right mediallobes of the liver and also the greater curvature of the
the peritoneal cavity. In this view, all organs are excluded from the peri-
toneal cavity by their serous covering. In this view, all abdominal organs
stomach and the gall bladder which, covered by the liver, lies to the right
of the median plane at the level of the 7ch intercostal space.
 are extraperitoneal (outside the peritoneal cavity) and only a little serous
fluidis located intraperitoneally. In both points ofview,theterm retroperi-
 In the left hypochondriac region, the left medial lobe of the liver (region of
toneal describes organs of the abdominal cavity that are covered by the
the 6th - 8eh intercostal space), the left lateral lobe ofthe liver (region of the
 peritoneum only on a part of their surface. Retroperitoneal organs have a
10ch intercostal space), and the spleen (11) at the level of the 11ch and 12h
substantial part of their surface uncovered by the peritoneum. The kidneys
 intercostal space are in contact with the body wall.
 are an example. Most countries of the western hemisphere also account as
ataiiao auud au ot lens aua ae iesueo euuado
of the 6h - 8h intercostal space), the right lateral lobe of the liver (region
the caudal vagina and vestibule, the pelvic urethra, etc. In the continental
of the 8ch - 9h intercostal space) and the caudate process of the liver, which
European countries, the term extraperitoneal is limited to those organs that
invests the cranial pole of the right kidney, the descending duodenum (——3.
 are sufficiently far removed from the peritoneum that no part is covered by
-region of the 11th - 12zh intercostal space) and the right lobe of the pan-
the peritoneum; e.g., the caudal rectum. In the first point of view, organs
creas project onto the thoracic wall.
that follow the longitudinal axis of the body as, for example, the rectum,
 change from an intraperitoneal position to an extraperitoneal one. In the
Il. In the middle abdominal region, the intestinal mass, except its com-
 second point of view, the rectum, and all other abdominal organs, are
mencement and termination, caudal portions of the spleen (11) and in the
 always entirely extraperitoneal.
female, the ovary (7), including uterine tube and uterine horns (8) are in
contact with the abdominal wall.
c) The ABpoMINAL CAMTY comprises that space between the diaphragm and
pelvic inlet, which becomes free after the removal of all abdominal organs,
 In the umbilical region the jejunal loops (6) contact the ventral abdominal 
including the peritoneum.
wall.
 d) The PeRIToNEAL CAMTY is that space which is enclosed by the parietal
In the left lateral abdominal region, the left kidney, dorsally, and following
caudally, the left ovary and portions of the descending colon, jejunum and
 peritoneum and contains, in the one point of view, the intraperitoneally
 cecum, and the ascending colon, are projected onto the abdominal wall.
located organs with their mesenteries, omenta, peritoneal ligaments, etc.
(gastrointestinal tract, liver, spleen, pancreas, ovary, uterine tube and
In the right lateral abdominal region are the caudal pole of the right kid-
uterus of the bitch). In the other point of view, discussed above, the peri-
ney, the right ovary, the descending duodenum and portions of the jejunum 
toneal cavity contains only a small amount of serous fluid.
as well as the cecum and ascending colon.
e) In the dog, the greater omentum reaches from its attachment at the
IL. In the caudal abdominal region, there are the urinary bladder (9), the 
 greater curvature of the stomach caudally nearly to the pelvic inlet. In
initial portion of the rectum and, in the bitch, the body of the uterus; in the
 doing so, it lies between the abdominal organs and the ventral abdominal
male dog, the ends of the deferent ducts.
wall. Accordingly, many ABDoMINAL ORGANs are not ordinarily in contact
In the pubic region the urinary bladder is found, and in older male dogs the
with the ventral abdominal wall.
prostate gland is present.
 Abdominal organs that are not covered by the greater omentum (4) but cov-
Jejunal loops and portions of the uterus project onto the left inguinal and
ered by the visceral peritoneum are in direct contact with the abdominal wall.
right inguinal regions.
Cranially, these are portions ofthe liver includingthe gallbladder (see p. 59)
b) Before undertaking to distinguish the abdominal cavity from the perito-
and, caudally, parts ofthe stomach. Totheleft, the spleen lies superficiallyon
the intestinal mass. Caudally the urinary bladder projects freely into the 
neal cavity and the retroperitoneal space, the PeRIToNEuM will be con-
hypogastrium. On the right side, the descending duodenum is uncovered by
sidered.
 the greater omentum from the level of the umbilicus to the liver.
The peritoneum is a serous membrane that consists of a superficial
mesothelium, a connective tissue layer, the lamina propria serosae, and a
 Those abdominal organs that are covered by the greater omentum become
-d paed sy raaei u, e se anssi aaauo asoigo esoasgns eat
 visible after removal of the greater omentum. The velar part of the greater
 omentum (Velum omentale —12) is spread out between the hilus of the
toneum, it lines the peritoneal cavity and, as visceral peritoneum, it covers 
the surface of the abdominal viscera. The latter organs are suspended by a
spleen and the descending mesocolon, and coils of the small intestine
duplication of the serosa designated in the case of the intestine as mesen-
(jejunum) with the pancreas can be seen. Exceptions are only for the tran-
tery, of the stomach as dorsal and ventral mesogastrium or omentum, and,
 sitional area between duodenum and jejunum and for the initial portions
in relation to organs other than the stomach and intestine, as various peri-
 of the colon, which after displacement also are visible. In the bitch, the
toneal ligaments, mesovarium in the case of the ovary, etc. The tela sub-
 ovary, surrounded by the ovarian bursa, and the uterine horns can be seen;
 serosa may contain fat tissue. At normal nutritional conditions only a little
 in the male dog, the terminal part of the deferent duct.
fat is present in association with the parietal and visceral peritoneum. The
f) The RETRoPERIToNEAL SPACE (see also the discussion of this space in “b)
mesenteries contain predominantly greater amounts of fat tissue in the sub-
 above) is located at the dorsolateral abdominal wall between the parietal
serous layer In the mesogastrium (see p. S3), strands of subserous fat sur-
 peritoneum and the sublumbar muscles and contains the kidneys including
round lace-like arranged blood and lymph vessels. Between these strands,
the adrenal glands as well as numerous vessels, nerves and lymph vesses,
in the reticular meshes, the subserous fat tissue is scarce or absent. Because
 including the aorta and caudal vena cava. It can be observed after the part
 of this structure parts of the ventral mesogastrium are designated lesser
of the peritoneum that covers each kidney, together with the kidneys, is
omentum and the elongate dorsal mesogastrium is designated greater
removed from underlying structures.
50
Abdominal cavity and digestive apparatus
1  Liver
10 Falciform lig .
2 Stomach
3 Descending part of duodenum
4 Greater omentum
Superficial wall
Umbilicus
Median lig. of urinary bladder
( Ventral view)
Deep wall
11Spleen
5 Pancreas
6 Jejunum
12Velumomentale
7 Ovary
8 Uterine horn
9 Urinary bladder
(see pp. 53, 55, 57, 59)
51
2. Peritoneal Cavity, Lymph Nodes of Stomach and Intestine, Cisterna Chyli and Spleen
a) The PERIToNEAL CAvITY ends caudally within the pelvic cavity with three
II. The common dorsal mesentery (10) extends from the beginning of the
 excavations (pouches) of the parietal peritoneum (i5), which are situated
 duodenum to the rectum and, for the individual parts of the intestine, is
one above the other. The dorsally located rectogenital pouch (3) extends
specificaly designated as mesoduodenum, mesojejunum, mesoileum,
most caudal and is dorsally bounded by the rectum and ventrally by the
mesocecum, mesocolon and mesorectum. The elongation of the intestine
uterus or deferent ducts. Between the genital organs and the urinary bladder
with simultaneous rotation during ontogenesis brings about a dorsal
is the vesicogenital pouch (5). The ventrally located pubovesical pouch (2)
twisting of the cranially located mesentery at the origin of the cranial
is found between the urinary bladder and the pubic bone. This pouch has
mesenteric artery. This forms the root of the mesentery (13). The meso-
 only a short ca udal extension and is subdi vided by the median ligament of
colon (9) of the descending colon and the mesorectum (6), which follow
-ad aul jo uoisuaixa ue si ssaoid ieuia ai '(1) rapeq Arum a
caudally from the area of the root, are linearly fixed at the dorsal abdom
toneum external to the abdominal cavity it islike thefinger of a glove, com-
inal and pelvic wall. A ventral mesentery does not develop caudal to the
mencing at the vaginal ring (7) and traversing the inguinal rings and canal
 cranial part of the duodenum.
(inguinal space). In addition, cranially, the serosal mediastinal cavity (43)
c) The LyMPH NopEs of the gastrointestinal tract lie predominantly in the
separates during ontogenesis owing to the development of the diaphragm.
 mesenteries and omenta ofthose parts of the viscera which form part of the
It extends cranially within the mediastinum to the base of the heart.
afferent area of the corresponding lymph nodes. The hepatic (portal)
 b) The PeRIToNEuM that joins the parietal peritoneum of the abdominal
lymph nodes (18) are cranial to the pancreas, on both sides of the portal
wall to the visceral peritoneum that invests the stomach and intestine (see
vein. The jejunal lymph nodes (12) lie in the proximal third of the mesoje-
also pp. 156, 157) is designated the greater omentum and lesser omentum
junum in series, one after the other. The solitary lymph nodes may have a
(26, 27, 28; 20, 21, 22; —see also the text-illustration) of the stomach and
length up to 20 cm. The lenal (splenic) lymph nodes are grouped around
the common dorsal mesentery of the intestine.
the ramification of the splenic artery and vein. A gastric lymph node is
1
 1. The dorsal mesogastrium (17, greater omentum, omentum majus or epi-
 inconstant. When present it is found near the pylorus at the lesser curva-
 ploon) to a great extent covers the intestinal tract ventrally and laterally.
 ture of the stomach. The colic lymph nodes (14) lie near the attachment of
The greater omentum (26) is composed of superficial and deep laminae.
the ascending mesocolon and the transvese mesocolon of the intestine. The
 Each lamina consists of a double lamella of serosa. The greater omentum
 caudal mesenteric lymph nodes (8) are at the terminal branching of the cau-
starts as a deep leaf or visceral wall (Paries profundus, 28) jointly with
 dal mesenteric artery. The efferent vessels draining the above-mentioned
the transverse mesocolon at the dorsal abdominal wall, lies ventrolateral to
lymph nodes predominantly unite to form the visceral trunk, which opens
the intestinal mass and reflects at the pelvic inlet as the superficial leaf or
 at the level of the kidneys into the cisterna chyli.
 parietal wall (Paries superficialis, —27). The latter wall is in contact with
 d) The CIsTERNA CHYLl (see p. 61) is dorsally situated upon the abdominal
2
the ventral abdominal wall ( Paries) and extends to the greater curvature of
 aorta at the level of the kidneys, between the crura of the diaphragm. As
the stomach. Here both serosal lamellae separate and cover the surface of
main tributaries of the cisterna chyli, the lumbar trunk drains the lymph
the stomach as visceral peritoneum (4). At the lesser curvature of the stom-
 from the pelvis including the total limb area, and the visceral trunk drains 
 ach the lamellae meet each other again. Here the ventral mesogastrium
 the lymph from the internal organs. From the cistern, the lymph passes in
(lesser omentum) begins. The superficial and deep walls of the greater
 the thoracic duct, which, passing through the aortic hiatus, continues cra-
 nially alongside the aorta to reach the previously mentioned venous angle
visceral surface of the liver, form the wall of the omental bursa, which
 at the thoracic inlet (see p. 41).
reaches caudally to the pelvic inlet with its caudal extension, the caudal
 e) The position of the spleen (Lien, —11; see text-illustration) depends on 
 omental recess (50). The left lobe of the pancreas develops between the two
the degree of filling of the stomach. Spleen and stomach are loosely con-
lamellae of the deep wall; and between the lamellae of the superficial wall,
the spleen develops. The epiploic (omental) foramen (16) lies caudal to the 
 empty the ventral extremity ofthe spleen lies caudal to the left costal arch
liver, ventral to the caudal vena cava and dorsal to the portal vein. It is the
 and may reach beyond the midline to the right side of the body. At the
 Opening to the vestibule of the omental bursa (19), which, with the caudal
splenic hilus (Hilus lienis, —25) both serosal lamellae of the superficial
omental recess, forms the total omental bursa. The vestibule of the omen-
wall of the greater omentum are fixed. The more superficial lamella
tal bursa lies between the dorsal abdominal wall and the lesser omentum
 invests the spleen as its peritoneal cover. On the cut surface of the spleen
and, at the lesser curvature of the stomach, has access to the caudal recess
the red and white splenic pulp can barely be distinguished with the unaid-
of the omental bursa (Aditus ad recessum caudalem). Particular named
 ed eye or they may remain undetected. Red and white pulp have princi-
parts of the greater omentum are the gastrosplenic or gastrolienal ligament
 pally different functions. The red splenic pulp has its main function in the
(24) and the velar part of the greater omentum ( Velum omentale, see p. 51).
circulatory system of the blood. In this pulp the blood flows parly out-
The omental velum lies left in the body and runs between the deep wall of
side the blood vessels (open circulation of the spleen) and partially inside
the greater omentum and the descending mesocolon. It is the only part of
the wide-lumen thin-walled blood sinuses (closed circulation of the
the greater omentum that does not join in the formation and bordering of 
 spleen). In the red pulp the aged erythrocytes are broken down and the
the cavity of the omental recess.
 blood is stored (storage spleen). The numerous smooth muscle cells of the 
II. The ventral mesogastrium begins at the lesser curvature of the stomach
 splenic capsule and of the radiating splenic trabeculae may squeeze out
and ends at the diaphragm and the ventral abdominal wall between the
the blood as if from a sponge. Because the blood from the splenic vein
diaphragm and the umbilicus. The liver develops in the ventral mesogas-
po al jo ronu e se suu uads au ua id au s
trium. By the development of the liver, the lesser omentum is subdivided 
 pressure, especially of the portal circulation (see p. 57). The splenic artery
into a proximal (visceral) and a distal (parietal) part. The proximal part is
(A. lienalis), which originates from the celiac artery, releases several
the lesser omentum (20), which consists of the hepatogastric ligament (21)
branches to the elongate splenic hilus. The white splenic pulp (splenic
nodules and periarterial lymph sheath, PALS) is chiefly functional in the
 gastrium is the falciform ligament (23), which runs between the liver and
immune defense mechanisms of the body and has functions similar to the
the diaphragm and ventral abdominal wall In the fetus, in its free border,
lymph nodes (formation of lymphocytes and humoral defense substances;
the falciform ligament contains the umbilical vein. After birth, the umbili-
filter for the blood; recirculation of lymphocytes). The lymphocytes are
 cal vein and much of the falciform ligament undergo complete involution
 in the blood only a short time. After they leave the blood stream they pass
leaving only a fatty, caudal, remnant at the umbilicus and a short fold ven-
 to lymphatic organs like the spleen. Splenic vessels; see p. 57; splenic
tral to the caudal vena cava at the diaphragmatic face of the liver. The oth-
 nerves from the vagus and sympathetic nerves, see p. 49.
 er hepatic ligaments (triangular and coronary ligaments, see p. 58) are sec-
 ondarily developed peritoneal folds without significant vessels.
Dorsal extremity
....Pancreas
(lateral view)
19
15
21
 Diaphragm
Liver
(parietal
25 Hilus of spleen
(visceral
Stomach
surface)
 surface)
27
23
Spleen
(caudal recess)
Ventral extremity
52
 Mesentery and peritoneal cavity Q
(Right surface)
(see p. 51)
Legend :
29 Rectum
44 Vaginal process of peritoneum (left)
30Uterus
31 Pararectal fossa
46 liocecal fold
32 Urinary bladder
33 Lat. lig. of bladder
34 Round ig. of uterus (section)
35 Duodenocolic fold
50 Omental bursa
36Ovar
37 Right kidney
38 Liver
54 Greater curvature
40Gall bladde
Cata.
a
enacava
43 Serous cavity of mediastinum
cPortal vein
53
3. Stomach and Small Intestine, Pancreas
a) The EsopHAGus with its thoracic part lies in the mediastinum and cours-
esophagus, and pass to the gastric plexus. They supply the gastric glands
es throughthe esophageal hiatus ofthe diaphragm intothe abdominal cay-
and the musculature of the stomach. Synapse with the second, postgan-
ity. The very short abdominal part (25) enters the stomach immediately.
 glionic, neurons takes place in the wall ofthe stomach in the myenteric and
Both the thoracic and abdominal part have an outer serosal membrane and
submucosal plexuses.
differ by this from the cervical part, which is surrounded by an adventitia.
c) The PANcREAs (see also p. 57) consists of two parts with very different 
1
 b) The SToMAcH (VENTRIcULus, GASTER, —7) is the continuation of the
functions, the predominant exocrine portion and the small endocrine part.
 esophagus. The function of the stomach consists of a transitory storage of
The surface of the organ is lobular and partially nodular. The color
food and of the regulation of its further transport in small portions into the
si seauoued aui 'pau daap oi aled si pue yuanuoo pooq aui uo spuadap
 small intestine. The hydrochloric acid of the stomach has a disinfecting
roughly hook-shaped with a total length of about 25 cm in a medium-sized
action and functions to activate the pepsinogen formed by the gastric
 dog of 15 kg. The body of the pancreas (2) is adjacent to the cranial part
glands, which, as pepsin, initiates digestion. The stomach is glandular
 of the duodenum, and its associated left lobe (8) is directed left toward the
throughout and of unilocular, simple type in comparison with the stomach
 spleen. The left lobe is also called the splenic lobe or transverse branch. The
of othe domestic mammals. Like the wall of the intestine, the stomach wall 
right lobe of the pancreas (4) or duodenal lobe is on the right side within
3
 consists of a mucous membrane ( Tunica mucosa with a Lamina epithe-
the descending mesoduodenum. The exocrine portion of the pancreas orig-
lialis, propria and mscularis mucosae), submucosa (Tela submucosa) as a
 inates embryologically from two organ-primordia and, in agreement with
 gliding layer, muscular tunic and an external serosal tunic. The position
this, usually two excretory ducts are present. The pancreatic duct (21)
and shape of the stomach vary considerably depending on its fullness. The
merges either in common with or directly beside the ductus choledochus
stomach that is nearly empty lies with its longitudinal axis roughly trans-
(common bile duct, —19) on the major duodenal papilla (20) in the area of
verse to the longitudinal axis of the body. The fundus of the stomach con-
the body of the pancreas. The accessory pancreatic duct (24) terminates a
tacts the diaphragm. The stomach is separated by the liver from the ventral
 few cm farther caudally on the minor duodenal papila (23) at the cranial
abdominal wall and is almost entirely located in the intrathoracic part of
 part of the right pancreatic lobe. Both ducts communicate within the pan-
the abdominal cavity. With filling of the stomach, the pylorus projects far
creas and, in the case of the obliteration of the terminal part of the pan-
into the middle abdominal region to the level of the third lumbar vertebra.
 Creatic duct, which rarely occurs, only the opening of the accessory pan-
The stomach is then found with its broad surface at the lateral and ventral
 Creatic duct on the minor duodenal papilla remains. At the opening of the
 abdominal wall.
 pancreatic excretory ducts, their circular smooth muscle is reinforced to
 The cardiac part with its cardiac ostium (27) and the surrounding cardiac
form a sphincter by which a reflux of (activated) pancreatic juice and a self-
5
 sphincter muscle, is related on the left to the cardiac notch (26) and the
digestion of the organ is prevented. Within the pancreas, lipid-, carbohy-
greater curvature of the stomach (30) and the blind-sac-like fundus (28).
 drate-, and protein-splitting enzymes are formed. These are in part formed
To the right the cardiac part is related to the lesser curvature (15) and pass-
 as inactive precursors that become activated in the intestine by an entero-
es over without a distinct boundary to the body of the stomach (29). The 
 kinase. The pin-point-sized pancreatic islets (LANGERHANS islets) reach
gastric groove (14) is on the internal surface of the body of the stomach in
 a maximum diameter of only 0.5 mm and form altogether the endocrine
the region of the lesser curvature, where the angular notch (16) marks the
 portion, which represents more or less 1-2 % of the pancreas. The pan-
border to the pyloric part. The groove is flanked on both sides by longitu-
creatic islets have a dense capillary network, and their hormones (mainly
 dinal muscle bundles that are able to close the gastric groove to form a
 insulin and glucagon) are drained by the blood vascular system.
tube. The pyloric part consists of the thin-walled and wide-lumened pyloric 
 I. The blood supply is from the celiac artery (pancreatic branches of the
antrum (22), which at an internal transverse fold continues cone-like into
 splenic artery and cranial pancreaticoduodenal artery) and also from pan-
the tapering pyloric canal (17). The pylorus, which follows the pyloric
 creatic branches of the caudal pancreaticoduodenal artery of the cranial
canal, has increasing sphincter-like circular muscular bundles and commu-
mesenteric artery. Venous drainage is to the portal vein.
6
nicates with the duodenum at its pyloric ostium (18). On its internal sur-
face, the stomach wall is protected by a mucus layer that prevents self-
IL. Lymph drainage is to the pancreaticoduodenal lymph nodes, which are
digestion. The gastric mucous membrane is thrown up into centimeter-
located at the beginning duodenum. Besides these, lymph reaches the
thick gastric folds that are erased with increasing fullness of the stomach.
hepatic and jejunal lymph nodes.
 IL. The parasympathetic nerve supply is secretory to the exocrine pancreas
a diameter of a few millimeters, and are separated at the sides by gutter-like
 and is supported by hormones of the wall of the intestine. Sympathetic
depressions. On the gastric areas, gastric pits can just be seen with the
 nerves act to inhibit secretion.
 naked eye. Here the united secretory ducts of several gastric glands open.
The gastric mucous membrane has in its cardiac part the narrow, ring-like
 d) The digestion and absorption of nutrients take place within the SMALL
cardiac gland zone, at the fundus and body the zone of proper gastric
INTEsTINE (see also p. 57). Associated with this function, the internal intesti-
 glands, and in the pyloric part the pyloric gland region, which in the area
nal surface is considerably increased bycircular folds, intestinal villi, crypts
of the lesser curvature may extend onto the body of the stomach. The mus-
 of the mucous membrane and microvilli of its enterocytes. The small intes-
cular tunic contains besides the external longitudinal layer, which contin-
tine consists of duodenum, jejunum and ileum and extends from the
ues onto the esophagus and the duodenum, and the internal circular layer,
 pylorus to the opening ofthe ileum into the large intestine. It is about three
which is thickened to form the cardiac sphincter muscle (27) and the
 and one-half times the length of the body.
pyloric sphincter muscle (18), also obliquely coursing fibers (Fibrae obli-
 I. The duodenum is shaped like a hook and surrounds the pancreas. It 
quae). The latter are especially distinct in the fundus and are also distinct
begins with the cranial part (1), which ascends to the right and dorsal as
far as the porta of the liver and after this continues at the cranial duodenal
vature into the dorsal and at the lesser curvature of the stomach into the
flexure as the descending part. The descending part (3) bears at its begin-
10
ventral mesogastrium.
 I. The blood supply (see p. 57) of the stomach is provided by the vascular
breadths farther caudal the minor duodenal papilla is located. The
 arcades that course at the greater and lesser curvatures and give off numer-
 descending part continues at the caudal flexure as the transverse part (6).
ous coiled branches that straighten with increasing fullness of the stomach.
 The latter lies caudal to the cranial mesenteric artery and, after a transverse
The arterial arch at the lesser curvature joins the left and right gastric arter-
 course to the left across the midline, continues as the ascending part (5). At
ies. The arterial arch at the greater curvature of the stomach is formed by
the duodenojejunal flexure (10) the ascending part is continued as jejunum.
the left and right gastroepiploic arteries. In addition, the splenic artery fur-
 The boundary is at the cranial indistinct border of the duodenocolic fold
nishes short gastric branches to the dorsal left part ofthe greater curvature.
(11) where the mesentery becomes longer.
The gastric veins join the portal vein (see p. 57).
IL. The jejumum (9) is by far the longest portion of the small intestine and
IL. The lymph drainage is to the gastric lymph node, which is inconstant.
is suspended by a long mesojejunum that permits a wide distribution ofthe
When present, it lies toward the pyloric extremity of the lesser curvature.
jejunal loops between the stomach and the pelvic inlet.
Lymph drainage is also furnished by the splenic, pancreaticoduodenal and
IIL. The short ileum (13) begins at the indistinct free end of the ileocecal
hepatic lymph nodes.
fold (12). The site of termination of the arterial and venous antimesenteric
I. The nerve supply of the stomach is by the gastric plexus of the auto-
ileal branch indicates more distinctly the border with the jejunum. The
nomic nervous system. The parasympathetic constituents reach the stom-
ileum ends with a fairly straight course at the ileal ostium and surrounding
ach by way of the dorsal and ventral vagal trunks in company with the
ileal sphincter muscle at the junction with the ascending colon (see p. 56).
54
Stomach, Intestine and Pancreas
1  Cranial part of duodenum
7Stomach
2 Body of pancreas
8 Lef lobe of pancreas
 3 Descending part of duodenum
9 Jejunum
4 Right lobe of pancre
- 10  Duodenojejunal flexure 
- 11  Duodenocolic fold 
 5 Ascending part of duodenum
12 lleocecal fold
6 Transverse part of duodenum
13lleum
Legend :
Liver
d  Falciform lig. and
 Spleen
AsC. colon
 Uterine horn 
Greater omentum:
 round lig. of liver
Superficial wall (section)
Com. mesenteric v.
Transv. colon
Body of uterus
b
 Gastrosplenic lig.
Cran. mesenteric a.
m
Desc. colon
Urinary bladder
Deep wall (section)
Velum omentale
Cecum
9
C
f
n Ovary
 Median lig. of bladder 
Stomach
(sectioned visceral surface)
14 Gastric groove
Esophagus:
15 Lesser curvature
25
Abdominal part 
16 Angular notch
26   Cardiac notch
18 Pyloric ostium and 
17 Pyloric canal
27
Cardiac ostium and
pyloric sphincter m.
cardiac sphincter m.
19 Common bile duct 
28 Blind-sac-like fundus
 20 Major duodenal papilla
21 Pancreatic duct
22 Pyloric antrum
29 Body of stomach
 23 Minor duodenal papila
24 Accessory pancreatic duct
 30 Greater curvature
(see pp. 51, 57)
Legend :
A Mucous membrane and
 Muscular tunic:
Longitudinal layer
C
E
Int. oblique fibers
gastric folds
B
Ext. oblique fibers
Circular layer
Serous layer
55
4. Large Intestine, Blood Vessels of Stomach and Intestine
1  a) It is in the LARGE INTEsTINE that the rea bsorption of water, and dissolved
b) The ARTERIEs OF STOMACH AND INTESTINE originate from the celiac, cra-
 electrolytes together with the digestive juices, takes place. On the lumenal
nial and caudal mesenteric arteries, which are ventral branches of the
surface of the large intestine, villi are absent and the crypts of the large
abdominal aorta.
intestine are particularly deep. The mucosa bears longitudinal folds that
 disappear in cases of intestinal impaction and a two- to threefold increase
The celiac artery (22) divides into three main branches: The left gastric
in intestinal diameter. The canine large intestine is short and simply formed
artery (17) gives off an esophageal branch and supplies the left part of the
in comparison to this part of the gut in other domestic animals. The large
lesser curvature of the stomach. The splenic artery (21, —A. lienalis)
intestine is composed of cecum, colon, rectum and anal canal.
releases pancreatic branches, lienal or splenic branches (18) and short gas-
tric arteries (Aa. gastricae breves, —16) and the left gastroepiploic artery
I. The cecum is coiled like a corkscrew (H, see also text-illustration below
left) and consists of an apex, and a body that abuts on the ascending colon.
hepatic artery (5) passes to the Porta bepatis and, after release of the right
The cecum lies on the right side within the concavity of the C-shaped duo-
 gastric artery (4) for the pylorus-sided part of the lesser curvature of the
denum. The cecum can be considered as a diverticulum of the colon. Both
stomach and the hepatic branches (1) for the liver, continues as the gas-
parts of the large intestine are in communication at the cecocolic ostium,
troduodenal artery (3). The latter bifurcates into the right gastroepiploic
which is found beside the ileal ostium that also opens into the ascending
 artery (7) for the right-ventral part of the greater curvature and the cra-
colon.
 nial pancreaticoduodenal artery (6). The right gastroepiploic artery anas-
2
 II. The colon is shaped like a hook and commences on the right side from
tomoses atthe greater curvature with the same-named lef artery, the right
the cecocolic ostium with the short ascending colon (I - J), which ascends 
 gastric artery anastomoses at the lesser curvature with the same-named
to the level of the cranial mesenteric artery. At the right colic flexure, cra-
left artery and the cranial pancreaticoduodenal artery anastomoses on the
nial to the cranial mesenteric artery, the transverse colon (J - K) continues
 duodenum with the same named caudal vessel that is a branch of the cra-
its course, which again opens into the descending colon (K - L) at the left
 nial mesenteric artery.
 colic flexure on the left side.
The cranial mesenteric artery (23) releases the ileocolic artery (27), the
II. The rectum (L - M) commences at the pelvic inlet, about at the T-
 often double caudal pancreaticoduodenal artey (11), 12 - 15 jejunal arter-
 shaped termination of the caudal mesenteric artery into the left colic artery
ies (29), and ends as the ileal artery (14). The ileocolic artery branches into
and cranial rectal artery. Just cranial to its continuation as anal canal it is
the middle colic artery (24) for the trans verse colon, the right colic artery
dilated as the rectal ampulla.
(9) and the colic branch (Ramus colicus —10) for the ascending colon and
 IV. The anal canal (see text-illustration, below, right) consists of three
divides into the cecal artery (12) and the mesenteric ileal branch (13). The
3
zones, each lying caudal to the other: the columnar zone commences at the
 cecal artery is continued onto the ileum as the antimesenteric ileal branch
 anorectal line where the simple columnar epithelium of the intestinal
(15). The mesenteric ileal branch anastomoses with the ileal artery that
mucosa, which contains intestinal glands, terminates. The columnar zone
forms a common stem with the last jejunal artery.
is characterized by columnar folds of the anal mucosa. The mucous mem-
 The caudal mesenteric artery (30) gives off the cranial rectal artery (31) to
brane is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium and contains solitary
the rectum and the left colic artery (28), which anastomoses on the
lymph nodules and anal glands. The columns of mucous membrane cover
 descending colon with the middle colic artery.
longitudinally running blood vessels and form by this an erectile body that
supports closure of the anus. The intermediate zone (also called anocuta-
c) The PoRTAL VEiN (2, see also p. S9) is formed by three main
neous line) that follows can be seen as a 1 mm wide indistinct circular fold
branches*, the veins of which behave principally like the same-named
at the transition to the modified external cutis. The terminal cutaneous
arteries that they accompany. These are 1. The gastroduodenal vein (3).
4
 zone is about 4 cm wide and has at its beginning a few hairs, which increase
which at the level of the stomach opens into the portal vein from the right
in number caudally. Hepatoid circumanal glands are also present. Lateral-
side, and 2. the splenic vein (19), which passes from the left and opens into
ly between the anal canal and the external anal sphincter muscle are the
the portal vein about 4 cm caudal to the gastroduodenal vein. By reason of
 paranal sinuses that open laterally between the intermediate and the cuta-
its receiving the left gastric vein, the splenic vein is also designated the gas-
neous zone.
 trosplenic vein (V. gastrolienalis). 3. The strongest contribution to the por-
Anal closure is chiefly brought about by internal and external anal sphinc-
ter muscles. The internal anal sphincter muscle is an enlargement of the cir-
fluence of the cranial mesenteric vein (26) and caudal mesenteric vein (25).
cular muscle layer of the muscular tunic of the rectum. The cross-striated
 Lymphatic system of the intestinal canal (see p. 52)
 external anal sphincter muscle closes the anus and in doing so compresses
the paranal sinus, thus emptying it.
 Nerve supply of the intestine (see p. 60)
 Cecum and lleum
 Rectum and anal canal
(ventral view)
(dorsal view)
Ascending colon (section)
lleal ostium
Rectal ampulla
Cecum-
Ext. anal sphinter m.
 Int. anal sphincter m.
 Paranal sinus
lleum
Anal canal:
 Columnar zone
Intermediate zone
leocecal fold
Cutaneous zone
56
*) In another point of view, the portal vein begins at the confluence of the cranial and caudal mesenteric veins and receives the gastroduodenal and splenic
veins as tributaries. In this view, no *common mesenteric vein' is formed.
Intestine
( Ventral view)
Left med. lobe
 Right med. lob
Quadrate lob
Right lat. lobe
 Left lat. lobe
Caudate proce
1  Hepatic branches
2 Portal vein 
16 Short gastric a. and v.
4 Right gastric a. and v
5 Hepatic a
17 Left gastric a. and v.
6 Cran. pancreatico-
Stomach
duodenal a. and v.
18 Splenic brr.
 7 Right gastroepiploic 
19 Splenic v.
a. and v.
- 20 Left gastroepiploic
a. and v.
8Com.mesenteric v.
 21 Splenic a.
 22 Celiac a.
23 Cran. mesenteric a.
10 Colic branch
24 Middle colic a. and v.
11 Caud. pancreatico-
 25 Caud. mesenteric v.
duodenal a. and v.
26
Cran.me
sentericv
27 lleocolic a. and v.
12 Cecal a. and 
28 Left colic a. and v.
13 Mes
29 Jejunal aa. and ww.
14 lleal a. and v.
15 Antimesenteric ileal br.
30 Caud. mesenteric a
31 Cran. rectal a. and v.
Legend :
a
Gall bladder
b
Legend :
d
Common bile duct
A→B
 Cranial part of doudenum
Caud. vena cava
C
Descendingduodenum
Esophageal brr.
CID
 Transverse duodenum
 Major duodenal papilla
D-E
Ascending duodenum
6
Minor duodenal papilla
E-F
Jejunum
Body of pancreas
lleum
Right lobe of pancreas
H
Cecum
Left lobe of pancreas
Ascending colon
Deep circumflex liac a.
J-K
Transverse colon
(see pp. 51, 55, 59)
m
Ex. liac a.
K-—
Descending colon
Int. iliac a.
Rectum
 Median sacral a.
57
5. Liver and Gall Bladder
1
 a) The functions of the LivER (HePAR s. JEcuR) are manifold and correlate
 hepatic artery (17) with its branches conveys oxygenated blood to the liver.
with the remarkable size of the organ, which is about 3.3 % of the body
 After entering the liver, the portal vein divides into right and left branches
weight. Besides metabolic functions in the metabolism of carbohydrate,
that supply the liver chiefly The hepatic artery divides similar to the portal
 protein and fat, the liver has significant functions in inactivating hormones
vein; both send their blood within the hepatic lobule through the hepatic
and detoxifying foreign substances as well as therapeutic agents (for par-
capillaries, which as liver sinusoids are especially permeable. The venous
ticulars, see clinical-functional anatomy and textbooks of biochemistry).
 blood from the liver sinusoids reaches the center of the liver lobule and the
Prenatally, this largest of the internal organs has an even greater share of
 central vein and after this by way of collecting veins into the hepatic veins,
the total body weight; because in the fetus there is in addition the impor-
which, at the dorsal border of the liver, open into the embedded caudal
tant function of blood cell formation.
vena cava (19).
The position of the liver is predominantly intrathoracic. The right lateral 
lobe of the liver and the caudate process of the caudate lobe abut on the
the description of the blood supply of the liver: Within the portal circula-
right kidney at the level ofthe last rib. The lateral border of the liver cours-
es roughly parallel to the costal arch. Only the ventral portion of the liver
beds. Initially it flows through the first capillary bed in the intestinal wall
is extrathoracic, resting on the falciform ligament with its abundant fat tis-
and is collected finally in the tributaries of the portal vein. After this it
sue.
flows through the second capillary bed in the liver lobules. The portal vein
 of the liver collects blood from organs of the gastrointestinal tract and the
The surface of the liver with its smooth convex diaphragmatic surface is in
 spleen. This blood has been carried to these unpaired organs by way of
contact with the diaphragm and matches the form of the diaphragmatic
 unpaired arteries: celiac, cranial and caudal mesenteric arteries.
cupola. Its concave visceral surface is directed to the abdominal organs.
 Stomach, duodenum, colon and the right kidney bring about impressions
 The lymph drainage of the liver is to the hepatic (portal) lymph nodes ( 8),
on the plastic, firm-elastic surface of the organ. Of the borders of the liver,
which are located near the porta.
the dorsal border is blunt and bears the esophageal impression (16); where-
 The sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve supply is by the hepatic
as, the other margins of the healthy organ are sharp.
 plexus, the constituents of which enter the liver at the porta in the compa-
I. The lobes of the liver of the dog are well demarcated by deep interlobar
ny of the hepatic artery.
fissures (13). The resulting distinct lobation is supposed to correlate with
The path of the bile (see text-illustration) commences intralobularly in the
the clearly expressed dynamics of the vertebral column.
liver with bile canaliculi, which, lacking their own walls, lie between the
The lobation of the liver follows according to the comparative anatomical
hepatic cells. Interlobularly the bile of the liver is first drained by way of
point of view. From that point of view, the liver is subdivided by two lines
smaller hepatic ducts and finally by several isolated hepatic ducts (4). Out-
that extend from its dorsal to its ventral border. The left line runs
side the liver, at the opening of the last hepatic duct, the cystic duct (3) of
between the dorsally located esophagus and the ventrally situated round
the gall bladder is continued by the ductus choledochus (5), which has a
ligament of the liver, which, in the mature dog, is usually absent. The right
sphincter muscle (M. sphincter ductus choledochus). The ductus chole-
line connects the caudal vena cava, which is dorsal and the ventrally locat-
 dochus opens on the major duodenal papilla.
ed gall bladder. Between the two lines, the quadrate lobe (11) is ventral to
the Porta bepatis and the caudate lobe is dorsal. The caudate lobe consists
of the large caudate process (7), which is connected to the right kidney by
the hepatorenal ligament, and the small, left-projecting papillary process
(15), which is ventral to the lesser omentum. Lateral to the connecting
Hepatic duct and gall bladder
lines are right and left lobes, which are separated by intralobar fissures
into a right medial lobe (2) and a right lateral lobe (6) and a left medial
(12) and left lateral lobe (14).
The lobulation of the liver is not so distinct as in the pig; nevertheless it is
( Visceral surface)
easily recognized on the hepatic surface. The hepatic lobules have a dia-
meter of 1 - 1.S mm and a height of 1.5 - 2 mm. The afferent blood ves-
sels, branches of the portal vein and hepatic artery, surround the periphery
of the lobules and mark the corner points of a hexagonal, classical hepatic
(right)
(left)
lobule. The central vein is central within the liver lobule. It represents the
first part of the hepatic venous system (hepatic veins), which drains blood
from the liver (on other principles of classification, for example, portal
venous lobules, see textbooks of histology).
IL. The ligaments of the liver (see also p. S9, below) fix the organ predo-
minantly to the diaphragm. The right and left triangular ligaments fix the
right and left lateral lobes. The coronary ligament that continues medially
from them fixes the right and left medial lobes. The hepatorenal ligament
(9) runs between the caudate process and the right kidney. The falciform
ligament (10) is the distal portion of the ventral mesogastrium. In the fetus
the umbilical vein of the liver runs in the free border of the falciform liga-
ment from the umbilicus to the liver. In the mature dog, the umbilical vein
is lost, the round ligament of the liver does not persist, and the falciform
ligament is present only as a short fold ventral to the caudal vena cava as
evel of the umbilicus. The Area muda of the liver is a zone of adhesion
where the liver is joined to the diaphragm by connective tissue; this area is
free of peritoneum and lies to the right and left of the caudal vena cava as
it passes through the liver. The lesser omentum is subdivided into the hepa-
toduodenal and hepatogastric ligaments, which originate from the named
origins and converge to the porta ofthe liver (Porta bepatis; see p. S3). The 
b) The GALL BLADpER (1) stores the bile insofar as it has not flowed direct-
ductus choledochus runs in the free border of the hepatoduodenal ligament 
and, beside it, are the portal vein and hepatic artery.
ly into the duodenum. In the gall bladder, the golden colored bile is first
dehydrated. This makes the bile thicker and changesits color to dark green.
IL. The following structures pass to and from the liver at the porta (Porta
The gall bladder lies between the right medial lobe of the liver and the
hepatis): portal vein (functional blood vessel), the hepatic artery (nutrient
quadrate lobe. In the adult dog the fundus of the gall bladder extends to
blood vessel), hepatic ducts, vagal and sympathetic branches as well as
the diaphragm. The body of the gall bladder is continued by a constrict-
lymph vessels that pass to the hepatic (portal) lymph nodes.
ed part, the neck of the gall bladder. The latter continues as the cystic
The blood supply (see opposite page, lower figures) ofthe liver is from two
duct. The bile may traverse the cystic duct in different directions: During
 sources: With respect to size, the portal vein (18) with its branches is the
 digestion, into the duodenum; in intervals between digestion, from the liver
2
main supply, providing venous blood rich in nutrients. The small calibered
for storage in the gall bladder.
58
Liver (Visceral surface)
(ventral)
10 Falciform lig. and 
Round lig. of liver
11
Quadrate lobe
12 Left medial lobe 
 Gall bladder
 13 Interlobar fissure
 2 Right medial lobe
14 Left lateral lobe
3 Cystic duct
20
 4 Hepatic ducts 
5 Common bile duct
6 Right lateral lobe
 16 Esophageal impression
7 Caudate process of caudate lobe 
- 17 Hepatic a.
8 Hepatic portal Inn.
18 Portal v.
9 Hepatorenal lig.
19 Caud. vena cava
(see pp. 57, 61)
Legend :
(dorsal)
 20 Lesser omentum (section)
25 Splenic a.
30 Right kidney 
34 Costal part of diaphragm 
21 Esophagus and vagal tr.
26 Celiac a.
31 Adrenal gland
 35 Cran. abdom. a. and v. and
22 Gastroduodenal a.
27 Cran mesenteric a.
 32 Left crus of lumbar part 
cran.iliohypogasric n.
23 Right gastric a.
28 Renal a. and v.
of diaphragm
 36 Caud. iliohypogastric n.
 24 Left gastric a.
29 Renal impression
33 Aorta
 37 lioinguinal n.
Visceral surface
Diaphragmatic surface 
(Portal v. and hepatic a.)
(Hepatic w.)
10
10
(right)
(left)
(right)
4
29
Legend :
A
 Left triangular lig.
Portal vein:
Hepatic a.
Hepatic w.:
B
Right triangular lig .
49
Right lat. br.
Left hepatic v
C
Coronary lig. of iver
Right med. br.
Middle hepatic v.
Umbilical part 
Left br.
Right hepatic y.
Transverse part
Right acc. hepatic v.
59
6.
 Autonomic Nervous System, Abdominal Aorta, Caudal Vena Cava, Sublumbar Muscles
and the Lumbar Plexus
 The abdominal organs are shifted to the right side to demonstrate the left lumbar sympathetic nerve trunk and the abdominal aorta with its large originat-
ing intestinal arteries. For this dissection, first the kidney with its peritoneal cover is loosened from the underlying tissues to permit access to the retro-
yunt oauredwas jequni aul pue euog aul aoeds juoad
a) The LuMBAR SYMPATHETIc TRUNK lies in the lumbar region, medially,
level of the 2nd lumbar vertebra. The ovarian artery (11) or, respectively,
beside the psoas minor muscle. From the first three lumbar ganglia two to
testicular artery originates at the level of the 3rd lumbar vertebra. The cau-
three thin nerves are released; these form the lumbar splanchnic nerves. In
dal mesenteric artery (15) leaves the aorta at the level ofthe 4rh lumbar ver-
the sacralregion, right andleftsympathetic trunks, including the sacral gan-
tebra, and can be observed easily by putting tension on the mesentery of
glia, join to form an unpaired sacral sympathetic nerve trunk with the impar
the large intestine at the level of the colon-rectum junction. The deep cir-
ganglion thatiscontained within it Thecaudalcontinuation is the unpaired
 cumflex iliac artery (17) arises a short distance caudal to the caudal mesen-
coccygeal sympathetic nerve trunk with its unpaired ganglia. In contrast to
teric artery at the level of the 4rh lumbar vertebra, at a right angle to the
pue jees hequn isei au 'yunu saueduas iequni aui jo jed isy au
aorta, cranial to the aorta’s dividing into the external iliac arteries (19) and
coccygeal ganglia do not receive segmentally coursing white communicat-
 internal iliac arteries (21), which is at the level of the Sch lumbar vertebra.
ing rami; instead, the sympathetic nerves extend longitudinally within the
lumbar sympathetic nerve trunk through the sacral- to the coccygeal sym-
d) The CAuDAL VeNA CAvA (18) lies to the right of the aorta and receives
 iu idasxa isaaie paua-aoqe aui le ot aaies ae ieu suia
pathetic nerve trunk. Predominantly in the lumbar sympathetic trunk gan-
 celiac, cranial and caudal mesenteric arteries are, at their origin, unaccom-
glia or only in the prevertebral ganglia that follow distally (see below) do
 panied by veins.
synapses take place from myelinated preganglionic to unmyelinated post-
 ganglionic neurons. In comparison to the parasympathetic system, the
 e) The SuBLuMBAR MuscLEs are located ventrolateral to the lumbar verte-
synapse with the postganglionic neurons of the sympathetic system is
 bral column and are supplied by ventral branches of the lumbar nerves.
brought about mainly near the central nervous system. After the synapse of
ui un is aui ne seio (zi asn uou sepenb au
the preganglionic neurons within the ganglia of the sympathetic nerve
 vertebrae and the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae and cours-
trunk, the unmyelinated postganglionic neurons again contact the segmen-
es to its region of insertion, which extends from the alar spine to the auric-
tal (somatic) spinal nerves as grey communicating branches and contribute
ular surface of the iliac bone. The psoas major muscle (22) arises from the
sympathetic fibers to them. The grey and white communicating branches
vertebral end ofthe lasttwo ribs and from the lumbar vertebrae and, at the
( Rami communicantes grisei et albi) can take their course close to the gan-
 level of the pelvis, joins the iliacus muscle to form the iliopsoas muscle (see
 glion of the sympathetic trunk either separately or in a common nerve trunk.
ass au ie asu ot sun ien ai sasia sosdo aui ie d
The lesser number of myelinated preganglionic neurons, which pass through
trochanter of the femur (femoral bone). The iliacus muscle (24) takes ori-
the ganglia of the sympathetic nerve trunk without synapse, run in the lum-
 gin from the sacropelvic surface of the ilium and from the lateral surface of
bar splanchnic nerves (13) and the sacral splanchnic nerves, and also
the insertion tendon of the psoas minor muscle. The psoas minor muscle
through the aortic plexus (9) and the adrenal plexus (4), to the prevertebral
(14) arises from the last three thoracic and first four lumbar vertebrae
plexus and the prevertebral ganglia within it. The prevertebral ganglia are
where it lies ventral to the psoas major muscle. It terminates with a flat ten-
the celiac ganglion (1) and the cranial mesenteric ganglion (2) (which with
 don at the psoas minor tubercle of the ilium.
their associated plexuses collectively form the celiacomesenteric plexus) and
 f) The LuMBAR PLExus of the somatic nervous system (see also text-illus-
the caudal mesenteric ganglion (15). It is in these ganglia, which lie at the 
tration) is formed from nLv 3 by ventral branches of the lumbar nerves and
origin of the same-named artery, that the synapse onto the postganglionic
is connected with the sacral plexus to form the lumbosacral plexus. The
unmyelinated neurons takes place. The postganglionic neurons form peri-
 nerve plexus lies within the sublumbar muscles and is seen only by remov-
arterial plexuses in the adventitia of the arteries and reach the internal
 ing the muscles (see p. 71). The cranial iliohypogastric nerve (nLv1, —3)
organs with the ramifications of the arteries. The lumbar splanchnic nerves
 and caudal iliohypogastic nerve (nLv 2, —7), which as segmental nerves are
 pass caudoventrally from the lumbar sympathetic nerve trunk to reach the
not derived from the lumbar plexus, and the first plexus nerve ilioinguinal
caudal mesenteric ganglion. From the caudal mesenteric ganglion, sympa-
nerve -nLv2 and 3, —8) emerge between the psoas minor and quadratus
thetic nerves pass as the hypogastric nerves (25) to reach the pelvic plexus
lumborum muscles. After a subperitoneal course, they penetrate the trans-
within the pelvic cavity (see also p. 49).
 verse abdominal muscle about 3 cm lateral to the quadratus lumborum and
 b) The PARASYMPATHETIC SYSTEM OF THE SACRAL SPINAL CoRD Sends its
divide into a ventrolateral (vl) and ventromedial (vm) branch. The vl
1
 nerves in retrograde fashion into the abdominal cavity up to the transverse
branches penetrate the abdominal muscles in an extended oblique course
colon. The parasympathetic supply of the organs situated cranial to the
 and supply the ventrolateral abdominal cutis (see p. 33). The vm branches
transverse colon is from the vagus nerve that, with its dorsal and ventral
 supply the abdominal muscles and the peritoneum. They pass ventrally on
vagal trunks, enters the abdominal cavity, distributing branches to the
the lateral surface of the transverse abdominal muscle to the rectus abdo-
diaphragmatic face of the stomach, to the liver and duodenum, and giving 
 minis muscle and, near the linea alba, may reach the abdominal skin and
 off branches to the celiacomesenteric (solar) plexus also.
the mammary gland. The lateral cutaneous femoral nerve (nLv 3 and 4, ——
16) emerges between the psoas major and minor muscles and with the deep
c) The ABpoMINAL AoRTA (10) releases the segmentally arranged paired lum-
circumflex iliac artery and vein, extends laterally through the transversus
bar arteries from its dorsal surface. These pass in company with the
 abdominis and internal abdominal oblique muscles. This branch supplies
veins to the lumbar vertebral column and associated soft tissues. From the
the skin inthe area of the fold of the flank. The genitofemoral nerve (nLv3
lateral wall of the aorta originate the common trunk of the caudal phrenic
 and 4, —20) appears medial to the terminal tendon of the poas minor mus-
artery and cranial abdominal artery as well as the renal, ovarian or testic-
cle. It accompanies the external iliac artery laterally and divides ventrally
ular, and deep circumflex iliac arteries. The same-named veins accompany
 on this artery into a weak femoral and a strong genital branch. The femoral
all of these arteries. From the ventral wall of the aorta originate the
 branch traverses the vascular lacuna to reach the femoral canal. The strong
unpaired celiac, cranial and caudal mesenteric arteries. In the initial por-
genital branch, after having traversed the inguinal canal, supplies the skin
tion oftheir course to the internal organs these arteries are unaccompanied
 of the scrotum and prepuce or, respectively, the inguinal mammary gland
by veins. The celiac artery (1) originates immediately caudal to the aortic
 complex. The femoral nerve (nLv 4 - 5, —23) passes within the iliopsoas
hiatus at the level of the 13th thoracic vertebra. A little caudal to that the
muscle through the muscular lacuna and, before entering the quadriceps
At the level of the 2nd lumbar vertebra the cranial abdominal artery (5)
(nLv 4 - 6, —26) passes lateral to the iliopsoas muscle, crosses the ilium
 originates from the aorta jointly with the caudal phrenic artery (not labeled
 medially and, after perforating the levator ani muscle, extends through the
in the figure). The renal artery (6) follows immediately caudal, still at the
 obturator fora men to reach the adductor muscles.
Lumbar plexus
(lateral view)
Cy
16
Sacral plexus
2320
60
 Abdominal cavity and pelvis Q
(caudoventral view)
(right)
(left)
1 Celiac ggl. and celiac a
 2 Cran. mesenteric ggl. and a.
 3 Cran.liohypogastric n.
4 Adrenal plexus 
 5 Cran. abdominal a.
6 Renal a.
39
 7 Caud. liohypogastric n.
1
 8 llioinguinal n.
 9 Aortic plexus
10 Abdominal aorta
11 Ovarian a.-
12 Quadratus lumborum m. -
 13 Lumbar splanchnic nn.
14 Psoas minor m.
15 Caud. mesenteric ggl. and a.
16 Lat. cutaneous femoral n.
17 Deep circumflex iliac a.
18 Caudal vena cav
19 Ext. iliac a.
 20 Genitofemoral n.
 21 Int iliac a.
 22 Psoas major m.(section) -
 23 Femoral n
24 Illiacus m.
30
 25 Hypogastric n.
26 Obturator n.
Legend :
 27 Transverse abdom. m.
28 Erector spinae m.(section)
29 Sacrocaudalis Ccoccygeus ]
dors. lat. m.
Auricular surface of sacrum
(see pp. 49, 63, 71)
32
Supf. gluteal m.(section)
Greater splanchnic n.
 34 Intertransversarius dors. caud.
C
Sympathetic trunk (lumbar)
[coccygis] m.
Ggl. of sympathetic trunk
Coccygeus m. (section)
Lesser splanchnic n.
36 Diaphragm (right crus)
d
Lumbar a.
37 Aortic lumbar In.
Com. iliac v.
38 Adrenal gland 
e
39 Kidney
会
Int. iliac v.
40
Ureter
F
liolumbar a. and v.
41
Cisterna chyli
Lumbosacral trunk 
42 Med. iliac In.
Cran. gluteal a., v. and n.
Lat. caudal [coccygeal]
 aaud gluteal a. y and n.
a.,v.and n
45 Round lig. of bladder
46 Levator ani m.(section)
k
Dors. perineal a. and v.
47 Perineales mm.
Pelvic plexus
48 Constrictor vestibuli m.
m
Sciatic n.
49
Constrictor vulvae m.
n
 Int. pudendal a. and v.
50
 Descending colon 
and pudendal n.
51 Rectum
Ventr. perineal a. and v.
52 Uterine horn 
and supf. perineal n.
P
Urethral a. and v.
Vagina
A. and v. of clitoris
55 Linea alba
and dors. n. of dlitoris 
56 Illiofemoral In.
Left colic a
57
Int. abdom. oblique m.
Cran. rectal a.
Rectus abdom. m
Median sacral a.
 Urinary bladder
Vaginal a. and v.
60 Pelvic symphysis
Uterine a. and v.
61
 Symphysial tendon
W
 Caud. vesical a. and v.
62 Gracilis m.
X
 Deep femoral a. and v.
63 Paranal sinus (section)
Ext. pudendal a. and v.
64 Crus of clitoris
Z  Caud. epigastric a. and v.
61
Chapter 7: Urinary and Genital Organs, Pelvis
1. Urinary Organs
 After double ligation between colon and rectum with preservation of the caudal mesenteric ganglion, the intestine is transected. The cranial part of the
body, including the gastrointestinal canal with liver and pancreas is removed. For the study of the kidney, median, paramedian, sagittal and transverse
 sections are performed. The ymph nodes illustrated (sacral, -8; medial iliac, -7 and lumbar aortic lymph nodes, -6) and the adrenal glands (1) will first 
 be identified. They are described in more detail on p. 68.
Of the urinary organs, the kidneys, the ureter and the urinary bladder are
 Il. Autonomic innervation of the kidney is by sympathetic and parasym-
 described here and the urethra later,in common with the genital organs.
pathetic nerve fibers that proceed chiefly from the abdominal aortic plexus.
 a) The KioNEys lie retroperitoneally within the retroperitoneal space (4).
 an a ue sd uu ai uaamq ssios (s) aian aui (a
1
2
The left kidney lies ventral to the first three lumbar vertebrae and the right
 der. It lies retroperitoneally, adjacent to the sublumbar muscles. Its caudal
kidney a half vertebral length more cranial. Classified according to com-
 portion is located within a fold of peritoneum, crosses the deferent duct in
parative anatomical criteria, the canine kidney belongs to the smooth uni-
the male dog and traverses the wall of the neck of the urinary bladder in a
papillary type of kidney. Its renal lobes (23), which in some marine mam-
long oblique course.
mals (e.g., seals) are separated from each other and are attached to the
renal branches of the ureter like grapes on a stalk, show a fusion of the cor-
tical areas in the dog, which results in a smooth surface of the kidney. The
Renal arteries and veins
renal medulla (24) retains a recognizable lobar arrangement. The pyramid-
like medullary substance (renal pyramid, —25) of the renal lobe consists of
a peripheral pyramidal base (or external part, —27) and a central renal
 Fibrous capsule
 papilla (or intermal part, 26), which projects into the internal hollow
 Stellate w.
space of the kidney (renal sinus, -14). In the median plane of the kidney the
renal papilae are fused to form what may appear as a large, single, com-
 Efferent glomerular
mon renal papilla (renal crest, —12). On both sides of the median plane of
arteriole
the kidney, parts of the renal papillae that are not fused project as individ-
Renal corpuscule
ual renal pyramids between the pelvic recesses (19) into the renal sinus. The
(subcapsular)
-den asodpe aut anss iej jo ansdeo ieuaxa ue u pappaqua are saupi
Collecting tubule
sule (2). The fibrous capsule (13) that follows internally is, after section,
Afferent glomerular
easily removed from the normal renal parenchyma, but this is not possible
arteriole
in certain pathological conditions. In the renal cortex (18), which is about
Capillary bed
two centimeters thick, renal corpuscles can be seen as pinpoint circum-
17 Interlobular a. and v.
scribed vascular spaces. A renal corpuscle consists of a coil of blood capil-
Glomerulus 
laries, the glomerulus, and a surounding capsule, into which the primary
Renal corpuscule
urine - an ultrafiltrate of the blood plasma - passes. The renal corpuscle,
(juxtamedullary)
with the proximal convoluted tubule that passes from it and the following
16 Arcuate a. and v.
nephron (see text-illustration). It is into the renal corpuscle of the nephron
Arteriola recta (vera)
that the primary urine (about 150 liters daily) is filtered, and it is within its
Venula recta 
tubular system that the resorption of fluid, including glucose and elec-
Arteriola recta (spuria)
trolytes from the primary urine, takes place. In the opposite direction waste
products, especially nitrogen containing end-products of protein metabo-
15 Interlobar a. and v.
ism, in particular, urea, and also certain drugs, are excreted. A connecting
tubule joins the nephron to a collecting tubule. Several arched collecting
Nephron loop
tubules join like the branches of a tree to form a straight collecting tubule
(OI ,NH))
that unites with other collecting tubules to form a papillary duct. Within the
collecting tubules, owing to an osmotic pressure difference, and under the
influence of the antidiuretic hormone of the posterior hypophysis, a further
resorption of water is realized from the filtrate. Thus is formed the secondary
(sao jeuan eded jeuau uowo aui uo (ap a s'l inoqe) aun
numerous papillary ducts discharge. They are predominantly single, with
the result that an elongate sieve-like plate (Area cribrosa —21), is easily seen
 on viewing the renal crest (22). At both ends of the area cribrosa there is an
ca. 2 mm long slit-like opening, the common papillary duct (20), which
takes up several papillary ducts before its opening on the crest.
The renal pelvis (11 lies within the renal sinus. In the area ofthe renal hilus
 Papillary duct
it is separated from the renal vessels that enter there, and the renal
parenchyma, by fat tissue and at the perimeter of the common renal papil-
la (renal crest) its external adventitia is fused with the fine connective tis-
21 Area cribrosa
 sue that joins the tubules of the renal parenchyma. Its internal layer of
epithelium is continued onto the renal crest and is continuous with the
 epithelium lining the papillary ducts that discharge there.
I. The blood vascular system of the kidney (see also text-illustration) has
 complicated topographical relations to the urine conducting, looplike renal
tubules. The renal artery (3) divides into interlobar arteries (15), which run
between the lobes and are continued by the arcuate arteries (16). The lat-
ter course arch-like at the interface between cortex and medulla. From the
arcuate artery, interlobular arteries (17) pass in a peripheral direction.
They supply predominantly the renal cortex and demarcate a lobule on
either side. (Grossly, the renal lobules can scarcely be distinguished as sub-
units of the renal lobes.) The interlobular arteries give off the afferent
 glomerular arterioles, which at the vascular pole of each renal corpuscle are
c) The URINARY BLADDER (see also p. 64) lies clothed by the peritoneum.
continued by a glomerulus. The efferent glomerular arteriole originates
 From it the median ligament of the urinary bladder (10) courses to the
from the vascular pole of the glomerulus and is continued by a dense cap-
 ventral midine and thus to the linea alba. During fetal development the
illary net in the area of the renal tubules. The first capillary net (glomeru-
urinary bladder leads to the embryonal urinary duct (urachus) and by
lus) filters the primary urine and is found within the arterial limb of the
that means to the umbilicus. The paired lateral ligament of the urinary
blood vascular system. It is designated the glomerular capillary network.
bladder (9) extends to the dorsolateral body wall and contains the umbil-
 From the second capillary network (renal tubule net) the venous drainage
of the kidney commences.
 ical artery, which in many cases is obliterated to form the round ligament
 of the bladder —9) and in other cases supplies blood to the urinary blad-
II. The lymph from the kidney drains into the lumbar aortic lymph nodes.
 der by cranial vesical arteries.
62
Abdominal cavity and urinary organs
1 Adrenal glands
Legend :
 2 Adipose capsule-
 Diaphragm
 3 Renal a. and v.
b
Esophagus
Caud.vena cava
4 Retroperitoneal space
d
 Celiac a.
Aorta
Cran. mesenteric a.
Ribs
5 Ureter-
 Cran. abdominal v.
 Peritoneum (section)
6 Lumbar aortic Inn.
Abdominal mm.
Testicular a. and v.
Psoas minor m.
m
Caud. mesenteric a.
n
Deep circumflex iliac a. and y.
 7 Medial iliac Inn.
Ext. iliac a.
Int. iliac a.
8 Sacral lInn.
Median sacral a.
Rectum
 Deferent duct 
 9 Lat. lig. of urinary bladder and
Vaginal ring 
round lig. of urinary bladder -
1 0  Median lig. of urinary bladder
Left kidney
(see p. 69)
(Sagittal section)
(Median and 
Transverse section
Paramedian section
 paramedian section)
11
 Renal pelvis
12 Renal crest
15lnterlobaraa.
13 Fibrous capsule
16
Arcuate aa.
17
 Interlobular aa. -
14 Renal sinus
Sagittal section
 Paramedian section
Median section
18 Renal cortex
19 Pelvic recess
 20 Common papillary duct 
21 Area cribrosa-
22 Renal crest
23 Renal lob
25 Renal pyramid 
26
 Internal part -
 External part-
63
2. Urinary Bladder and Peritoneal Relationships of the Genital Organs
 In the male dog on the right side of the body the scrotum (see clinical-functional anatomy) is cut, parallel to the raphe scroti with attention to the tunica
dartos. The smooth musculature of the tunica dartos is also present in the scrotal septum, which separates the two vaginal tunics with their enclosed
testes. The peritoneal vaginal tunic including the laterally adjacent (external) cremaster muscle and surrounding external spermatic fascia as well as the
 internal spermatic fascia is loosened from the scrotum and, by a longitudinal section, opened up to the vaginal ring. The bitch is treated similarly, insofar
as a vaginal process is present.
a) The URINARY BLADDER (see also p. 62 and text-illustration) has a Cranial
 diaphragm tothe ovary. The caudal gubernaculum (Lig. inguinale ovarij fol
 apex (Vertex), a central body (Corpus vesicae) and a caudal neck (Cervix
lows caudally from thesuspensory ligament. Atthejunctionofthe uterine tube
vesicae). Dorsally, at the neck of the bladder, the ureters, converging, tra-
with the horn of the uterus, it is subdivided into the proper ligament of the
verse the wall obliquely. They lie just deep to the mucosa and create inter-
ovary (2), which extends between the ovary and the terminationofthe uterine
 nally a moderate swelling, the ureteral columns (Columnae uretericae),
tube, and the round igament ofthe uterus(Lig.teres uteri, —3)thatfollows the
that can be traced caudally to the opening of each ureter (Ostium ureteris)
 proper ligament. The round ligamentis fixed laterallytothe mesometrium and
into the bladder. Ureteral folds continue caudally from the openings, unit-
 passes through the vaginal ring (5) up to the end of the vaginal process of the
ing at the transition of the urinary bladder to the urethra, the internal ure-
thral ostium. It is here that the ureteral folds are continued as the median
 25 % ofthe bitches on one or both sides of the body, the connectivetissue por-
dorsal urethral crest that, in male dogs, extends to the seminal collculus
 tion of the round ligament of the uterus passes without peritoneal coverage
and, in the bitch, to the end of the urethra.
 through the inguinal space and may reach the pubic region.
 The blood supply of the urinary bladder is chiefly from the caudal vesical
 As only a slight ovarian descensus has taken place, the ovaries are found
artery, which originates from the prostatic or, respectively, vaginal artery
near the location of their development, and the peritoneal folds that
and runs from the pelvic cavity to the urinary bladder. The total venous
 approach the ovary from cranial and caudal remain intact during ontoge-
drainage passes to the caudal vesical vein (see also p. 71).
 nesis and are not obliterated.
The lymph vessels pass to the sacral lymph nodes.
IL. The peritoneal folds of the internal genital organs of the male dog are
 The autonomic innervation is from the pelvic plexus. Within the wall of the
the mesorchium (proximal and distal), mesoductus deferens, mesofunicu-
urinary bladder intramural nerve plexuses containing ganglion cells regu-
lus and mesepididymis. The proximal mesorchium (15) is found in the peri-
ate the contraction of the muscular wall.
toneal cavity as the vascular fold (Pica vasculosa) containing the testicular
vessels. It passes through the vaginal ring (5) into the vaginal process of the
peritoneum. Here, in the vaginal canal, the proximal mesorchium is united
5
with the mesoductus deferens (or fold of the deferent duct —Plica ductus
Apex
 deferentis, —24), both proceeding from that part of the mesorchium, the
(ventral view)
Body
mesofumiculus (23), that is continuous with the parietal vaginal tunic (the
canal and the vaginal cavity that follows caudally have (comparable to the
Ureter 
peritoneal cavity) a parietal vaginal tunic (Tunica vaginalis parietalis, 22
Deferent duct
and 25; designated periorchium and perifuniculus in the figure), from
Opening of ureter
 Trigone of bladder
which the peritoneal lamellae containing the testicular vessels and nerves
Neck 
- Ureteral fold
and the ductus deferens (Mesorchium and Mesoductus, respectively) fold
Prostate-
 Urethral crest
 off, and a visceral vaginal tunic (Tumica vaginalis visceralis, —21; desig-
Opening of deferent dl
- Seminal colliculus 
nated epiorchium in the figure) that forms a thin serous covering upon the
testis and epididymis.
The mesofuniculus is that part of the mesorchium that is between the origin
-Urethra
 of the mesorchium from the parietal vaginal tunic and the origin of the
 mesoductus from the medial side of the mesorchium (see p. 65).
 b) The PeRIToNEAL FoLDs of the internal genital organs of the female dog are
The spermatic cord (Funiculus spermaticus) consists of seven structures: tes-
subdivided into mesovarium (proximal and distal), mesosalpinx and meso-
ticular artery, testicular vein, autonomic nerve plexus and testicular lymph
metrium and gonadal ligaments. Mesovarium, mesosalpinx and mesometri-
 vessels, deferent duct with deferent artery and vein, 
—a- g and their peri-
um collectively are named the broad ligament of the uterus (Lig. latum uteri).
 toneal coverings, the mesorchium and mesoductus. Close to the testicle, at the
I. The mesovarium (6) conducts the ovarian artery and vein to the ovary.
Near the ovary, the mesosalpinx (9) splits off laterally, the point of its ori-
is continued by the distal mesorchium (19). Between these two peritoneal
 gin defining a subdivision of the mesovarium into a long proximal meso-
folds,the testicular bursa (or epididymal sinus, —20) is found. The opening
varium (7) and a short distal mesovarium (8) the epithelium (mesothelium)
into the bursa is lateral.
 of which is continued onto the ovary as a surface epithelium (germinal
 IV. The gonadal ligaments of the male dog are subdivided into the cranial
 epithelium). Between the two lamellae of the mesosalpinx there is lateralto
 and caudal gubernaculum. The cranial gubernaculum (suspensory liga-
the ovary the thin terminal portion, and medial to the ovary the thicker ini-
ment of the testis, -
14) is more or less completely reduced. Should it occur,
tial portion, of the uterine tube, which courses in an arc around the ovary.
it extends laterally from the proximal mesorchium and can be followed lat-
 The short distal mesovarium with the suspended ovary and the long mesos-
eral to the kidney extending toward the diaphragm. The caudal guberna-
alpinx form together the wall of the ovarian bursa (10). The bursa exhibits
 culum (Lig. inguinale testis) is subdivided by the epididymis; that is to say,
at the free distal border of the mesosalpinx medially the ostium ofthe ovar-
the proper ligament of the testis (16) courses between the testicle and the
ian bursa (11) and laterally a fat-free place ("window') through which the
tail of the epididymis, and the ligament of the tail of the epididymis ( 17) is
Ovary can be seen (see p. 67). Caudally, the mesovarium is continuous with
the band that, if distinct, extends with the scrotal ligament as a continuous
the mesomerium (4). Its attachment to the uterus, parametrium (12),
cord from the tail to the dermis layer of the scrotal skin. The fundus of the
s sans pe ua pue arae auain aun aea omi sii yn sisau
 vaginal tunic is attached to the internal scrotal surface by the extraperi-
perimetrium (13) upon the uterine surface.
 toneal portion of the caudal gubernaculum and subcutaneous connective
I. The gonadal ligaments of the bitch (see also p. 67) are the sus pensory liga-
tissue. In the dog, the caudal end of the tail of the epididymis is uncovered
ment of the ovary, the proper ligament ofthe ovary andthe round ligament of
by peritoneum and the connective tissue joining it to the dermis of the scro-
the uterus. The suspensory ligment of the ovary (1) is the cranial gubernacu-
tal skin is usually poorly defined. The connective tissue here constitutes
lum that, lateral tothe kidney, passes from the last ribat the attachment of the
 both the ligament of the tail of the epididymis and the scrotal igament.
 PERITONEAL RELATIONSHIPS OF THE GENITAL ORGANS
Peritoneal Folds of the Gonads
 Ligaments of the Gonads
Bitch
Male Dog
Bitch
Male Dog
 Proximal mesovarium
 Proximal mesorchium
 Suspensory ligament of
 Suspensory ligament of the testis
{Plica vasculosa)
the ovary (between ovary
(extensively involuted)
Distal mesovarium
Distal mesorchi um
 and diaphragm)
 Ovarian bursa or
 Proper ligament of the ovary
 Proper ligament of the testis
Mesosalpinx
Testicular bursa
 Mesepididymis
(between the ovary and the 
( between the testis and the
(splits off laterally
(splits off laterally
termination of the uterine tube)
tail of the epididymis)
between the proximal and
between the proximal
 Round ligament of the uterus
Ligament of the tail of the
distal mesovarium)
and distal mesorchium)
(between the termination of
epididymis
Mesometrium
 the uterine tube and the
( between the tail of the epididymis
fundus of the vaginal process 
and the fundus of the vaginal tunic)
64
of the peritoneum)
Urogenital ligaments
(right side)
Legend :
26 Ovary
27 Duodenum
28 Horn of uterus
31 Rectum
2Proper lig. of ovary
32 Rectogenital pouch
33 Vesicogenital pouch
3Round lig.of uterus
34 Pubovesical pouch
35 Urethra
36 Lat lig. of bladder and
round lig. of bladder 
37 Urinary bladder
39 Greater omentum
5 Vaginal ring
40 Uterine tube
6 Mesovarium:
ovarian a. and v.
8 Distal mesovarium
9 Mesosalpinx
10 Ovarian bursa
1 Ostium of ovarian bursa
12 Parametrium and
Transversesection
uterine a. and v.
13Perimetrium
-3
41 Caudal vena cava
42 Aorta
43 Descending colon
44 Duodenocolic fold
45 Prostate
46 Retractor penis m
47Root of penis
48 Body of penis
4 Suspensory lig. of testis
49 Glans penis
50 Epididymis
51  Testis
42
 52 Vaginal process
of peritoneum 
15 Prox. mesorchium
53 Ext. abdom. oblique m.
54 Linea alba
46-
14
16 Proper lig.
of testis 
17 Lig. of tail of
epicdidymis
Cavity of vaginal process
(see pp.67,69,71)
(Transverse section)
18 Mesepididymis
52
19 Distal mesorchium
Vaginal canal
-50
Legend :
20 Testicular bursa
 23 Mesofuniculus-
a
Testicular a.
51
(Epididymal sinus)
24 Plica ductus deferntis
Testicular v.
15
21  Epiorchium
中
C
Testicular nerve plexus
 22  Periorchium
A. of deferent duct
25 Perifuniculus
V. of deferent duct
9
Deferent duct
65
3. Female Genital Organs
 In the bitch, the ostium of the ovarian bursa is enlarged longitudinally and the ovary is everted through the opening. The ovary is then sectioned longitu-
 dinally into halves. The uterine tube is exposed in its entire length. Uterus, cervix, vagina, vaginal vestibule and vulva are opened on the dorsal midline in
paipnis aq uea suolal jeuatu jiaul ieyl os yiual eot jieu
A common basic structural plan is distinctly recognizable for both sexes
 IV. The vagina (30) is remarkably distensible and as a copulatory organ has
¥6
even with respect to the genital organs and becomes particularly clear dur-
 distinct longitudinal and indistinct transverse mucosal folds. It is com-
ing ontogenesis. In both genders, the genital organs may be subdivided into
auaa uau au aesopi su e aq ausp passan
internal and external.
the feminine urethra) and has dorsal and ventral walls and a narrow trans-
 verse lumen. The length ofthe vagina is about 12 cm, extending cranially
a) The INTERNAL GENITAL ORGANS are the gonads, the germ cell producing
to the vaginal formix (19), which surrounds the vaginal portion of the
organs, and the uterine tube and uterus, the conducting organs, that con-
 cervix ventrally and laterally, and caudally to the vaginal ostium (29). Ven-
vey the germ cell. During pregnancy, the uterus is the place for development
trally, at the vaginal ostium, the external urethral ostium is found upon the
of the fertilized germ cell. The vagina and vestibule of the vagina {usually
urethral tubercle and laterally radiating semicircular mucosal folds perhaps
designated only vestibule') are the copulatory organs that follow caudal to
signify the presence of a hymen. Like the uterus, the vaginal wall is also
the uterus.
three-layered.
1
1. The ovary (9), the female gonad, produces the germ cells and functions
V. The vestibule of the vagina (27) extends from the vaginal ostium to the
in addtion as an endocrine gland. The ovary is bilaterally flattened. Its size
vulvar cleft ( Rima pudendi s. Rima vulvae). The vestibule is at first hori-
is dependent on the stage of the sexual cycle and is about 15 x 10 x 6 mm.
 zontally positioned and, after this, continued caudally by a ventral arch-
The ovary is concealed within the ovarian bursa (1), which is a space whose
walls consist of the mesovarium and mesosalpinx (see also p. 65). It is
neous aglandular mucous membrane appears smooth. Within the lateral
accessible through a medial slit, the ostium of the ovarian bursa (2). In lat-
wall is the vestibular bulb (25), which is enveloped laterally by the striated
 constrictor vestibuli muscle (24). Smooth muscle of the vestibular wall is
 salpinx (Fenestra bursae ovaricae). The ovaries lie suspended by the meso-
sparse. The accessory genital glands (minor vestibular glands) secrete a vis-
varium, caudal to the kidneys, at the level of the 4th or Sth lumbar verte-
 cous fluid and open, one after the other, in two longitudinal rows that are
bra. Corical and medullary parts can be distinguished.
caudolateral to the external urethral ostium (28).
了
The cortex of the ovary contains ovarian follicles with their contained
b) The ExTERNAL GENITAL ORGANs are the female vulva ( Pudendurm femi-
oocytes and, depending on the phase ofthe sexual cycle, also corpora lutea.
 ninum), the clitoris, and the feminine urethra.
The corpora lutea are formed from the wall of the follicle following ovula-
1. The vulva consists of the vulvar lips (Labia pudendi, —11) and the vulvar
tion (see clinical-functional anatomy).
cleft (12). The vulvar lips form a rounded commissure dorsally, and a point-
ed ventral commissure. They correspond to the labia minora of the human
 The ovarian medulla is also called the heterosexual part of the ovary owing
 being. The constrictor vulvae muscle forms the muscular basis of each labi-
to the fact that embryologically it is comparable to the anlage of the testis.
um.
The medullary cords of the embryonic ovary correspond to the embryonal
testicular cords; but in the mammal, the cords are lost early in develop-
IL. The clitoris is the female homologue to the penis and, like the penis, may
8
ment. The medulla contains a dense network of blood and lymph vessels as
be considered to consist of a root, body and head, with two types of erec
well as autonomic nerves (chiefly sympathetic).
tile bodies. The unpaired corpus spongiosum of the clitoris forms alone the
 glans of the clitoris, which is located caudally in the vestibule. It may pro-
 II. After ovulation, the uterine tube (salpinx, -10) transports the ovum to
2
the uterus and, moreover, functions as the site of fertilization. It is 5 - 10
unpaired erectile body lie external to the clitoris as the vestibular bulb (25)
a ui 'esnq ue ajo fm a u 'yui u may e kuo pe s u
 under the mucous membrane of the vestibule. The body of the clitoris is
mesosalpinx with its abundant fat, the initial portion of the tube with its
 attached to the ischial arch by the crura of the clitoris. The two crura unite
'pe piy adiud s iei s al jo aoq aui uy on nis
tially externally at the ostium of the ovarian bursa. The end-portion of the
different from the corpus cavernosum penis, lacking an apical ossification.
uterine tube,the isthmus, can also be recognized externally, but the mid
Cartilage may however occur in the tip of the clitoris.
dle portion of the tube is usually well concealed by fat. The infundibulum
The blood supply of the vulva, including the vestibule, is provided by
(14) with the centrally located abdominal ostium of the uterine tube (15)
 branches of the internal pudendal artery and vein that also give off the vagi
and the surrounding tubal fimbriae are located lateral to the ovary at the
 nal artery and vein that, in turn, dispatch the uterine artery and vein (5).
margin of the bursal ostium. The ampulla of the uterine tube (13)
 descends ventrally and in so doing extends cranially around the ovary,
The uterine vessels course in the mesometrium, form arca des, and anasto-
 mose at the tip of the uterine horn with the uterine branch (4) of the ovar-
continuing in the mesosalpinx that forms the lateral wall of the ovarian
ian artery and vein (3). The latter vascularize the ovary and also participate
bursa as the slightly undulating isthmus of the uterine tube (16). The isth-
 in the blood supply of the uterine tube. The venous uterine ramus is espe
mus is continued by the uterine part (15) that pierces the wall at the tip of
cially strong as it is the main drainage of the uterus.
the uterine horn and opens into the uterine lumen on the uterine papilla
with the uterine ostium of the uterine tube (18).
The lymph drainage of the ovary, uterine tube, and cranial tip of the uter-
ine horn is to the aortic lumbar lymph nodes (Lnn. lumbales aortici); ofthe
3:4
 IIL. According to comparative anatomical classification, the canine uterus 
 other parts of the uterus and the vagina including the vulva to the medial
(Metra) is bicornuate. In the sexually mature, non-pregnant, medium-
iliac and sacral lymph nodes (see also p. 68).
sized bitch, the uterine horns (6) are about 12 cm long and, after their
union, are continued caudally into the uterine body (7). The body of the
Aq st 'aqnt auuain au supnu eao al jo Addns aaiau suoune aui
uterus is only 2 - 3 cm long and is shorter than it may at first appear in
the abdominal aortic plexus with ovarian, intermesenteric, and caudal
 mesenteric plexuses. Uterus and vagina are supplied by the pelvic plexus.
external view. This is because the horns, fused externally, remain separat-
 The external genital organs are supplied with autonomic, motor, and sen-
ed internally by a uterine velum for a distance of 1 cm. Besides horns and
body, the cervix uteri (8) is that part of the uterus that has the narrowest
 sory fibers by the pudendal nerve.
5
lumen and the firmest muscular coat, which facilitates its demarcation by
 IIl. The feminine urethra measures only a few centimeters and is consider-
 smsld e esixa un
 ably shorter than the male urethra. It begins at the neck of the urinary blad
nal portion (20) into the vagina. The vaginal portion of the cervix projects
der with the internal urethral ostium and ends ventrally at the vaginal
dorsal to the ventral vaginal fornix and is as a semi-cylinder integrated
 Ostium between vagina and vestibule with the external urethral ostium that
into the dorsal vagina wall that with a tapering longitudinal swelling is
 opens on the mucosal urethral tubercle ( Tubercuum urethrale). The ure-
continued caudally into the vagina. The narrow cervical canal (22) is
thra is located between the pelvic floor and the vagina. The initial part is
bounded by longitudinal mucosal folds and commences with the internal
similar tothe neck of the urinary bladder and is structured by external lon-
uterine ostium (23) and ends in the center of the vaginal portion with the
 gitudinal and internal circular smooth muscle cell bundles. The caudal part
external uterine ostium (21). The wall of the uterus consists of three-lay-
contains in its wall a venous erectile body and the striated urethralis mus-
ers altogether: endo-, myo-, and perimetrium.
cle that assure the closure of the urethra (continence).
66
Female genital organs
Ovarian bursa
(Longitudinal section)
(ventral view)
 Ovarian bursa
 2 Ostium of ovarian bursa -
9 Ovary
3 Ovarian a. and v.
10 Uterine tube
4  Uterine branch 
5 Uterine a. and v
Uterus
6
 Uterine horn
11  Vulvar lip
12 Vulvar cleft
(see pp. 33, 63, 65, 69, 71)
Legend :
Suspensory lig. of ovary
Intercornual lig.
m
 Median lig. of bladder 
Hypogastric nn.
b
Proper lig. of ovary
Vaginal ring
n
Urinary bladder
Perimetrium
Vaginal process of pertoneum
Deep circumflex iliac a. and v
Myometrium
Round lig. of ovary
t
 Mesovarium
Ureter 
and lat. cutaneous femoral n.
Endometrium
Mesosalpinx
Rectum
Genitofemoral n.
 Fenestra bursae ovaricae
Mesometrium
Lat. lig. of urinary bladder
 Caud mesenteric a. and ggl.
(dorsal view)
24 Constrictor vestibuli m.
25 Vestibular bulb
 Uterine tube:
13Ampulla
26 Clitoridal fossa
—14  Infundibulum
 15   Abdominal ostium and
Fimbriae
16
Isthmus
17 Uterine part
23
21
18   Uterine ostium and 
27 Vestibule of vagina
 uterine papilla
Cervix uteri
28 Ext. urethral ostium
29 Vaginal ostium
(Longitudinal section)
30 Vagina
Vaginal fornix
Vaginal portion
Ext. uterine ostium
22
Cervical canal
23 Internal uterine ostium
67
4. Male Genital Organs, Lymphatic System of the Lumbar and Pelvic Regions
 In the male dog the testicle is cut into halves. The urinary bladder and the urethra are opened by a ventromedian section. The erectile bodies willbe stud-
ied by making cross-sections of the penis at the level of the root, body and glans.
The genital organs ofthe male dog are, like those of the bitch, subdivided
 II. The masculine urethra (14) commences at the intermal urethral ostium
into internal and external genital organs. The accessory sex glands belong
(25) from the neck of the urinary bladder and ends at the external urethral
to the internal genital organs.
 ostium (27) at the tip of the glans of the penis. At the ejaculatory ostia, the
a) Following the descent of the testis into the scrotum, the INTERNAL GENI-
 path of the urine and that of the semen join. Caudal to the prostate, a cay-
TAL OnGANs are the testes, which are the germ cell forming organs (gonad:
ernous body is present in the urethral wall. It is surrounded incircular fash-
testis) and the organs that conduct the germ cell to the urethra (epididymis
ion by the striated urethralis muscle. The pelvic part of the urethra passes
 over into the penile part in a caudaly convex arch with a considerable
and deferent duct).
increa se in the girth of the erectile body.
I. The testicle (Testis or Orchis, —1) lies in the scrotal cavity. It is invested
by a firm tunica albuginea from which connective tissue septa radiate inter-
The blood supply of the testicle, including the epididymis, is provided by
the testicular artery (7), which originates from the abdominal aorta about
testis. Between these septa, within the lobules of the testis, are the androgen
at the level of the third lumbar vertebra. It courses within the proximal
producing interstitial or LEYDIG'S cells, and the convoluted seminiferous
 mesorchium (vascular fold or plica vasculosa) and, within the spermatic
tubules (Tubuli seminiferi convoluti) that are continued by the straight
cord, reaches the testicle before giving off its epididymal branches. The df-
seminiferous tubules (Tubuli seminiferi recti into the rete testis, a tubular
erent duct, urethra and prostate are supplied by branches of the internal
network within the mediastinum testis. The rete testis connects to 12 - 16
 pudendal artery (artery of the ductus deferens, —8, and urethral and pro-
efferent ductules and by these to the epididymis (see clinical - functional
static arteries). The penile artery of the internal pudendal artery gives off
anatomy).
its artery of the bulb of the penis to the corpus spongiosum penis, includ-
II. The epididymis is divided into the thickened head of the epididymis (16),
ing the corpus spongiosum glandis. Its deep artery ofthe penis passes to the
2
which is the place where the efferent ductules unite to form the single epi-
corpus cavernosum penis, and its dorsal artery of the penis supplies parts
didymal duct, the slender body of the epididymis (15), and the tail of the
 of the corpus cavernosum penis, portions of the corpus spongiosum glan-
epididymis (17), which is an enlargement at the caudal end ofthe body. The
dis and of the prepuce. The testicular vein (7) originates on the right side
body and tail of the epididymis contain the strongly coiled epididymal
from the caudal vena cava, on the left from the left renal vein and forms
duct, which has a length of several meters and, with a decrease in its coil.
the pampiniform plexus (10) dorsal to the head of the epididymis. The
ing, is continued by the deferent duct at the medial aspect of the tail. The
branches of the venous plexus enlace the testicular artery. The veins of the
epididymis is the germ cell-conducting, germ cell-maturing, and for a lim-
deferent duct, urethra and prostate drain - in the company of the same-
ited period of time, a germ cell-storing organ.
named arteries (A. ductus deferentis, A. uretbralis and A. prostatica) - the
II. The deferent duct (ductus deferens, —8) is the continuation of the epi-
 blood from the deferent duct, urethra and prostate to the internal puden-
3
 dal vein. The penile veins accompany the same-named penile arteries. From
 didymal duct. The first part of the deferent duct is in the spermatic cord
the glans of the penis the blood is drained partially by the external puden-
(26, —see also p. 64), which is located within the vaginal tumic (9) of the 
"ues pue sauu leunaul aoeds ieunau aui jo kem Aq uiaa lp
 peritoneum and extends to the vaginal ring (4). The terminal portion of the
 deferent duct passes the vaginal ring and reaches the abdominal cavity Just
The lymph drainage of the testicle and epididymis, including the spermat-
before its reaching the prostate, the duct has a very slight spindl-shaped
ic cord, is to the medial iliac lymph nodes (2) and the lumbar aortic lymph
enlargement (ampulla of the ductus deferens, —5) in the wall of which are
nodes (1). From the prostate and the urethra the lymph reaches the sacral
accessory sex glands, the ampullary glands. The continuing narrow termi-
(3) and medial iliac lymph nodes. The superficial inguinal or scrotal (6)
 nal part is surrounded by prostatic parenchyma and opens into the urethra
4
lymph nodes take up the lymph from the penis, prepuce and scrotum.
 on the seminal colliculus (24). Its opening is the ejaculatory ostium.
5
IV. The prostate (23) is the accessory sex gland, the ducts of which ( Duc-
 The innervation of the testicle and epididymis is by the testicular plexus
aq e s aisd au sno is an apisaq uado iiid 
and is within the spermatic cord. It has connections with the abdominal
(external part) with two glandular lobes and a slight disseminate part
aortic and caudal mesenteric plexuses. The prostate and deferent plexuses
(internal part), the glandular lobules of which are located within the wall
supply the corresponding organs (prostate and deferent duct). They branch
of the urethra and surrounded by the urethralis muscle. In other domestic
from the pelvic plexus and contain sympathetic, parasympathetic and sen-
mammals, there are in addition vesicular and bulbourethral glands.
sory fibers. The pudendal nerve supplies the dorsal nerve of the penis,
b) The ExTERNAL GENITAL ORGANS are the penis and prepuce (see p. 33), the 
which conveys sensory, sympathetic and parasympathetic fibers.
urethra, and the scrotum.
c) The LYMPH SySTEM OF THE LUMBAR AND PELVIC REGIONS is described in
I. The penis consists of the root of the penis, the body of the penis, and the
the following for both genders according to the natural direction of lymph
glans penis (designated here also as Caput penis) and is formed by two dif-
flow in the caudocranial sequence.
ferent types of cavernous body (Corpora cavernosa). The one type is the
hard, paired erectile body (Corpus cavernosum penis or Corpus rigidum
The sacral lymph nodes (2) are located in the angle of origin between
penis —18)*; the other part is the spongy, sof, unpaired cavernous body of
the right and left internal iliac arteries. The lymph flows from the nearby
the urethra (Corpus spongiosum penis —19). On a cross-section through the
 portions of the rectum and genital organs and from the sacrococcygeal ver-
penis,the tunica albuginea,trabeculae, and the cavernous tissue can be stud
tebral column and their surroundings as well as the deep areas of the pelvic
ied. Erection of the penis is brought about by an increase in blood pressure
limbs. Efferent lymph vessels of the sacral nodes reach the medial iliac
within the vascular spaces of the cavernous tissue. This is the result of an
 lymph nodes.
increased inflow of blood that is supported by a dilatation of the penile
arteries and a decrease in the drainage of the penile veins. At the root of the
 The medial iliac lymph nodes (2) lie at the aorta at the origin of the deep
 penis, each corpus cavernosum penis attaches to the ischial arch as a crus
 circumflex iliac artery (lateral iliac lymph nodes are absent in the dog).
penis (13). The corpus spongiosum penis, which is located between the cru-
 Afferent lymph vessels of the medial iliac lymph nodes proceed from the
ra, is well developed as the bulb of the penis (12) and is overlain by the bul-
superficial inguinal lymph nodes and traverse the inguinal space. More-
-A biodios yioq suad auijo apoq auijo aue aul ul 'alpsnu snsoauodsog
 over, they receive lymph from the abdominal and pelvic wall, the rectum,
ernosa are fused at the median septum of the penis. They cover here roof-
 testicle, urinary bladder and the pelvic limb. The testicular lymph may
like the corpus spongiosum with its contained urethra. In the region of the
bypass the medial iliac lymph nodes. For the most part the efferent vessels
7
 glans penis, the paired corpora cavernosa fuse to form the unpaired os penis
flow together into the lumbar trunk, which opens into the cisterna chyli.
(22), which is hollowed out ventrally forming a deep groove. The unpaired
corpus spongiosum penis, with the penile urethra that it envelops, lies in the
The lumbar aortic lymph nodes (1) lie in an irregular manner along the
ventromedian elongate groove of the penile bone. The cavernous body of
abdominal aorta and receive the lesser part of the drainage of the medial
the glans (Corpus spongiosum glandis) is derived from the corpus spongio-
iliac lymph nodes. Besides this, lymph from the caudal thoracic wall,
sum penis.It consists of the prominent bulb of the glans (21), which is at the
 abdominal wall, lumbar vertebral column and their surroundings and from
level of the caudal third of the os penis, and cranial to the bulb, of the long
the kidneys flows to the aortic lumbar nodes. Efferent vessels of these
part of the glans (20).
 nodes open into the cisterna chyli.
68
n si sad un sndo wh au (  nuni auu g a u ( s
Male genital organs
1 Lumbar aortic lymph nodes 
 2 Media iliac lymph nodes 
 3 Sacral lymph nodes 
7 Testicular a. and v.
 4 Vaginal ring
8 Ductus deferens and 
a. and v. of ductus deferens
 5 Ampulla of deferent duct
 9 Vaginal tunic
6 Superficial inguinal ymph nodes
10 Pampiniform plexus 
11  Testis (medial surface)
(see pp. 33, 37, 63, 65, 71)
Legend :
a Suspensory lig. of testis
e Mesoductus deferens
h Caud. supf. epigastric a. and v.
m Retractor penis m.
[deferential fold]  
iVentral scrotal brr.
n Ischiocavernosus m.
[vascular fold] 
fUrinary bladder and
jProper lig. of testis
O Urethralis m.
c Ureter
Ureteral ostium
k Lig. of tail of epidicdymis
p Bulbospongiosus m.
d Plica genitalis
g Ext. pudendal a. and v.
I Scrotum
23 Prostate
Root of penis
 24 Seminal colliculus 
12
Bulb of penis
 25 Internal urethral ostium
13  Crus of peni
14 Urethra
median section)
 26 Spermatic cord
(lateral surface)
Epididymis
15
 Body of epididymis
16  Head of epididymis 
17
 Tail of epididymis -
Glans penis
 Corpus spongiosum glandis
 27 External urethral ostium
20  Long part of glans 
Body of penis 
21  Bulb of glans
18   Corpus cavernosum penis-
 22 Os penis
19  Corpus spongiosum penis 
69
5. Arteries, Veins and Nerves of the Pelvic Cavity, Adrenal Glands
 The ight pelvic limb together with the right portion of the bony pelvis is removed, preserving the arteries, veins, and nerves. The organs (rectum and
urogenital organs) remain in the pelvic cavity. The pubic and ischiatic bones are cut with the saw a fingerbreadth to the right and parallel to the pelvic
 symphysis. The right ilium is separated from the sacrum at the sacroiliac joint. Then, the right crus of the penis (crus of the clitoris in the female) is cut from
 the ischial arch as well as the muscles, arteries, veins and nerves that course between thigh and pelvis.
a) The TERMINAL DIvISION OF THE AoRTA (21) into the single median sacral
iliac vein (17), compared to the same-named artery, is very long and releas-
artery and the paired external and internal iliac arteries is at the level of the
es the visceral venous trunk (vaginal vein, female; prostatic vein, male) that
last lumbar vertebra.
accompanies the same-named artery that is a branch ofthe internal puden-
dal artery. After giving offthe iliolumbar vein (1), cranial gluteal vein (3)
The unpaired median sacral artery (18) continues caudally from the aorta
ventral to the sacrum and passes over caudally into the median coccygeal
and lateral coccygeal (caudal) vein (7), the long internal iliac vein is con-
(caudal) artery.
tinued at the origin of the last parietal vein (caudal gluteal vein, —6), atthe
level of the third caudal vertebra, by the internal pudendal vein (9). The
The external iliac artery (12) is accompanied laterally by the genitofemoral
caudal gluteal vein gives off the dorsal perineal vein (8).
nerve. Shortly before it traverses the vascular lacuna ( Lacuna vasorum),the
c) The SAcRAL PLExus of the lumbosacral plexus is formed by the ventral
artery ends by dividing into deep femoral (13) and femoral arteries. Before
its reaching the deep muscles of the medial thigh, the deep femoral artery
branches of the last two lumbar nerves and the sacral nerves. It can be sub-
 divided into a stronger cranial part (lumbosacral trunk) and a weaker cau-
dispatches the pudendoepigastric trunk (14) that divides into the extermal
pudendal artery (15), which traverses the inguinal space (canal), and the
dal part.
caudal epigastric artery (27), which courses on the internal surface of the
I. The lumbosacral trunk (16) originates from nLv 6 and nLv 7 as well as
rectus abdominis muscle and ana stomoses at the level of the umbilicus with
 nSv 1 and gives off the cranial gluteal nerve (3) and caudal gluteal nerve
the same-named cranial artery. The latter artery originates from the inter-
(6), which are accompanied by the same named blood vessels and supply
nal thoracic artery. On the external surface of the rectus abdominis muscle,
the gluteal muscles and the skin overlying them. The lumbosacral plexus is
at the level of the umbilicus, there is a superficial anastomosis between the
then continued by the ischiadic nerve (4), which crosses the greater
 superficial cranial epigastric artery and the superficial caudal epigastric
 ischiadic notch laterally to reach the thigh.
artery. The cranial artery is a branch ofthe internal thoracic artery and the
caudal artery passes from the external pudendal artery. It is not uncommon
 IL. The caudal part of the sacral plexus gives off the pudendal nerve (nSv
for the caudal epigastric and external pudendal arteries to arise indepen-
1 - nSv 3, —9), which enters the ischiorectal fossa, accompanied by the
 dently from the deep femoral artery and, in that case, no pudendoepigas-
internal pudendal artery and vein (see p. 73). The caudal cutaneous
tric trunk is formed.
femoral nerve (5) originates mostly -with considerable individual varia-
tion in its origin—from nSv 2 and nSv 3. At its origin, it gives off muscu
At its origin, the internal iliac artery (17) gives off the umbilical artery that
 lar branches for the coccygeus and levator ani muscles (some authors
runs in the lateral ligament of the urinary bladder, and is either completely
regard these branches as independent branches of the sacral plexus),
obliterated to form the round ligament of the bladder or as a cranial vesi-
courses ventrolaterally along the sacrotuberous ligament, passes the
cal artery supplies the cranial part of the urinary bladder. After a short
ischiadic tuber and ends in the skin of the caudolateral thigh. Branches, as
 caudal clunial nerves, supply the gluteal region.
artery (6) and internal pudendal artery (9). The caudal gluteal gives off the
iliolumbar (1), cranial gluteal (3), lateral coccygeal (caudal) (7) and the
 The caudal clunial nerves (see p. 73) consist also of cutaneous branches of
dorsal perineal artery (8), which as parietal arteries supply the pelvic wall.
the caudal gluteal nerve, which, together with the same-named blood ves-
Before it enters the ischiorectal fossa, the internal pudendal artery gives off
sels, enter the tela subcutanea proximally at the caudal border of the super-
a visceral vessel for pelvic cavity organs; that is, the vaginal female)or pro-
ficial gluteal muscle.
static (male) artery with the middle rectal artery passing from its caudal
 The middle clunial nerves (see p. 73) are formed by weak dorsal branches
branch and the uterine (female) or deferent artery (male), including the
 of the sacral nerves and by a cutaneous branch of the cranial gluteal nerve,
 caudal vesical artery, passing from its cranial branch. The vaginal artery
which with the same-named blood vessels reaches the skin proximally at
(11) and the corresponding prostatic artery (11) run ventrally, almost per-
the cranial border of the superficial gluteal muscle. The cranial clunial
pendicularly, to their area of supply, tothe vagina or the prostate.The mid
 nerves (see p. 29) are formed by dorsal branches of the lumbar cutaneous
dle rectal artery (10) supplies the ventrolateral aspect of the ampulla of the
 nerves and supply the skin of the lumbar region.
 rectum. The uterine artery (24) courses near the insertion of the mesometri-
um and anastomoses with the uterine branch (23) of the ovarian artery
 d) The parasympathetic nervous system of the sacral spinal cord is com-
(22). The ovarian artery is a direct branch ofthe aorta at the level of the 3rd
 posed of the pelvic nerves (2), which extend perpendicularly upon the lat-
lumbar vertebra. The artery of the ductus deferens (24) accompanies the
eral wall of the rectum at the level of the vaginal fornix or of the prostate
 deferent duct to the epididymis. When there is complete obliteration of the
 and meet the horizontally running hypogastric nerve to form the pelvic
umbilical artery, the caudal vesical artery (26) supplies the entire urinary
 plexus. The pelvic plexus consists of sympathetic and parasympathetic and
bladder.
 visceral sensory fibers and contains within it small pelvic ganglia. From the
 plexus, which is delicate, nerves course in the company of blood vessels to
BLOOD VESSELS OF THE PELVIC CAVITY
the different organs of the pelvic cavity as rectal, vesical, prostatic, defer-
Aorta
Caudal vena cava
ential, and uterovaginal plexuses.
Median sacral a.
Median sacral v.
e) The ADRENAL GLANDs (see p. 63) are endocrine glands that lie craniome-
 Median coccygeal (caudal) a.
Median coccygeal (caudal) v.
dial to the kidney. Their cortical part has a yellowish tinge owing to the
External iliac a.
Common iliac v.
content of stored lipid substances utilized in the synthesis of steroid hor-
 Deep femoral a.
External iliac v.
mones. The yellow color is visible on the sectioned surface of the gland.
 Pudendoepigastric trunk
 Deep femoral v.
The brownish to gray part of the sectioned gland, the medulla, produces
Internal iliac a.
 Pudendoepigastric v.
the hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine (see textbooks of biochem-
Umbilical a.
 Internal iliac v.
istry). Both adrenals lie retroperitoneally and are incompletely divided ven-
Caudal gluteal a.
 Iliolumbar v.
trally into cranial and caudal parts by the cranial abdominal vein that lies
 liolumbar a.
Vaginal or prostatic v.
in a deep transverse groove of the gland. The right adrenal is the more cra-
Cranial gluteal a.
 Uterine v. or v. of the ductus
nially situated and lies next to the caudal vena cava; the left adrenal abuts
Lateral coccygeal (caudal) a.
deferens
on the abdominal aorta.
 Dorsal perineal a.
 Caudal vesical v.
 Their blood supply is multiple and is from the suprarenal arteries and veins
Internal pudendal a.
Middle rectal v.
that originate from the aorta or the caudal vena cava, respectively. Branch-
Vaginal or prostatic a.
Cranial gluteal v.
es may arise from the caudal phrenic artery and vein, from the cranial
 Uterine a. or a. of the ductus 
 Lateral coccygeal (caudal) v.
 abdominal artery and vein, and from the renal artery and vein.
deferens
Caudal gluteal v.
 Caudal vesical a.
 Dorsal perineal v.
The adrenal capillaries arise from the suprarenal arteries that, one after the
Middle rectal a.
 Internal pudendal v.
other, traverse the cortex and medulla. Suprarenal veins receive the blood
 from the central vein of the adrenal medulla.
 b) The terminal division of the caudal vena cava (20) is at the level of the
last lumbar vertebra where the very slight median sacral vein (18) contin-
 The lymph flows to the lumbar aortic lymph nodes. Autonomic innerva-
ues the caudal course ofthe caudal vena cava. At this level, the caudal vena
 tion is predominantly sympathetic by way of the suprarenal plexus, which
cava divides into the large right and left common iliac veins (19) that
communicates with the major splanchnic nerve and the celiacomesenteric
branch at the pelvic inlet into external and internal iliac veins. The internal
plexus.
70
Arteries, Veins and Nerves of pelvis (right side)
古
1 lliolumbar a. and v
16Lumbos
sacraltrunk
2 Pelvic nn.
17 Internal iliac a. and v.
3 Cranial gluteal a., v. and n.-
4 Ischiadic n.
19 Common iliac
5 Caudal cutaneous femoral n.-
6 Caudal gluteal a., v. and n.
7 Lateral coccygeal
20 Caud. vena cava
[caudal] a. and v.
and renal v.
 8 Dorsal perineal a. and v.
9 Internal pudendal a., v. and 
1 Aorta
pudendal n.
10 Middle rectal a. and v.-
11  Vaginal or
prostatic a. and v.
-22Ovarian a.and v.
12 External iliac a. and 
 23 Uterine br.
andgenitofe
24 Uterine a. and v.
13 Deep femoral
-25 Round lig. of bladder
(Umbilical a.)
and pudendoepigastric v.
- 26 Caudal vesical
a. and v.
15 External pudendal a. and v.
- 27 Caudal epigastric
a. and v.
21
25
2
( see pp. 61, 65, 69, 73)
Legend
a Urethral a. and v.
fVentr. perineal a. and v. and
Femoral n.
g Hypogastric n.
w Caud. supf. epigastric
b A. and v. of clitoris or penis
 supf. perineal n.
m llioinguinal n
Ureter
a. and v.
C A. and v. of penile bulb
g Caud rectal a., v. and n.
 n Lumbar splanchnic nn.
s Testicular a. and v.
d Deep a., v. and n. of clitoris
h Deep perineal nn.
o Caud. mesenteric a and ggl.
t  Supf. inguinal In.
or penis
p Deep circumflex iliac
u Peritoneal vaginal
e Dorsala., v. and n ofclitoris
a. and y. and lat. cutaneous
process
or penis
k Obturator n.
femoral n.
V  Rectus abdominis m.
71
6. Pelvic Diaphragm, Ischiorectal Fossa; Associated Arteries, Veins and Nerves
 For the following dissection the skin is removed, making the incision around the anus and the vulvar lips (Labia pudendi s. Labia vulvae). After docking the
tail, the remaining root of the tailis fixed dorsally. In this dissection, which is on the right side of the body, first the muscles, or stumps of the muscles as
the case may be, are dissected, and this is followed by dissection of the arteries, veins and nerves. After this, also on the left side of the body, the arter-
ies, veins and nerves are dissected and then the muscles.
The pelvic outlet in its middle region is closed off by the pelvic
diaphragm which abuts the ischiorectal fossa on either side. The per-
ads ausxa ue a iaad a ie ans s ua 
a rhombus between the root of the tail, the ischiadic tubers of both sides
(caudal view)
and the caudal end of the pelvic symphysis. In the male dog, and in the
bitch in which the vulva hangs considerably, the ventral border extends 
ventrally to the scrotum or to the ventral border of the vulva. In this
Levator ani m
expanded area of the perineal region, the body wall forms the perineum,
so far as this is clinically useful and broadly defined. In the more narrow
Anal diaphragm:
 definition, the perineum is only the proper perineum between anus and
- Ext. anal spincter m.
vulva, which is formed superficially by the longitudinal perineal cuta-
Ischiorectal fossa:
neous muscle and, deeply, by a tendomuscular plate of insertion for
 Coccygeus m.
neighboring muscles, the tendinous center of the perineum (perineal
Perineal mm.
 Sacrotuberous lig. 
body).
Urogenital diaphagm:
Obturator internus m.
Bulbospongiosus m.
a) The PELvic DIAPHRAGM is the musculofascial closure of the pelvic out-
let that is found internally and caudally at the pelvis. It is formed by the
levator ani muscle of both sides with bilaterally adjacent coccygeus mus-
Ischiatic arch
cle and both lamellae of the diaphragmatic fasica of the pelvis. Looking
into the pelvic cavity, a dorsoventrally arranged, longitudinal opening is
recognizable in the slight depression between the bilateral levator ani
b) The IscHioREcTAL FossA is the pyramidal pelvic outlet fossa with a cra-
muscles. This “levator door' is closed dorsally in the anal part of the
pelvic diaphragm by the anal canal with surrounding musculature and
nial apex and a caudally situated, open, base. The lateral boundary is the
ischiadic tuberosity and the sacrotuberous ligament that attaches there.
ventrally in the urogenital part of the pelvic diaphragm by the urogeni-
The ventral boundary is the ischial arch including the internal obturator
tal canal with surrounding musculature as well as in between by the
 muscle, and the medial boundary, the pelvic diaphragm with the levator ani
proper perineum.
 and coccygeus muscles. The ischiorectal fossa is filled by a pad of fat and
arteries, veins, and nerves gathered in neurovascular bundles.
 PELVIC DIAPHRAGM WITH COCCYGEUS AND LEVATOR ANI MUSCLES
 Anal part of the pelvic diaphragm
Perineum proper
 Urogenital part of the pelvic diaphragm
 External anal sphincter muscle
Perineal muscles
 Bulbospongiosus muscle
Internal anal sphincter muscle 
Constrictor vestibuli muscle
 Rectococcygeus muscle
 Tendinous center of the perineum
 Constrictor vul vae muscle
(Perineal body)
 Ischiocavernosus muscle
 Retractor penis or retractor clitoridis muscle
The coccygeus muscle (13) is situated medially beside the sacrotuberous lig-
the long superficial perineal nerve (7) with originating dorsal labial or dorsal
ament and courses between the ischiadic spine and the first four caudal ver-
scrotal nerves for the skin and the short deep perineal nerves (6) for the mus-
tebrae. The fibers of the levator ani muscle (12, —-see also text-illustration)
cle of the urogenital part of the pelvic diaphragm. The pudendal nerve ends on
have a similar course; the muscle is located medial to the coccygeus. Its ori-
the dorsum of the clitoris (which, owing to the caudoventral course of the cli-
gin is linear and lies beside the pelvic symphysis at the ischiadic and pubic
toris, is actuallythe ventral surface of the clitoris) as the dorsalclitoridalnerve
bones and ascends from here caudodorsally to the tail. Its tapering insertion
(5) or, respectively, as the dorsal nerve of the penis (10) on the dorsum penis.
is on the 4h to the 7zh caudal vertebrae. Different from human beings, only
 The internal pudendal artery (2) accompanies the pudendal nerve and gives
a very few muscle fibers contact the sphincter ani externus muscle, so that
 off the urethral artery for the pelvic part of the urethra. It then gives off the
in the dog, the function-related name of the muscle is a bit misleading. In
bilateral contraction the tail is drawn ventrally, clamped down.
ventral perineal artery (8) that, in turn, near its origin, gives off the cau-
dodorsally directed caudal rectal artery (3), and distally the caudoventrally
The external anal sphincter muscle (14), together with the internal anal
directed dorsal labial or, respectively, dorsal scrotal branch. The internal
 sphincter muscle, surrounds the anal canal. The sphincter ani internus mus-
pudendal is continued as the artery of the clitoris (4) or, respectively, artery of
cle is the caudal continuation of the circular layer of smooth muscle of the
the penis (9). The artery of the clitoris (4) gives offthe large artery of the
rectum. The anal sac (paranal sinus) lies between the striated and smooth
vestibular bulb and ends by dividing into the very small dorsal artery of the
sphincter muscle of the anus.
clitoris and the deep artery of the clitoris. The artery of the penis gives off the
large artery of the bulb of the penis, the smaller deep artery of the penis,
Rectococcygeus muscle (11) and retractor penis (clitoridis) muscle (19); see
which enters the crus of the penis, and continues as the dorsal artery of the
p.74.
 penis, which is usually of moderate size. The dorsal perineal artery (1) arises
The perineal muscles (15) consist of longitudinally running bundles of mus-
 from the caudal gluteal artery.
 cle that extend between the external anal sphincter and the bulbospongio-
 The internal pudendal vein (see p. 71) accompanies only the ca udal part of
sus muscles or, resp., the constrictor vestibuli muscle.
the same-named artery. It has a course similar to the artery but the
The bulbospongiosus muscle (20) runs trans versely across the bulb of the
sequence of its branches is different.
 ARTERIES AND NERVES OF THE ISCHIORECTAL FOSSA
vestibuli muscle (77) with a roughly circular course of its fibers and the
caudally following constrictor vulvae muscle (18) with a nearly longitudi-
 Intermal pudendal artery
 Pudendal nerve
 nal course of its fibers. The ischiocavernosus muscle (16) originates at the
Urethral artery
Caudal rectal nerve
ischiadic arch and covers the crus of the clitoris or the crus penis.
Ventral perineal artery
 Superficial perineal nerve
Caudal rectal artery
 Dorsal labial nerves or
The innervation of the coccygeus and levator ani muscles is by muscular
branches of nSv 3. The other muscles are supplied by branches of the
 Dorsal labial branch or
 Dorsal scrotal nerves
pudendal nerve; that is, the muscles of the anal part by the caudal rectal
 Dorsal scrotal branch
Deep perineal nerves
 nerve, and the muscle of the urogenital part and those ofthe perineum by
Artery of the clitoris or
 Dorsal nerve of the clitoris or
the deep perineal nerves.
 Artery of the penis
Dorsal nerve of the penis
 Artery of the vestibular bulb or
 Caudal cutaneous femoral nerve
 c) NEuRovAscuLAR BuNDLEs traverse the pudendal canal to reach the fun-
Artery of the bulb of the penis
dus of the ischiorectal fossa.
 Deep artery of the clitoris or
The pudendal nerve (2) runs between the internal obturator muscle and the
Deep artery of the penis
coccygeus muscle caudoventrally and medially into the ischiorectal fossa. It
Dorsal artery of the clitoris or
 gives offthe caudal rectal nerve (3) for the anal part of the pelvic diaphragm,
Dorsal artery of the penis
72
Ischiorectal fossa
11 Rectococcygeus m.
12 Levator ani m.
13 Coccygeus m.
-14 Ext. anal sphincter m.
1 Dors. perineal a. and 
cutaneus br.of caud.gluteal n
 2 Int. pudendal a. and
pudendal n.
3 Caud.rectal a. and n.
4 A. of clitoris -
 5 Dorsal ditoridal n
15 Perineal mm.
6 Deep perineal nn.
7 Supf. perineal n.
 8 Ventr perineal a.
-16 Ischiocavernosus m.
Bulbospongiosus m.
Constrictor vestibuli m.
 Constrictor vulvae m.
(caudal view)
22
13
19 Retractor penis m.
 Penile part
9 A. of penis
10 Dorsal n. of penis
28
20 Bulbospongiosus m.
(see pp. 71,75,79)
Legend :
 21  Crus of Clitoris
25 Supf. gluteal m.
30 Semitendinosus m.
a Lat. caudal [coccygeal] a.
d Caud. gluteal a. and
22 Sacrocaudalis -coccygeus] ventr.
31 Semimembranosus m.
 b Cran gluteal a. and
lat. and med. mm.
32 Gracilis m.
middle clunial nn.
23 Ostium of paranal sinus
28 Ischiatic tuberosity
C Caud. gluteal a. (cutaneous brr.)
 clunial n.
24 Sacrotuberous lig.
29 Biceps femoris m.
 and caud. (dors.) clunial nn.
73
7. Smooth Muscle of the Pelvic Diaphragm and the Bony Pelvic Girdle
 After cranial reflection of the free caudal border of the levator ani muscle and after caudal reflection of the anus with surrounding sphincter muscles, the
smooth musculature can be seen in overall view.
a) The SMOoTH MuSCLES OF THE PELvIc DIAPHRAGM pass between the vis-
the ilium, which, in the dog, is identical to the cranial ventral iliac spine.
cera and the skeletal system.
The sacral tuber (14, —lies opposite at the dorsocaudal border ofthe wing
I. The unpaired rectococcygeus muscle (A) is a reinforcement of the longi-
 of the ilium and extends from the cranial dorsal iliac spine (15) to the cau-
tudinal smooth muscle of the rectum, running ventromedian at the caudal
dal dorsal iliac spine (16). The gluteal surface (17) is the surface of origin
vertebral column to the third caudal vertebra.
 of the gluteal muscles laterally on the wing of the ilium, where at the level
 of the alar spine the indistinct ventral gluteal line (17") and at the level of
II. The paired retractor clitoridis muscle or retractor penis muscle begins
the caudal ventral iliac spine the caudal gluteal line (17*) begin. The medi-
under the levator ani muscle at the first caudal vertebra and divides caudo-
al surface of the wing of the ilium is the sacropelvic surface (18), which is
laterally on the rectum into three parts that lie next to each other in the fol-
subdivided into the tuberculate, ear-shaped auricular surface (Facies auric-
lowing dorsoventral sequence: The strong anal part (B) inserts dorsolater-
ularis, —19), for the articulation with the sacrum, and into the dorsally con-
al at the anus between the anal muscles. The moderately strong penile part
tinuing smooth-surfaced iliac surface (20) for the insertion of the longis-
(C) meets with the corresponding muscle of the opposite side caudomedi-
simus dorsi and iliocostalis muscles. Cranioventrally at the ilium the arcu-
an at the perineum and runs ventromedian on the penis cranially. The
 ate line (21), together with the dorsally located promontory of the sacrum
and the ventrally located pecten ossis pubis (33), participates in the for-
rectal part (D) is weak or absent. If well developed, it loops around the rec-
mation of the terminal line. At mid-level, the arcuate line exhibits the very
tum ventrally, which in the horse is very distinctly expressed and led to the
indistinct psoas minor tubercle (22). Opposite to that, on the caudodorsal
naming of it as 'rectal loop."
border of the liac wing, is the greater ischiadic notch (23). It extends from
b) The BoNy Pelvic GiRDLE (CINGulum MemBRI PeLviNl, —See also text-
the caudal dorsal iliac spine of the sacral tuber to the ischiadic spine and
1
illustration) consists of both hip bones (Ossa coxarum), the three indi-
furnishes the passage for the ischiadic nerve.
vidual bones of which are completely fused in the adult. The hip bones of
 I. The ischiadic bone or ischium with its body (24, -
Corpus ossis ischiij
2
both sides jointly form the ventromedian located pelvic symphysis (1)
forms part of the acetabulum and passes over caudally into the horizontal
and are separated dorsally by the sacrum. Together with the sacrum and
ischiadic table (25). The symphysial branch of the ischium (26), which fol-
the first two caudal vertebrae, they form the bony pelvis. Of the three
lows medially, participates with that of the opposite side in the formation
fused individual bones of the hip bone, the pubic bone and the ischiadic
 of the caudal part of the pelvic symphysis. Laterodorsally opposite is the
bone bound the obturator foramen (2) and both bones fuse with the
lesser ischiadic notch (27) that caudolaterally at the ischiadic tuber (28, 
third, the iliac bone, at the acetabulum (3). In the depth of the acetabu-
 Tuber ischiadicum) passes over into the concave ischiadic arch (29).
lum (acetabular fossa, —4) of fetuses and puppies a tiny fourth bone is
 Ischiadic arch and ischiadic tuber, jointly with the sacrotuberous ligament
found (acetabular bone) that fuses at an early age with the other compo-
 and the third caudal vertebra, border the pelvic outlet.
nents of the hip bone. The strong ligament of the femoral head courses
between the acetabular fossa and the head of the femoral bone. The
IL. The pubic bone or pubis with its body (30, —Corpus ossis pubis) con-
 tributes to the formation of the aceta bulum. From the body, as the cranial
ligament, is a ventromedial interruption of the lunate surface (5). On the
ramus (32), it extends caudomedially in the direction of the pelvic symphy-
 acetabular border the acetabular lip (Labrum acetabulare) is found. It is
sis and, at the symphysis, caudally as the caudal ramus (symphysial ramus,
made up of fibrocartilage and deepens the acetabular fossa. Dorsal to the
31). At the pelvic inlet the cranial ramus bears the pecten ossis pubis (33),
acetabulum in the dog the blunt-bordered ischiadic spine (7) is located. It
which extends from the laterally located iliopubic eminence (34) to the
 is formed in the border area between the iliac and ischiadic bones, where
 median situated ventral pubic tubercle (35). On the internal surface of the
they fuse. Cranially, the iliac bone borders the pubic bone at the iliopu-
 pubic bone the direction of the course of the obturator nerve can be seen
bic eminence (34). The pubic bones of right and left sides unite to form
 as the obturator sulcus.
the cranial part of the pelvic symphysis and the ischiadic bones of either
c) The PELvic DIAMETERs (see also text-illustration) are of importance in
side join to form the caudal part of the pelvic symphysis.
 obstetrics in the evaluation of the natural birth passage. The vertical dia-
 meter is the vertical line from the cranial end of the pelvic symphysis to the
vertebral column. The conjugate diameter extends from the cranial end of
the pelvic symphysis to the promontory of the sacrum. Transverse diame-
ters are present as a dorsal transverse diameter between the two ends ofthe
sacral wings, as a middle transverse diameter between the right and left
 psoas minor tubercles, and as the ventral transverse diameter between the
two iliopubic eminences.
Os coxae
(medial view)
 Diameters of pelvis
(cranioventral view)
Terminal line:
Promontory
Dors. transverse diameter
Vertical diameter
Arcuate line
-True conjugate (measurement)
Middle transverse diameter
Pecten ossis pubis
I. The body (8) of the iliac bone or ilium takes part in the formation of the
acetabulum (which is also true for the body of the pubic and ischiadic
bones). The caudal ventral iliac spine (9,
d) The TeRMINAL LINE is the boundary between the abdominal and pelvic
—area of origin of the rectus 
 cavities. In human beings and domestic mammals the terminal line is formed
femoris muscle) is craniodorsal to the acetabulum; it is at the transition to
the wing of the ilium (10). The alar spine (11,
by the promontory of the sacrum, the arcuate line of the ilium, and by the
—area of insertion of the
caudal tendon of the quadratus lumborum muscle) is located at the cran-
pecten ossis pubis.
ioventral border of the wing of the ilium; that is, a thumbbreadth ventral
e) Different from the situation in the erect human being, the Pevic FLooR
to its transition into the dorsally situated, cartilage-covered iliac crest (12).
is formed by the pubis and ischium with the obturator foramen that they
Here, at the transition, the tuber coxae (13) is found at the lateral angle of
contain.
74
Anal and urogenital musces
(caudolateral view)
Legend :
A
Recto
Retractor ditoridis or penis m.
 Clitoridal or penile part
Anal part
D
 Rectal part
E
Vertebral part
G Paranal sinus 
H Longitucinal perineal 
cutaneous m
 Ischiourethralis m.
Ischiocavernosus m.
 Bulbospongiosus m.
 Constrictor vestibuli m.
M
Constrictor vulvae m.
 N  Sacrocaudalis [-coccygeus] 
dors. lat. m.
O Dorsal caud.
 intertransverse m.
Levator ani m.
Q Coccygeus m.
R
 Supf. gluteal m.
S Middle gluteal m.
 Sacrotuberous lig.
U
Obturator int. m.
 Semimembranosus m.
WSemitendinosus m.
X Biceps femoris m.
(see pp.73, 79)
(lateral view)
Gluteal surface (17)
Ventr. gluteal line (17)
(2l) eul leane pneo
Pelvic girdle:
Sacropelvic surface (18)
Auricular surface (19)
lliac suface (20)
Os coxae (Hip bone)
Pelvic symphysis (1)
Greater ischiatic notch (23)
Obturator foramen (2)
Acetabulum (3)
Os Ischi (lschiatic bone)
 Acetabular fossa (4)
Acetabular notch (5)
Body of ischium (24)
Lunate surface (6)
Ischiatic table (25)
Ischiatic spine (7)
Branch of ischium (26)
Os ilium (liac bone)
Ischiatic tuber (28)
Body of iliac bone (8)
Ischiatic arch (29)
Caudal ventra iliac spine (9)
Wing (10)
Alar spine (11)
Os pubis (Pubic bone)
Body of pubis (30)
Caud. branch of pubis (31)
Tuber coxae (13)
Symphysial surface
Cran. ventr. iliac spine
Sacral tuber (14)
Cran. dors. iliac spine (15)
liopubic eminence (34)
Caud. dors. iliac spine (16)
Ventr. pubic tubercle (35)
75
Chapter 8: Pelvic Limb
1. The Skeleton of the Pelvic Limb
The Peivic LiMB also includes the pelvic girdle. For the study of common
e) For the most part, the description of the digital bones of the thoracic
characteristics in the structural plan of thoracic and pelvic limbs, the
limb (see thoracic limb) holds for the DiGITAL BoNes of the pelvic limb.
description of the thoracic limb should also be considered here.
The proximal phalanx (50) and middle phalanx (51) have a base (52) pro-
a) The FEMoRALE BoNE (Os FEMoRIs, the bone of the thigh, commonly des-
ximally (with an indistinct flexor tuberosity of the middle phalanx), a
ignated simply femur') consists proximally of a head, a thin neck, promi-
middle body (54) and a distal head (55). The indistinct flexor tuberosity
nent muscular processes (trochanters) and a body or shaft that is continu-
(53) is located proximoplantarly on the base of the middle phalanx; it is the
 ous distally with the femoral trochlea and condyles. The head of the femur
area of insertion of the superficial digital flexor tendon. The distal phalanx
(1) bears an articular surface covered with cartilage except for a small,
 or unguicular bone (56) has its articular surface (57) proximally and prox-
nearly central area, the fovea capitis (2), which is the site of attachment of
 imodorsa lly an indistinct extensor process (58) on which the digital exten-
the ligament of the head of the femur. The ligament is attached to the
sor inserts. The flexor tubercle (59), on which the deep digital flexor ten
 acetabulum at the acetabular fossa. The neck of the femur (3) is a distinct
 don inserts, is proximoplantar. The sharp unguicular crest (60) surmounts
2
narrowing of the bone between the head and the muscular processes. The
the unguicular sulcus (61). The distal part of the unguicular bone is the
4
lateral process, the greater trochanter (4), is largest and is the site of attach-
unguicular process (62), which is surrounded by the horn of the claw.
ment of the midle and deep gluteal muscles. Caudomedial to the base of
When, on the first digit only, the claw is retained and the central bony sup-
the greater trochanter is the trochanteric fossa (5), a deep depression that
 porting skeleton is lacking, the term "wolf's claw' (Paraunguicula, —60) is
serves for the insertion of deep muscles of the coxal joint. Medial to the
 sometimes used.
trochanteric fossa is the lesser (or “minor") trochanter (6), which is the
insertion of the iliopsoas muscle. The gluteal tuberosity (not illustrated) is
 f) Of the SesAMoip BoNEs, the sesamoid bones of the gastrocnemius mus-
in the dog a smallelevation of bone distal to the greater trochanter; it is the
cle (64) were discussed in the context of the femoral condyles. The
attachment of the superficial gluteal muscle. The body (shaft) of the femur
sesamoid bone of the popliteus muscle (65) is caudolateral at the stifle
(8) is long and exhibits caudally the facies aspera (9), which is a rough area
joint, at the transition of the tendon of origin of the muscle into its belly.
for insertion of the adductor magnus and adductor brevis muscles. The
The proximal sesamoid bones (66) are plantar at the metatarsophalangeal
facies is bounded by a lateral lip (labium, 10) and a medial lip (11). The
joint. The distal sesamoids (67), which are plantar at the distal interpha-
popliteal surface (12) that follows the facies aspera distally is bordered lat-
langeal joints, and the dorsal sesamoids at the proximal interphalangeal
erally by the lateral supracondylar tuberosity (13), a roughness for the ori-
 joints are cartilaginous. The dorsal sesamoids at the metatarsophalangeal
gin of the lateral head of the gastrocnemius and the superficial digital flex-
 joints (68) are usually osseous. The patella (69) is the largest sesamoid bone
or muscles. A medial supracondylar tuberosity is the origin of the medial
 of the body and lies in the tendon of insertion of the quadriceps femoris
head of the gastrocnemius. The medial femoral condyle (14) bears caudal-
 muscle. It bears a cartilage-covered articular surface for articulation with
ly a smooth articular surface for the medial sesamoid bone (15) for articu-
the trochlea of the femur.
lation with the sesamoid bone of the gastrocnemius (64) and a prominent
medial epicondyle (16) for the attachment ofthe medial collateral ligament
of the femorotibial joint. The lateral femoral condyle (17) with its articu-
lar surface for the lateral sesamoid bone (18) and lateral epicondyle (19)
has a corresponding configuration. The intercondylar fossa (20) cranially
abuts on the femoral trochlea (21), which acts as a gliding surface for the
patella (69) between the two ridges of the trochlea.
Pelvic limb
b) The tibia and fibula are the BoNEs oF THE CRus (LEG) and articulate
 proximally and distally with each other. At the tarsus, the distal ends ofthe
(Artesien-Normand Basset)
tibia and fibula project abaxially beyond the articular surface as the medi-
al or, respectively, lateral malleolus.
I. The menisci of the femorotibial joint are attached by ligaments to the
(medial view)
proximal articular surface of the tibia (22). The medial tibial condyle (23)
is set off from the lateral condyle (26) by the intercondylar eminence (24),
a proximomedian projection. The lateral condyle bears the fibular articu-
lar surface (26) for the joint with the head ofthe fibula. Cranial to this joint
is the extensor groove (27) for the tendon of the long digital extensor mus-
cle, which takes origin at the extensor fossa, a small depression that is lat-
eral at the margin of junction of the trochlea and lateral condyle. The body
ofthe tibia (28) continues distally from the condyles. Proximally, on its cra-
3
 nial aspect, it bears the tibial tuberosity (29), which is the site of termina-
tion of the patellar ligament (tendon of the quadriceps). The cranial mar-
gin of the tibia (29") is distal to the tuberosity. At the distal end of the tib-
ia the tibial cochlea (30) is surmounted by the medial malleolus (31).
II. On the fbula, the head (32) with its articular surface (33) is continued
- ere au Aq aip pamoy uese si yym ite) apoq suoi aui kq
leolus (35). The two crural bones enclose the cruralinterosseous space (36)
between them.
c) The TARsAL BoNEs are arranged in three rows. Of the two bones of the
proximal row, the medial one, the talus (37), has proximally a body (38)
and a trochlea (39), a neck (40) following, and distally a head (41). The lat-
 erally located calcaneus (42) projects far proximally with its tuber calcanei
(43), which facilitates its function as a lever for the tarsal extensors. The
tendon of the lateral digital flexor muscle runs over the sustentaculum tali
(44) before it unites distally with the tendon of the medial digital flexor
muscle to form the deep digital flexor tendon. The central tarsal bone (45)
is the one bone of the middle row, into which the especially large fourth
tarsal bone projects. The tarsal bones I - IV (46) form the distal row of the
tarsal bones.
 d) The METATARsAL BoNEs I - V consist of a proximal base (47), a middle
body (48) and a distal head (49). The short first metatarsal bone can be
 absent. Occasionally, it is divided into two bones, in which case the proxi-
mal part can fuse with the first tarsal bone.
76
Bones of pelvic limb
Os femoris
(craniomedial
(caudolateral view)
view)
Head of femur (1)
Fovea capitis (2)
Neck of femur (3)
Greater trochanter (4)
 Trochanteric fossa (5)
Lesser trochanter (6)
Gluteal tuberosity (7)
Body of femur (8)
Facies aspera (9)
Lateral lip (10)
Medial lip (11)
10
Popliteal surface (12)
Medial femoral condyle (14)
 Articular surface for medial sesamoid bone (15)
Medial epicondyle (16)
Lateral femoral condyle (17)
Articular surface for lateral sesamoid bone (18)
 Lateral epicondyle (19)
Intercondylar fossa (20)
Femoral trochlea (21)
Tibia
Proximal articular surface of tibia (22)
23
Medial tibial condyle (23)
27
65
26
Lateral tibial condyle (25)
33-
Fibular articular surface (26)
Extensor groove (27)
29'
Body of tibia (28)
Tibial tuberosity (29)
29″
Cranial margin (29')
[Tibial crest]
Tibial cochlea (30)
Medial malleolus (31)
34
Fibula
lateral
36
Head of fibula (32)
Articular surface (33)
Body of fibula (34)
Lateral malleolus (35)
 Crural interosseous space (36)
Tarsal bones
Talus (37)
Body of talus (38)
 Trochlea of talus (39)
Neck (40)
Head (41)
Calcaneus (42)
Calcaneal tuber (43)
(medial view
 Sustentaculum tali (44)
Central tarsal bone (45)
Tarsal bones I, I1,II, IV (46)
39
44
31
 Metatarsal bones I- V
37
30
35
Base (47)
Body (48)
Head (49)
46
 Digital bones
Proximal phalanx (50)
46
Middle phalanx (51)
Base (52)
Flexortube
erosity (53)
 Distal phalanx (56)
[Unguicular bone] 
Articular surface (57)
Extensor process (58)
Flexor tubercle (59)
Unguicular crest (60)
49
Unguicular sulcus (61)
Unguicular process (62)
Paraunguicula (63)
Sesamoids (64 - 69)
 Sesamoid bones of gastrocnemius m. (64)
Sesamoid bone of popliteus m. (65)
Prox. sesamoid bones (66)
Dist. sesamoid bones (cartilaginous) (67)
Dors. sesamoid bones (cartilaginous) (68)
1
Patella (69)
77
2. The Muscles of the Hip Joint and their Nerve Supply
oassp jiay buimolos (ca pue ia dd aas suian snoauenogns ahiel aun buasaid 'suio jesiel aul jo jeaa au oi Aisip qw aul jo uys aun ioaae
 and examination, the superficial gluteal, middle gluteal and biceps femoris muscles should be transected at the junction of their middle and distal thirds.
 Diferent from the usual procedure, the nerve supply can be studied only after sectioning the muscles. For this reason, the nerve supply of a muscle will 
be described after the description of its muscle group. The tensor fasciae latae muscle and the three muscle groups, croup muscles, hamstring muscles,
 and deep muscles of the coxal joint comprise the muscles of the hip joint.
a) The SuPERFicIAL FAscIA of the gluteal region is the gluteal fascia (14). It
 of the caudal gluteal nerve (thus the term gluteobiceps may properly be
passes from the thoracolumbar fascia and, in the direction of the femur, is
used to designate the biceps femoris). The caudal crural abductor muscle is
continued as the multilaminated fascia lata, which is tensed by the tensor
innervated by a musculocutaneous branch (12) of the common peroneal
fasciae latae muscle.
(fibular) nerve. After the muscular branch is given off, this small nerve ends
 as a cutaneous branch.
The tensor fasciae latae muscle (3) originates at the tuber coxae and neigh-
boring part of the ilium and radiates with its cranial main portion into the
Proximal to its branching, the ischiadic nerve (18) crosses the greater
2
 superficial lamina of the fascia lata, which fuses distally with the patellar
ischiadic notch, and then passes over the neck of the femur where the neck
ligament (quadriceps tendon). Its caudal, fan-shaped, part passes over into
is covered by the deep muscles of the hip joint. It innervates the hip joint
the deep portion of the fascia lata, that ends onthe lateral lip of the rough
 and divides between the biceps femoris and adductor magnus muscles into
area of the femur (Facies aspera ossis femoris). Function: Tensor ofthe fas-
the strong tibial nerve (13) and the smaller common peroneal (fibular)
cia lata and flexor of the hip joint. Nerve supply: cranial gluteal nerve.
nerve (11). The division of the ischiadic nerve into tibial and common per-
oneal nerves becomes distinct only in the distal half of the thigh; because,
 b) The Cnoup MuscLes arise from the gluteal surface of the ilium (middle
- uo e ui laaaon piq are saaau omi  yu pxid a u
and deep gluteal muscles) or from the sacrum and sacrotuberous ligament
nective tissue envelope.
(piriformis and superficial gluteal muscle). All croup muscles end on the
greater trochanter of the femur. Function: Extension of the hip joint and
 d) The DeEp Hip JoiNT MuscLEs (see text-illustration) are supinators ofthe
abduction of the limb. The deep gluteal turns the cranial face of the thigh
limb. They turn the cranial face of the thigh (and limb) laterally.
(and limb) medially.
The origin of the deep muscles of the hip joint is from the hip bone in the
The superficial gluteal muscle (2) lies most caudally and terminates most
vicinity of the obturator foramen. Their insertion is in the trochanteric fos-
distally at the base of the greater trochanter on the gluteal tuberosity. The
sa of the femur and (quadratus femoris only) just distal to the fossa on the
latter attachment is clearly seen after section and reflection of the muscle
 caudal surface of the femur. In craniocaudal sequence, the four muscles are:
stumps.
 The gemelli muscles (8) originate in the region of the lesser ischiadic notch
The middle gluteal muscle (1) originates dorsally at the gluteal surface
 and bound on the caudal border of the deep gluteal muscle.
between the ventral gluteal line and the iliac crest.
 The internal obturator muscle (19) has its origin internally on the medial.
The piriformis muscle (6) (Henning 1965) lies deep to the middle gluteal
 border of the obturator foramen and passes with a strong tendon dorsal to
muscle and ends jointly with it on the caudal part of the greater trochanter
the fanlike gemelli muscles, which form a central sulcus where the tendon
of the femur.
 passes over them.
The deep gluteal muscle (7) has an extended area of origin between the ven-
 The external obturator muscle (9) has a similar area of origin on the medi-
tral and caudal gluteal lines. Its fibers converge to insert on the cranial part
 al border of the obturator foramen, but it lies externally on the bony pelvis
of the greater trochanter.
(see also text-illustration p. 80). From this muscle, only a more deeply
located strong terminal tendon is visible at the caudal border of the gemel-
Innervation of the croup muscles is by the cranial and caudal gluteal
li muscles. Innervation: obturator nerve.
nerves, both of which emerge at the major ischiadic notch. The caudal
gluteal nerve (17) enters the medial aspect of the superficial gluteal muscle
 The quadratus femoris muscle (10) begins ventromedially at the ischiadic
 p a au s a oe sso xa ui 
 tuber and ends at the distal border of the trochanteric fossa.
nerve (5) passes between the middle and deep gluteal muscles. It supplies
 Innervation is by the muscular branches of the ischiadic nerve (rotator
these muscles and, usually, the piriformis muscle, and a branch passes
 nerve), which originates at the caudal border of the deep gluteal muscle
through the lateral part of the deep gluteal to end in the tensor fasciae latae
 from the ischiadic nerve. An exception is the external obturator muscle,
muscle.
which is supplied only by the obturator nerve.
1
 c) The HAMsTRING MuscLEs (long ischiatic muscles) are the biceps femoris,
semitendinosus, and semimembranosus. They arise from the ischiadic
tuber and additionally (biceps femoris) from the neighboring part of the
sacrotuberous ligament. The caudal crural abductor, which may be
 Deep muscles of hip joint
described with this group, has its origin only from the sacrotuberous liga-
ment. Fumction: Extension of the hip joint, flexion of the stifle joint, and
also extension of the hock joint insofar as they end in a calcanean tract
( biceps femoris and semitendinosus muscles).
 uo sisoe p e u sn (t a so s a
patellar ligament (quadriceps tendon) and on the crural fascia. Moreover,
it terminates on the calcanean tuber by the lateral calcanean tract, which at
the distal third of the crus fuses with the medial calcanean tract from the
semitendinosus and gracilis muscles. Ater section of the biceps femoris
(lateral view)
forcement from the lateral lip of the facies aspera ofthe femur (and it is for
this reason that the term ‘tract’ is used instead of *tendon').
The straplike caudal crural abductor muscle (20) originates from the distal
 part of the sacrotuberous ligament, deep to the biceps femoris muscle, and
its insertion radiates into the crural fascia with the caudal border of the
biceps.
8 Gmellimm.
The caudolaterally located semitendinosus muscle (16) ends proximome-
dially on the tibia and, together with the tendon of the gracilis muscle, is
19 Internal obturator m
 continued by the medial calcanean tract.
 The caudomedially placed semimembranosus muscle (15) has two strong
9 External
muscle bellies. The cranial one terminates on the medial condyle of the
femur, and the caudal one distal to the femorotibial joint space on the medi-
al condyle of the tibia.
10 Quadratus femoris m
The innervation of the hamstring muscles is by muscular bra nches that pro-
ceed from the proximal part of the ischiatic nerve (18), which ends at
midthigh by dividing into the tibial nerve (13) and the common peroneal
 o s sa a jo hd  a (i a (r)
nates from the sacrotuberous ligament and receives additionally a branch
78
Muscles of the hip joint
4 Gluteal fascia
1 Middle gluteal m.
3 Tensor fasciae latae m.
4 Biceps femoris m
15 Semimembranosus m.
16 Semitendinosus m.
(lateral view)
 5 Cran. gluteal n. and 
cran. gluteal a. and v
17 Caudal gluteal n.
6 Piriformis m.-
18 Ischiadic n.
 7 Deep gluteal m.
19 Internal obturator m.
8 Gemelli m
 20 Caudal crural
abductor m.
10Quadra
12 Musculocuta
13 Tibial n.
(see pp. 71, 73, 75)
Legend:
 21 Cran. part of sartorius m.
 30 Sacrotuberous lig.
a Middle clunial nn 
i
 Caud. cutaneous sural n. of.
22 Fascia lata
b Cutaneous br. of cran. gluteal a. and v.
tibial n
23 Coccygeus m.
32 Adductor magnus m.
C Caudal [coccygeall nn.
Lat. cutaneous sural n. of
24 Levator ani m.
d Lat. caudal [coccygeal a. and v.
com. fibular (peroneal) n.
25 Sphincter ani ext. m.
e Caud. cutaneous femoral n. and 
Distal caudal femoral a. and .
k
26 Bulbospongiosus m.
cutaneous brr of caud. gluteal a. and v.
Lat. saphenous v
27 Ischiocavermosus m.
fDorsal caudal clunial nn.
m Supf. popliteal ln.
28 Gracilis m.
g Caud. gluteal a. and v.
29 Deep portion of supf.
h Muscular brr.
 gluteal m.
79
3. The Medial Saphenous Vein, Obturator Nerve, Femoral Nerve, Medial Muscles of the Thigh
and the Femoral Space (Femoral Canal)
 After exposing the quadriceps femoris and identifying its four heads, sever the rectus femoris head a fingerbreadth distal to its origin from the ilium. Reflect
 the distal stump to obtain an overview of the four heads. To do this, the caudal part of the sartorius must be displaced caudaly or cut.
a) The MEDIAL SAPHENous VEIN (6) originates from the femoral vein at the
c) The FEMoRAL NERvE (9) in the abdominal region is embedded in the
tip of the femoral triangle. With the saphenous artery (6) and the saphe-
 iliopsoas muscle and courses together with it through the neuromuscular
nous nerve (12), it runs distally to the crus, crossing the stife joint medial-
lacuna. It then emerges from the ventral surface of the iliopsoas muscle.
ly. In the proximal third of the crus, it divides into a cranial branch (8) and
 Here it gives off the saphenous nerve (12), which supplies the stifle joint
a caudal branch (7).
and runs as a sensory nerve on the medial surface of the limb distally to the
 b) The OeTuRAToR NeRvE (1) courses on the internal surface of the pelvis,
first and second digits. After release of the saphenous nerve, the femoral
through a gap ofthe levator ani muscle and, following in the obturator sul-
 nerve supplies the sartorius muscle and the four heads of the quadriceps
 femoris muscle. The branch to the sartorius may arise from the saphenous
cus of the pubic bone, continues to the obturator foramen. It passes
through the obturator foramen, supplies the extermal obturator muscle (G)
nerve.
and gives off muscular branches for the adductor muscles of the thigh
 The sartorius muscle (10) is split into a cranial and a caudal part, which
(adductormagnus, addutor brevis, ectineusmuscles)mringmdil
 originate at the iliac crest and, respectively at the cranial margin ofthe wing
ly between the pectineus adductor muscles, it enters the deep surface of the
 of the ilium, and radiate into the medial femoral and crural fasciae. Func-
gracilis muscle, which also acts as an adductor. The obturator nerve ends
tion: Adductor of the limb and extensor of the stifle joint.
medially at the stifle joint with a very weak sensory branch.
 The gracilis muscle (5) has its ultimate origin from the pelvic symphysis.
The quadriceps femoris muscle (see text-illustration) consists of the vas-
3
tus lateralis (A), vastus intermedius (B) and vastus medialis (11, C) mus-
The aponeuroses of origin of the ipsi- and contralateral muscles arise from 
 a median tendinous double-plate, the symphysial tendon (2), which lies
 cles, which originate proximally from the fermur, and of the rectus femoris
muscle (D), which originates craniodorsal to the acetabulum at the cau-
 between right and left adductor muscles, and to which it gives origin. The
symphysial tendon can be observed after the removal of the feshy fibers of
dal ventral iliac spine. Owing to its origin from the bony pelvis, the rec-
origin of the adductor magnus muscle. At the level of the stifle joint, the
tus femoris muscle can act as an extensor of the stifle joint and at the
same time as a flexor of the hip joint. After reflection of the cut rectus
 gracilis muscle is continued by the crural fascia and joins the formation of
femoris muscle all four heads of the muscle become visible. The strong
the medial calcanean tract.
tendon of insertion of the quadriceps femoris muscle invests the patella
The adductor magnus muscle (4) originates in an extended area from the
 and terminates with the patellar ligament (E; this ligament is better
lateral surface of the symphysial tendon and from the pubic and ischiadic
named the quadriceps tendon, Tendo m. quadricipitis) on the tibial
bones along the pelvic symphysis. It has a broad-surfaced fleshy' insertion
-u lis an aq uaun si uun uiasu au aaum asan
at the facies aspera of the femur.
 patellar (subtendinous) bursa (see p. 87).
The adductor brevis muscle (3) arises from the ventral pubic tubercle and
d) The FEMORAL SPACE Or FEMoRAL CANAL* lies in the femoral triangle,
ends, together with the adductor magnus, proximally on the facies aspera.
which is bounded basally by the inguinal ligament, cranially by the caudal
lao sassous ieut youiq aaiau jeoidai e jo siseq aui uo payuapiaq ueo il
 sartorius muscle and caudally by the pectineus muscle. Deeply, the groove
the adductor brevis before it enters the adductor magnus.
like femoral space is bounded by the iliopsoas muscle and superficially it is
The pectineus (13, F) muscle must be considered as a double muscle accord-
 Covered by the medial femoral fascia. The space contains the femoral artery
ing to its phylogenetic development, because it is fused with the adductor
 and vein and the saphenous nerve. Its access from the abdominal cavity is
one u aui soroi suad u au dop ai ui osu suo
the femoral ring, which is closed only by peritoneum and the transversalis
longus. In addition to its supply by the obturator nerve it often has an addi-
fascia. At the distal tip of the femoral triangle the femoral vessels pass
tional innervation by the saphenous nerve or the femoral branch of the geni-
 deeply onto the caudal surface of the femur and reach the popliteal region.
tofemoral nerve. The muscle originates at the iliopubic eminence and at the
 They pass from the femoral space caudodistally between the adductor mag-
caudal angle of the superficial inguinal ring and ends at the medial lip of the
 nus and semimembranosus muscles or by a cleft in the adductor magnus
facies aspera.
that sometimes occurs.
Muscles of hip and knee joints
Popliteus m.
 Sesamoid bones of
gastrocnemius m.
 Facies aspera
(Hip joint - extension)
F Pectineus m.
(snbuol loonppe pue)
lliopubic eminence 
Quadriceps femoris m.:
Trochanteric fossa
A  Vastus lateralis m.
G Ext. obturator m.
Vastus intermedius m.
C
Vastus medialis m.
(Hip joint - flexion)
D
 Rectus femoris m.
(section)
E
 Patellar lig.
[Quadriceps tendon]
Tibial tuberosity
80
*) Femoral space and femoral canal are understood as synonyms by many veterinary anatomists. In human medicine, the term femoral canal is defined
quite differently as the hernial canal', the site of femoral hernia.
Pelvic limb
9 Femoral n.
(medial view)
10 Sartorius m.
 Obturator n.
11 Vastus medialis m.
2 Symphysial tendon
12 Saphenous n.
13 Pectineus m. (et adductor longus)
3 Adductor brevis m.
Legend :
14 Ext. abdominal oblique m. (aponeurosis)
16 
 Medial crus
Lateral crus
17
Ext. inguinal ring (supf.)
18 Inguinal ig.
19 lliopsoas m.
20
 Semimembranc
sus m.
21
Semitendinosus m.
22
Tractus calcaneus med.
23 Med. head of gastrocnemius m.
 24 Supf. digital flexor m.
25
Tendons
 26 Common calcanean tendon 
Deep digital flexor mm.
28
Lat. digital flexor m.
Med. digital flexor m.
29
Common tendon
30
Tendon of caud. tibial m.
31
Cran. tibial m.
32 Crural extensor retinaculum
6 Med. saphenous v. and
33 Interosseous mm.
saphenous a.
35 Tractus tori metatarsei
7Caudal br.
8Cranial br.
(plantar view)
Legend :
a Ext. iliac a. and v.
 Deep femoral a. and v.
25
Pudendoepigastric trunk and v.
Med. circumflex femoral a. and v.
é Femoral a. and v.
f Supf. circumflex iliac a. and v.
g Lat. circumflex femoral a. and v.
h Prox. caud. femoral a. and v.
iMiddle caud. femoral a. and v.
jDescending genicular a. and v.
k Tibial n.
 Caud. cutaneous sural n.
m Lat. plantar a. and v.
n Med. plantar a. and v.
0 Cran. tibial a. and v.
 and deep fibular (peroneal) n.
m
 p Supf. fibular (peroneal) n.
q Cran. br. of lat. saphenous v.
Lat. tarsal y.
s Dorsal pedal a. and v.
tMed. tarsal v.
u Dors. comm. digital a. w. and 
nn. II - IV
V Caud. br. of lat. saphenous y.
lat. plantar n.
 x Plant. metatarsal a. and n. IV of 
lat. plantar n.
y Abaxial plant. digital n. Il of 
25
 med. plantar n.
z Plant. comm. digital a. and. nn.II - IV
of med. plantar a. and n
(see pp. 83, 85)
81
4.
The Lateral Saphenous Vein, Common Peroneal Nerve and Tibial Nerve, Crural (Leg)
Muscles and Popliteus Muscle
 The skin of the limb is reflected to the distal end of the metatarsus and the second digit. To dissect the origins of the muscles of the leg, the semitendi-
 nosus and gracilis muscles are cut at the transition to their nsertion tendons. To demonstrate the common peroneal nerve and the origins of the digital
extensors and the tarsal flexors the broad tendon of insertion of the biceps femoris muscle has to be fenestrated as shown in the accompanying illustra-
tion, so that only two terminal tendinous strips remain preserved, each about a fingerbreadth in width: (1) the proximal tendon ending on the patellar liga-
 ment; and (2) the distal tendon ending in the crural facia. The lateral calcanean tract should be preserved.
 a) The LATERAL SAPHENous VEIN (2S) originates in the popliteal region from
lying lateral or, respectively, medial condyle of the femur. The insertion of
the distal caudal femoral vein. It divides in the distal third of the crus into a
the gastrocnemius is by tendon, also called the calcanean or Achills ten-
cranial branch (26) and a caudal branch (27). The cranial branches of the lat-
don, on the calcanean tuber.
eral and medial saphenous veins anastomose on the dorsum pedis (see p. 85),
[ a   ( a x r  a 
on the flexor aspect of the tarsus. From their union the large common trunk
supracondylar tuberosity of the femur and is proximally surrounded by the
of dorsal common digital veins II - IV is formed. The caudal branches of the
 gastrocnemius muscle. After section of the medial head of the gastrocne-
lateral and medial saphenous veins also anastomose proximal to the plantar
mius muscle, the superficial digital flexor muscle can be taken out of its
tarsus. Each vein continues distally. The caudal branch of the lateral saphe-
 muscular investment. Its continuation as the superficial digital flexor ten-
Yu au jo poadse ieued jaiel aui uo aeisp suni i aae si ua snou
 don is called tendo plantaris up to the calcanean tuber and, together with
and, at the level of the proximal border of the metatarsal pad, forms the
the calcanean tract and the gastrocnemius (calcanean) tendon, forms the
common calcanean tendon (12). From a position that is initially cranial to
digital veins II - IV.
the gastrocnemius tendon, the superficial digital flexor tendon (17) crosses
2
 b) The CoMMoN PERoNEAL (FIBULAR) NERvE (21)* originates as the lateral
the medial side of the gastrocnemius tendon and arrives caudal to the gas-
 division of the ischiadic nerve. Before crossing the lateral head of the gas-
 trocnemius tendon at the hock. It broadens at the calcanean tuber to form
trocnemius muscle it gives off the lateral cutaneous sural nerve (22), which
 an expanded calcanean *cap' (Galea calcanea, —16). The tendon branches
6
at popliteal level penetrates between the main and accessory portions ofthe
 On the plantar metatarsus and each of its branches, after forming the tun-
biceps femoris muscle and reaches the skin. After this, the common peroneal
 nel-like manica flexoria (see p. 23) at metatarsophalangeal joint level, runs
nerve enters the crural musculature laterally and divides here into the super-
 plantarly to insert on the middle phalanx of the digit. The calcanean cap is
ficial peroneal (fbular) nerve (8) and deep peroneal (fbular) nerve (9) It is
fixed to the calcanean tuber laterally and medially by retinacula. Upon the 
these nerves that provide the distal muscular branches for the tarsal flexors 
 calcanean cap lies the inconstant (acquired) subcutaneous calcanean bursa
and digital extensors. Both nerves pass distally onto the flexor aspect of the
and, deepto the calcanean cap,the subtendinous calcanean bursa (13) that
tarsus. The superficial peroneal nerve is craniolateral and the deep peroneal
is opened after severing the lateral part of the fexor retinaculum (14) and
nerve runs craniomedially through the ringlike opening of the crural exten-
 reflecting the calca nean cap to the medial side.
sor retinaculum. After this, the superficial peroneal nerve dispatches the
II. The deep digital flexor muscle (see also text-illustration) is composed of
dorsal common digital nerves II - IV (the first and second digits are supplied
the large lateral digital flexor muscle (5) and the smaller medial digital fex-
 dorsally by the saphenous nerve). The deep peroneal nerve gives off a mus-
or muscle (C)* The very slight caudal tibial muscle (B) originates from the
cular branch for the extensor digitalis brevis muscle (15) and ends by divid-
head of the fibula and, in the dog, terminates with a very long andthin ten-
ing into the dorsal metatarsal nerves II - IV (see p. 85).
 don on the central tarsal bone. In the domestic ungulates, the muscle is larg-
3
 c) The CRANIOLATERAL CRURAL (LEG) MusCLES are flexOrs of the tarsus and
er and its tendon contributes to the deep flexor tendon. The two muscles
 extensors of the digits. In craniocaudal sequence these muscles are the fol-
axd aa oxa r daap ai n aru r 
lowing:
from the tibia and fibula. Their tendons pass separately upon the flexor
I. The cranial tibial muscle (4) originates laterally on the cranial border of
 aspect ofthe tarsal joint and join in the proximal plantar metatarsus to form
the tibia. It extends together with the long digital extensor and digiti I mus-
the deep digital flexor tendon (20). The branches of the deep digital flexor
cle, and with the deep peroneal nerve, through the crural extensor retina-
 tendon course through the tunnel-like manica flexoria of the superficial dig-
 culum and ends proximally on the first and second metatarsal bones.
 ital flexor tendon-branches and extend to the unguicular bones.
 II. The long digital extensor muscle (7) originates at the extensor fossa of
f) The SPECIAL FLEXOR MusCLE OF THE STIFLE JOINT (see text-illustration) is
4
the femur (for this reason long[!] digital extensor muscle) and, after the
the popliteus muscle (A). This muscle also acts to rotate the tibia on the
division of its tendon of insertion, ends on the distal phalanx of all digits.
femur, turning the cranial face ofthe crus (leg) medially, an action analogous
ai oi daap sassd i i ha jo rosxa al pue ss i aui u
to pronation of the thoracic limb. The innervation of the popliteus is by the
crural extensor retinaculum and, after this, as the only muscle, passes with-
tibial nerve. The muscle originates by tendon at the popliteal fossa of the lat-
in the ringlike opening of the tarsal extensor retinaculum.
 eral condyle ofthe femur Its belly lies in the popliteal region deep to the gas-
II. The extensor muscle of digit I lies as an inconspicuous muscle at the dis-
 trocnemius muscle and is attached to the proximomedial part of the caudal
tal two thirds of the tibia deep to the long digital extensor muscle. It orig-
surface of the tibia. The sesamoid bone of the popliteus muscle (see also p.
 87) is within the tendon of origin at its transition to the belly of the muscle.
inates proximally from the fibula and ends on the first and second digits.
IV. The peroneus (fbularis) longus muscle (3)* takes origin from the head
 of the fibula and the proximal tibia. It crosses the tendons of the peroneus
brevis and lateral digital extensor muscles. It attaches plantarly with a
Deep digital flexor muscles and
transversely running tendon on the proximal ends of the metatarsal bones
 and ends medially on the first tarsal bone.
 popliteus muscle
V. The lateral digital extensor muscle (10) originates at the proximal third
A  Popliteus m.
of the fibula and joins the long digital extensor on the proximal phalanx of
the fifth digit.
B Caudal tibial m. -
VI. The peroneus (fbularis) brevis muscle (11)* originates at the distal two
C  Medlial digital fexor m.
thirds of the fibula and ends proximally on the fifth metatarsal bone.
5
d) Before the TiBlAL NeRve (23) passes deeply between the two heads of the
gastrocnemius muscle, it releases the distal muscular branches for the tarsal
extensors and the digital flexors and gives off the caudal cutaneous sural
nerve (24). This cutaneous nerve crosses the lateral head of the gastrocne-
(caudal view)
mius muscle and crosses or penetrates the lateral calcanean tract. It inner-
vates the caudal cutaneous area of the leg (crus) and, a fingerbreadth prox-
imal to the calcanean tuber, joins again with the tibial nerve. After this, the
tibial nerve crosses the sustentaculum tali deep to the flexor retinaculum
and upon the plantar aspect ofthe lateral digital flexor tendon (see below).
It divides here into the medial and lateral plantar nerves. The medial plan-
tar nerve (19) gives off the plantar common digital nerves II - IV, and the
lateral plantar nerve (18) gives off the plantar metatarsal nerves II - IV.
3 e) The CAUDAL CRuRAL (LEG) MuscLES are extensors of the hock joint
and/or flexors of the digit.
I. The gastrocnemius muscle is the extensor muscle of the hock joint. In the
20
tendon of origin of its lateral head (1) and of its medial head (2) are the
sesamoid bones of the gastrocnemius muscle that articulate with the under-
82
*) In the NAV (1994) the terms peronaeus and peroneus are given as synonyms for fibularis.
* * ) The medial digital flexor muscle is also designated long digital flexor rmuscle and the lateral digital flexor muscle is also designated the long digital flexor of digit I.
Pelvic limb
(caudal view)
(lateral view)
21 Common fibular (peroneal) n.
 22 Lateral cutaneous sural n.
23 Tibial n.
 24 Caudal cutaneous
sural n.
Legend :
42
28 Supf. popliteal In.
29 Biceps femoris m.
30
Tractus calcaneus lat.
31 Semitendinosus m.
32 Tractus calcaneus med.
Gastrocnemius m
33 Calcaneal tendon
1   Lateral head 
34 Tendo plantaris of supf.
digital flexor m.
 2  Medial head
35 Med. digital flexor m.
 3 Fibularis (peroneus)-
36 Abductor digiti V m.
longus m.
 25 Lateral saphenous v.
37 Interosseous m.
4 Cranial tibial m.
38 Sartorius m.
39 Fascia lata
26  Cranial br.
40 Adductor magnus m.
24-
5 Lateral digital flexor m.
27  Caudal br.
41 Semimembranosus m.
42 Caudal crural abductor m.
6 Superficial digital fexor m.
43 Crural extensor retinaculum
 7 Long digital extensor m.
45 Tendon of fibularis
 8 Superficial fbular (peroneal) n.
(peroneus) longus m.
 9 Deep fibular (peroneal) n.and -
46
Tendon of fibularis
 cranial tibial a. and v.
(peroneus) brevis m.
47
Tendons of long digital extensor m.
 10 Lateral digital exten
48 Tendon of lat digital extensor m.
49 Calcaneus
25-
11 Fibularis (peroneus) brevis m:
45
50 Interflexor mm.
51 Lumbrical mm.
 12 Common calcaneal tendon
52 Tractus tori metatarsei
26-
13 Subtendinous calcanean bursa -
36
 53 Plantar anularligg.
14 Lateral flexor retinaculum
44
m-
46
27-
15 Extensor digitalis brevis m.
47-
Legend :
27
 a Abaxial plant. digital n. V
50
3>
b Plant. metatars. a. and n. IV
of lat. plant. n.
35
 of lat. plant. a. and n.
C Caud. br. of med. saphenous v.
17 Supf. digital flexor tendon
d Caud. br. of saphenous a.
18 Lateral plantar a. and n.
é Med. tarsal v. of
med. saphenous v. (cran. br.)
36
19 Medial plantar a. and n.
fAbaxial plant. digital n.ll
 20 Common tendon of deep.
of med. plant. n.
digital flexor mm.
51
g Plant. comm. digital aa.
and nn. II - IV of med.
b
52
plant. a. and n.
Supf. plantar arch
h
Plant. com. digital v.Il
j Plant. prop. digital a..
电
37
(plantar view)
17-
k Dist. caudal femoral v.
ww.and nn.
I Lat. tarsal v. of lat 
saphenous v (cran. br.)
m Cran.br. of saphenous a.
n Dors. com. digital a., v.
and n. IV
0 Abaxial dors. digital n. V
 of supf. fibular (peroneal) n.
(see pp. 79, 81, 85)
83
5. Arteries and Accompanying Vessels and Nerves of The Pelvic Limb
 With the dissection of the arteries, the satellite, same-named, veins are considered and the accompanying nerves are recapitulated. In this dissection, the
 popliteus muscle is severed at its insertion at the medial margin of the tibia to permit examination of the popliteal vessels.
a) The REGION OF THE GROUP AND LATERAL THIGH is Supplied by parietal
 The popliteal artery (14) is the continuation of the femoral artery and lies
branches of the internal iliac artery (see p. 79). The cranial gluteal artery
deep to the popliteal muscle. It gives off several branches for the stifle joint
(2) with its cutaneous branches and in the company of the middle clunial
and divides deep to the popliteus muscle into the shorter and somewhat
nerves appears superficially at the proximal cranial border of the superfi-
smaller caudal tibial artery and the longer and larger cranial tibial artery.
 Cial gluteal muscle. Its deeper branches accompany branches of the cranial
 The cranial tibial artery (15) passes craniolaterally through the crural
 gluteal nerve (1) between the midle and deep gluteal muscles, which are
interosseous space and, with the same-named vein and joined by the deep
supplied with arteries or, respectively, nerves. With its lateral (caudal) coc-
 peroneal nerve, passes distally on the cranial surface of the tibia. On the
 cygeal artery (see p. 79) and the accompanying caudal clunial nerves the
 distal crus, it passes beneath the crural extensor retinaculum, lying next to
large caudal gluteal artery (3) passes proximally under the skin at the cau-
the tibia and deep to the cranial tibial and long digital extensor muscles.
dal border of the superficial gluteal muscle. With deeply lying branches the
 On the dorsum of the pes, the cranial tibial is continued as the dorsal ped-
caudal gluteal artery accompanies the ischiadic nerve caudally and supplies
al artery (7) that, on the distal tarsus, ends as the arcuate artery with the
 the superficial gluteal muscle as well as the heads of origin of the hamstring
 dorsal metatarsal arteries I - IV that arise from the latter.
muscles.
c) The VEssEL AND NERvE SuPPLY OF THE FooT is predominantly by the
b) THIGH AND CRus are supplied by the distal continuations of the external
superficially running dorsal common digital arteries, veins and nerves and
iliac artery.
the respective plantar common digital arteries, veins and nerves as well as
 by the deeply situated dorsal metatarsal and plantar metatarsal arteries,
Just proximal to the vascular lacuna, the external iliac artery (8) ends by
veins, and nerves.
dividing into the femoral artery (10) and the deep femoral artery (9). The
 I. On the dorsum of the pes, the dorsal common digital arteries I - IV pass
deep femoral artery gives off the pudendoepigastric trunk, a short com-
 from the cranial branch of the saphenous artery. The dorsal common digi-
mon trunk of the caudal epigastric and external pudendal arteries, or the
tal veins II - IV arise from the large common trunk that is formed by the
caudal epigastric and external pudendal arteries arise separately from the
union of the cranial branches of the medial and lateral saphenous veins.
 deep femoral with no trunk being formed. After dispatching the puden-
 The dorsal common digital nerves are branches of the superficial peroneal
 doepigastric trunk or the separate vessels, the deep femoral continues as the
nerve. Dorsal metatarsal veins II - IV arise from the deep dorsal venous
medial circumflex artery, which passes caudally deep to the pectineus mus-
 arch that is satellite to the arcuate artery and is continued proximally by the
cle. It passes upon the cranial surface of the adductor magnus, which it
 dorsal pedal vein. Dorsal metatarsal nerves II- IV are branches of the deep
supplies. A branch runs caudally between the adductor magnus and the
peroneal nerve.
 obturator externus muscles and anastomoses here with the lateral cir-
 II. On the plantar surface of the foot (Planta), plantar common digital
cumflex femoral artery. The lateral circumflex femoral artery (12) and the
superficial circumfex iliac artery (11) originate a fingerbreadth distal to
 arteries II - IV pass from the medial plantar artery. Plantar metatarsal
the lacuna vasorum by a common stem or individually from the cranial
 arteries II -IV arise from the deep plantar arch, which is supplied by the lat-
wall of the femoral artery. The superficial circumflex iliac artery runs
eral plantar artery, a deep branch of the medial plantar artery, and a per-
forating branch (*perforating metatarsal artery’) from dorsal metatarsal
between the sartorius and tensor faciae latae muscles to reach the rectus
femoris muscle. The proximal caudal femoral artery (4) originates at the
 artery I. The plantar common digital veins II - IV pass to the superficial
half-length of the femoral triangle from the caudal wall of the femoral
 plantar venous arch, which is formed by the caudal branch of the lateral
artery and goes deep (lateral) to the gracilis muscle into the the muscula-
saphenous vein and a medial tributary of the dorsal pedal vein and dorsal
ture of the medial thigh. At the distal tip of the femoral triangle, the
 common digital venous trunk. Plantar metatarsal veins II - IV pass to the
 deep plantar venous arch, which is satellite to the deep plantar arch formed
femoral artery gives off craniodistally the descending genual artery (13) t0
the vastus medialis and the stife joint, and caudodistally the deeply lying
 by the arteries. At its lateral end, the deep plantar venous arch runs to the
 caudal branch ofthe lateral saphenous vein. Plantar common digital nerves
middle caudal femoral artery (5) to the cranial part of the semimembra-
 II - IV are branches ofthe medial plantar nerve. Plantar metatarsal nerves
nosus muscle. Proximal to the descending genual artery, the femoral gives
 II - IV are branches of the lateral plantar nerve. Medial and lateral plantar
off the saphenous artery, which is superficially located and accompanies
the medial saphenous vein. With its satellite vein, the saphenous artery
 nerves are terminal branches of the tibial nerve.
(16) divides at the proximal third of the crus into cranial and caudal
d) The LyMPH VessELs begin distally in the region of the digits and the dig-
branches. Its cranial branch (17) courses distally on the cranial tibial mus-
ital and metatarsal pads with a well developed net of lymphatic capillaries,
cle and, on the dorsum of the pes, releases dorsal common digital arteries 
which are suitable for direct lymphography (The applied radiopaque con-
I - IV. The caudal branch of the saphenous artery passes distally upon the
trast media reach the lymph vessels indirectly from the connective tissue)
 From the distal region of the pelvic limb the superficial lymph vessels go to
tar aspect of the hock joint into a medial plantar artery (19) and a lateral
the superficial popliteal lymph node (see p. 83) that lies in the popliteal
plantar artery (18). The medial plantar artery gives off the plantar com-
 region between the biceps femoris and semitendinosus muscles. After that,
mon digital arteries I - IV, and the lateral plantar artery joins with the
 the superficial lymph vessels run predominantly to the superficial inguinal
perforating metatarsal artery and a deep branch of the medial plantar to
lymph nodes and from there through the inguinal canal to the medial iliac
form the deep plantar arch, which lies deep to the flexor tendons in rela-
lymph nodes. The deep lymph vessels also reach the popliteal lymph node
tion to the proximal parts of the plantar muscles of the paw. Plantar
and from there in a variable manner to the medial iliac lymph nodes. On
metatarsal arteries II - IV take origin from the deep plantar arch. The dis-
the one hand they course in company with the tibial and ischiadic nerves
tal caudal femoral artery (6) and the popliteal artery (14) are the end
to the sacral lymph nodes and from there to the medial iliac lymph nodes.
branches of the femoral artery. In the popliteal region, the distal caudal
 Otherwise they pass with the femoral artery and vein and by way of the
s n e s  aui sns ae r
femoral space and ring the inconstant iliofemoral lymph node and finally
(The accompanying distal caudal femoral vein is continuous here with the
the medial iliac lymph nodes. From the medial iliac lymph nodes the lymph
lateral saphenous vein that, unaccompanied by a corresponding artery,
flows to the cisterna chyli and may pass by way of the aortic lumbar lymph
runs distally on the lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle. The lateral
 nodes. The cranial continuation of the cisterna chyli is the thoracic duct,
saphenous divides at the distal third of the crus into a cranial branch and
which transports the lymph to the venous angle between the external and
a caudal branch.)
internal jugular veins.
Legend (see opposite page)
 20 Lumbosacral trunk
 32 Lateral saphenous v.
41 Cranial tibial a., superficial branch
 21   Caudal gluteal n.
33  Caudal branch
42 Medial tarsal v.
 22 Ischiadic n.
34
 Anatomosis with caudal branch of 
43 Dorsal abaxial a., v., and n. of digit V
23
Rotator n.
 medial saphenous v.
44 Arcuate a.
24
Tibial n.
35
 Cranial branch
45 Deep dorsal (plantar) arch
25
Muscular branch (of ischiadic n.)
36
 Anastomosis with cranial branch of
46 Superficial dorsal (plantar) arch 
26
Caudal cutaneous sural n. (of tibial n.)
 medial saphenous v.
47 Dorsal (plantar) metatarsal aa., v., n.
27
Common peroneal (fibular) n.
 37 Medial saphenous v. and saphenous a..
 48 Dorsal plantar) common digital a., w., nn.
28
 Musculocutaneous branch
 caudal branch
49  Dorsal (plantar) proper digital a., w., nn.
29
Lateral cutaneous sural n.
 38 Pudendoepigastric trunk 
 50 Plantar abaxial n. of digit V
30
 Deep peroneal (fibular) n.
39 Femoral n.
 51 Plantar abaxial n. of digit l
31
 Superficial peroneal (fibular) n.
40  Saphenous n.
84
Arteries, veins and nerves of pelvic limb
(Atresien - Normand Basset)
(medial view)
1Cranialgluteal n.
 2 Cranial gluteal a. and v.
20
21
 3 Caudal gluteal a. and v.
22
-23
8Externaliliac a.and v
39
24
9 Deep femoral a. and v.
27
25-
10 Femoral a. and v.
 12 Lat. circumflex femoral a. and v.
40
4 Proximal caudal femoral a. and v.
 5 Middle caudal femoral a. and v.
13 Desc. genual a. and v.
26
14 Popliteal a. and v.
6 Distal caudal femoral a. and v.
15 Cran. tibial a. and v.
16 Saphenous a. and
Med. saphenous v.
17  Cranial branch
(plantar view)
24
37
18 Lat. plantar a.and n
19 Med. plantar a. and n
33
(dorsomedial view)
35
42
19
Ct
7 Dorsal pedal a. and v.
1/
45
46
(see pp. 81, 83)
85
6.
 Synovial Structures of the Pelvic Limb
a) JoINTs OF THE PeLvC LiMB
 Name
 Participating bones
Form/
Function
 Remarks
 Composition
1. Sacroiliac joint
Auricular surfaces of
Plane joint,
Amphiarthrosis
This tight joint is the connection of the
the sacrum and ilium
 Simple joint
 pelvic limb to the trunk
Il. Hip joint
Aceta bul um formed by
 Spheroid joint,
 Free joint
The ligament of the head of the femur
ilium, ischium, pubis and
Compound joint
fall movements 
anchors the head of the femur to the
acetabular bone/
possible)
 acetabulum and, at least in young dogs,
Head of the femur
 conducts blood vessels (A. epiphysialis)
to the femoral head.
l. Stifle joint 
(genual joint, knee joint)
 Femoroti bial joint
Lateral and medial condyles Spiral joint,
Ginglymus with
Two fibrocartilaginous menisci compensate
of the femur and tibia
Compound joint
braking action,
 for the incongruent surfaces of femur and
Sesamoid bones of the gastro-
chiefly uniaxial
tibia and act also to absorb shock. The
cnemius and popliteal muscles
with slight abduc-
 menisci are attached by meniscal ligaments 
tion and adduction
 to each other and to the tibia. The menisco-
as well as rotation
 femoral ligament produces a connection
of the tibia on its
 of the lateral meniscus to the femur. The
long axis
form of the menisci is altered with the
movements of the joint.
Femoropatellar joint
Trochlea of the femur/
 Sliding joint,
Gliding movement
t  The patella is a sesamoid bone that is
 Patellar articular surface
Simple joint
 embedded in the end-tendon of the quadri-
ceps femoris muscle and by way of its
insertion (patellar ligament) is attached to
the tibial tuberosity.
IV. Proximal tibiofibular joint 
 Tibia/Head of the fibula
 Plane joint,
Tight joint
 Communicates with the stifle joint.
 Simple joint
without movement
V. Distal tibiofibular joint
 Distal ends of tibia and fibula Plane joint,
Tight joint
 Communicates with the tarsocrural joint.
 Simple joint
without movement
Vl.  Tarsal joint (hock joint)
Compound joint
 For a) and b) there is a large common joint 
 cavity. Within b), between the trochlea of
the talus and the sustentaculum tali, there is
a small, separate joint cavity that does not
 communicate with the common joint cavity.
 C) and d) possess their own joint cavities.
a) Tarsocrural joint
Cochlea of the tibia/
Cochlear joint,
Ginglymus,
The ligaments of the hock joint consist of
Trochlea of the talus/
Compound joint 
slight rotation
long ligaments, which bridge over several
Articular surface of the
mainly in a),
joints, and short ligaments that bridge over
lateral malleolus 
less in b)
single joints. The long lateral collateral
tarsal ligament extends from the lateral
b) Proximal intertarsal
Between talus, calcaneus,
 Plane joint,
 malleolus to the proximal end of metatarsal
joint*
and the central tarsal bone 
 Compound joint
bone V. It is superficial to the short liga--
and tarsal bone IV
ments. The longmedial collateral tarsal liga-
ment extends from the tibia to metatarsal
c) Distal intertarsal joint*
Between the central tarsal
 Plane joint,
In c) -e) little
bones I and Il. Thelong plantar ligament
bone and tarsal bones I -Il Compound joint 
mobility
extends from the calcaneus to metatarsal
 d) Tarsometatarsal joint
Between tarsal bones I - IV
 Plane joint,
bone IV. Other ligaments can be studied in
and metatarsal bones II - V
 Compound joint
the accompanying illustrations (below).
e) Intertarsal (perpendicular) joints: tight perpendicular joints between the tarsal bones.
VI. The JoINTs oF THE DIGITs are similar to those of the manus.
 b) SYNOVIAL BuRSAE
The tight joint capsule and the ligaments (sacrotuberous, dorsal and ven-
 The ischiadic bursa of the internal obturator muscle lies between the mus-
tral sacroiliac ligaments) of the sacroiiac joint are loosened at the end of
cle and the lesser ischiadic notch.
 pregnancy and permit some dilatation of the birth canal.
The trochanteric bursa of the superficial gluteal muscle is present in about
At the hip joint the transverse acetabular ligament bridges over the acetab-
 one-third of specimens. It is between the insertion tendon of the muscle and
ular notch, and the labrum of the acetabulum, which is fibrocartilage,
the greater trochanter.
a jo roenba, au puoaq sualoud inoum alaeo uo aui suadaa
 The trochanteric bursa of the biceps femoris muscle is found between the
femoral head. For this reason, in the dog, the hip joint is a spheroid joint
 muscle and the tendon of insertion of the superficial gluteal.
and not an enarthrosis.
 The distal infrapatellar bursa is located deep to the patellar ligament upon
The stife (knee) joint is composed of the femorotibial and the femoropatel-
the tibial tuberosity.
lar joints. The first has two joint sacs that communicate openly and that
 The subtendinous calcanean bursa of the superficial digital flexor muscle
 again communicate with the femoropatellar and the proximal tibiofibular
 lies deep to the calcanean cap of that muscle, upon the calcanean tuber.
joints as well as the articulations of the sesamoid bones of the gastrocne-
 c) SyNoviaL SHEaTHS
mius muscle with the femoral condyles. The capsule of the stifle joint also
invests the tendons of origin of the popliteal and long digital extensor mus-
 In crossing the hock joint the tendons are protected by synovial sheaths. An
pieui aie suui asau uum aq yaus snouut iensdes e se sa
exception is the superficial digital flexor tendon in which its subtendinous
 bursa serves a similar function. The tendinous sheaths of the digital artic-
(cruciate ligaments; see clinical-functional anatomy 86.2)
ulations are similar to those of the thoracic limb.
86
intertarsal joint,the term centrodistal joint is employed.
Joints, synovial bursae and sheaths
(dorsal view)
(ventral view)
(ventral view)
Ventral sacroiliac lig
Dors. sacroiliac ligg.
Articularis c
Transverse acetabular lig
Lig. of femoral head 
Hip joint 
Hip joint
Legend :
1 Quadriceps femoris m.
3 Gracilis m.
5 Gastrocnemius m.
7 Supf. digital flexor m.
 2 Semimembranosus m.
4 Semitendinosus m.
6 Popliteus m.
8 Tibialis cran. m.
(medial view)
(lateral view)
(caudomedial view)
Patella
 Med. femoropatellar ig.
Lat. femoropatellar lig.
Articular capsule
 Sesamoid bone of gastrocnemic m
Infrapatellar fat pad
Medial meniscus
Medial meniscus
Lateral meniscus
Dist. infrapatellar bursa
Subextensor recess
amoid bone of popliteus r
Stifle joint
Stifle joint 
Legend :
Deep digital flexor mm.:
11 Long digital extensor m.
14 Peroneus brevis
17
 Quadratus plantae m.
Med. digital flexor m.
12 Peroneus longus m.
15 Short digital extensor m.
18 Interosseus m.
16 Abductor digiti V
19 Tibialis caudalis m.
10
Lat. digital flexor m.
20 Extensor digiti I m.
(lateral view)
(medial view)
(medial view)
-Bursa of calcaneal tendor
H
Short medial collateral
-Subtendinous calcanean
tarsal lig. :
bursa of supf. digital
 Pars tibiotalaris
flexor m.
 Pars tibiocalcanea -
Synovial sheaths
Long medial collateral 
Short lat. collateral lig.
tarsal lig.
16
Pars tibiocalcanea
 Talocentral lig.
Articular capsule
Long plantar lig.
Subtendinous bursa of
11
fibularis (peroneus) brevis m.
 Synovial bursa
18
20
Hock joint
Hock joint 
Legend :
(see pp. 81,83,143)
A
 Med. collateral lig
 Lat. collateral lig
 Caudal tibial lig. of lat. meniscus
Cranial cruciate lig.
B
 Patellar lig.
D
Meniscofemoral lig.
二
 Caudal cruciate lig.
H
Crural  extensor retinaculum
Tarsal extensor retinaculum 
87
Chapter 9: Head
1.
 Skull, Including the Hyoid Apparatus
1  The skull is the skeleton of the head, organized into a cranial part (crani-
the opening at the commencement of the hypoglossal canal (35). The exter-
um) and a facial part. Of the seven bones of the (neuro)cranium, those
 nal opening of the canal is caudal to the jugular foramen between the occip-
numbered I to Ill and IVc are membranous bones forming the roof of the
 ital condyle and the jugular process (36). The basilar part (37) borders the
skull or calvaria. Individual bones numbered IVa and b, V to Vll are
foramen magnum (38) ventrally Midventrally between the jugular fora-
replacement or primordial bones which replace the carilaginous primor-
 mina it possesses an indistinct unpaired pharyngeal tubercle (39) for the
dial skeleton at the base of the skull.
 origin of pharyngeal muscles. Adjacent and medial to the tympanic bulla
 of either side, the basilar part has a muscular tubercle (40) for the insertion
2
 a) With regard to the CnANium the calvaria has a temporal fossa (j) which
 of the longus ca pitis muscle.
one can regard as the site of origin of the m. temporalis and which is
bounded by the external frontal crest (k), the external sagittal crest (l), the
nuchal crest (m) and the temporal crest (m'). The carotid canal housing the
Occipital bone
au on daap (u) uaurog poreo jepneo aui ie suiaaq 'e puoeo ieuau!
jugular foramen at the base of the skull It terminates at the internal carotid
1.
(caudolateral view)
foramen (o) within the cranial cavity rostrally, and at the external carotid
31
foramen (p) on the base of the skull. The jugular foramen (q) gives passage
to cranial nerves IX, X and XI. The parts of the cranial cavity are described
on p 90.
I. Caudodorsal to the orbit, the frontal bone possesses the zygomatic
 process (1) from which the orbital ligament runs to the frontal process of
the zygomatic bone (56). The external ethmoid a. and v. and the ethmoid
35
n. passs through the ethmoidal foramina (2). The frontal sinuses are
described on p. 90.
36
 I1. The parietal bone and 
40
Il. the interparietal bone project into the cranial cavity by means of their
37
tentorial processes (4 and 5 on p. 91).
 IV. The temporal bone consists of petrosal, tympanic and squamous parts.
 a. Of the petrosal part (6) only the following features are visible external-
ly: the mastoid process (7) for the attachment of tendons of the sternoclei-
Vll. The sphenoid bone consists of two bones, the basisphenoid and the
domastoideus, the stylomastoid foramen (10) for the exit of the facial n.,
 presphenoid. Each of these has a (horizontal) body situated medially, and
the external opening of the canaliculus ofthe chorda tympani (11), and the
a (vertical) wing laterally.
petrotympanic fissure (12). (Nos. 8, 9, 13, and 14 are described on p. 90.)
 The basisphenoid bone bears the sella turcica (42) on the inner surface of
b. The tympanic part (15) lies caudal to the temporomandibular articula-
the body (41). Internally, the wing (43) bears the foramen rotundum (44)
tion on the base of the skull. The external acoustic meatus, commencing at
for the entrance of the maxillary n. (V2), while externally the foramen
the external acoustic pore (16), is separated from the bulla tympanica (17)
 ovale (45) for the passage of the mandibular n. is seen medial and adjacent
to the mandibular fossa. The pterygoid crest (46), the osseous ridge of ori-
ity of the middle ear into which opens the tympanic ostium of the audito-
 gin of the extrinsic muscles of the ocular bulb, commences ventrally at the
ry tube. The other end of the auditory tube, the pharyngeal ostium, opens
alar canal (47). The maxillary a. and n. leave the alar canal at the rostral
into the pharynx.
alar foramen (48), having entered it at the caudal alar foramen (49) and the
c. The squamous part (18) belongs to the roof of the skull,its zygomatic
 foramen rotundum, respectively.
process (19) participating in the formation of the zygomatic arch. Cau-
The body (95) of the presphenoid bone, which is median in position,
doventrally, at the base of the arch, are located the mandibular fossa (20)
 merges with the wing (51) laterally. The optic canal (52), the passage ofthe
and its articular surface (21), and the well-defined retroarticular process 
optic n., is situated cranially on the wing at the base of the orbit. Caudal-
(22) caudal to these.
ly, the orbital fissure (S3) affords passage to cranial nerves II, IV, V1, and
VI.
 b) Rostroventral to the orbit, the FAcE houses the pterygopalatine fossa
(A). The greater palatine canal, containingthe greater palatine n., begins in
the fossa at the caudal palatine foramen (B) and ends at the greater pala-
tine foramen (C) on the hard palate. Lesser palatine canals, containing less-
 Temporal bone
er palatine nn., branch from within the greater palatine canal and terminate
likewise at lesser palatine foramina (D). The sphenopalatine foramen (E).
lying dorsal to the caudal palatine foramen, contains the caudal nasal n.
(lateral view)
(from V2) going to the nasal cavity. At the choanae (F) the nasopharyngeal
 canal is continuous with the nasopharynx. The orbit (G) is closed caudal-
m
ly by the orbital ligament. The paired palatine fissures (H), housing the
incisive ducts, are located in the hard palate caudal to the upper incisor
teeth. Pit-like excavations, the dental alveoli (J), accommodate the roots of
10
the teeth and are responsible for the external prominences of the alveolar
 juga (K). Alveolar canals (L) begin in the depth of the alveoli and conduct
arteries, veins and nerves to the teeth. Interalveolar septa (M) are osseous
ridges between the alveoli; whereas, a diastema (N) or gap between the
16-
teeth is rostral and caudal to the canine tooth.
VllI. to XVIl. are described on p. 90.
 XVIll. The hyoid bone, also designated hyoid apparatus, has cartilaginous
precursors in the branchial arches and is therefore classfied as a bone of
3
V. The ethmoid bone and its parts (23 to 29) are discussed with the
the skull. The unpaired basihyoid (90) element lies transversely at the base
 paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity (see p. 90).
of the tongue, and is flanked on both sides by the paired ceratohyoid (91)
Vl. The occipital bone of the fetus has recognizable sutures between its
elements. From the basihyoid, the two thyrohyoid (92) elements are direct-
squamous, lateral and basilar parts.
 ed caudodorsally to articulate with the thyroid cartilage of the larynx. The
The squamous part (30) has a conspicuous external occipital protuberance
these are followed by stylohyoid (94) elements directed towards the base of
(31) situated mid-dorsally, which is continuous on either side with the
the skull. A cartilaginous tympanohyoid (95) connects each stylohyoid to
nuchal crest.
the mastoid process of the temporal bone of the same side.
The lateral part (32) bears an occipital condyle (33) on each side of the
foramen magnum for participation in the atlanto-occipital articulation.
Within the foramen magnum and occipital condyle is the condylar canal
(34) for the passage of emissary vv. from the skull Rostroventral to this lies
88
 Cranium
(rostrodorsal view)★
External lamina (a)
XVll. Hyoid bone ★
n cerebelli (cd)
Temp
Transverse sinus canal (f)
Sulcus of transverse sinus (g)
Stylohyoid (94)*
Retroarticular foramen (h)
Tympanohyoid (95)*
Temeoralfosal crest (K*
External sagital crest (l)★
Nuchal crest (m)★
Jugular foramen (q)
Ossa neurocranii
I. Os frontale ★ ●
90
Zygomatic process (1)*●
Rhstral frontal sinus(
idalfora
(2)
Thyroid cartilage
Lateral frontal sinus(3b)
Medial frontal sinus (3c)
V.
Incisor teeth
91
I. Os parietale ★ 
Canine tooth
L(P1)
Ill. Os interparietale -
Wolf tooth
★心
Tentorial process (5)
P2
- P4
Premolar teeth
IV. Os temporale ★ 
- M2
 Molar teeth
a. Petrous part (6)**
ocess (7
Canalicuus of chorda tympani (11)
eayaranctsure(as
Cere
(13)
bxemeraeat (neaus
Ostium tympanicum tubae auditivae (17)
C. Squamg
69
Retroarticular process (22)★
Vl. Os occipitale ●
Tentorial process (31')
Lateral part (32)●
X
Basilar part (37)
Foramen magnum (38)
Pharyngeal tubercle (39)
 n
VIll. Os sphenoidale ●
Os basisphenoidale
Wing (43)★
Foramen ovale (45)
Rostral alar fora
men (48)*
Caudal alar foramen (49)
Os presphenoidale
Body（50）)
Orbital fissure (53)*
X Nasal bone ★
Face
Xl. Maxilla ★
Body of maxilla (57)*
aorblalca
Infraorbital foramen (59)*
caudal pal
Lacimal 8v 01
Lesser palatine canals
Caucsa pains gramen G
Frontal process (62)*
Zygomatic process (63)*
Orbit (G)
Xll. Incisive bone ★ 
(caudobasal view)
Alveolar juga (K)*
Palatine process (68)
Nasal process (69)+
Diastema (N)★
Xll. Palatine bone ●
 Bones of face
Vlll. Lacrimal bone ★ 
Fossa of lacrimal sac (54)
XIV. Pterygoid bone ★
Pterygoid hamulus (72)*
XV. Vomer ●
Frontal process (56)
Septal groove (73)
89
2. Skull, Paranasal Sinuses
1
 a) The WALL oF THE SkULL consists of an outer cortical layer of bone, the
 I to IV in series dorsoventrally. Endoturbinate I forms the osseous base for
external lamina (a), a middle, reduced layer of spongiosa, the diploe (b),
the dorsal nasal concha (28) while endoturbinate I is similarly associated
and an inner cortical layer of bone, the lamina interna (c). Dorsally, the
with the middle nasal concha (29). The ventral nasal conchal bone (XVI)
 spongy substance of the frontal bone is lost and the two cortical layers of
is the osseous basis of the ventral nasal concha and belongs properly to the
bone diverge from one another, forming the frontal sinuses. The paired
facial bones, not to the ethmoid bone.
frontal sinuses are paranasal sinuses and are in open communication with
the nasal cavity. The rostral frontal sinus (3a) lies between the median
osseous septum of the frontal sinus and the orbit. The lateral frontal sinus
Ethmoidal bone
(3b) is the largest of the frontal sinuses and extends into the zygomatic
(rostral view)
proces of the frontal bone. The medial frontal sinus (3c) is very small and
lies between the other two. Occasionally it is absent. In some cases a sphe-
274
noidal paranasal sinus is developed.
The osseous tentorium cerebelli (d) is formed from the fused tentorial
26
processes (4, 5, and 31') of the parietal, interparietal and occipital bones.
56
It is the bony basis of the membranous tentorium cerebelli that separates 
the cerebrum from the cerebellum within the cranial cavity.
The exit passages for the dorsal system of sinuses of the dura mater lies in
B  saa  lm is a m d u m s a on l h
dorsal median position atthe base of the osseous tentorium cerebelli as the
V
canal of the transverse sinus (f) which is continued laterally at the petrous
XV
suog pue () snus asan a jo sns aui oun auo idn
that, into the temporal meatus (e). The temporal meatus ends externally at
the retroarticular foramen (h)
 c) The FAcIAL PART OF THE SKULL is formed by the facial bones (VIll to
 b) The CRANIAL CAMTy is bounded by the internal surfaces of the cranial
bones. Rostral, middle and caudal fossae of the cranium are present at the
 nasopharyngeal inlet and of the nasal pharynx.
base of the cranial cavity. The rostral fossa (r) begins with the paired eth-
VII. The small lacrimal bone bears in its center the fossa of the lacrimal
moidal fossae (s) and ends at the chiasmatic sulcus (t) at which the two
sac (54), which receives the lacrimal sac.
 optic nerves cross caudal to the entrance into the optic canal (52). On the
 midline, the middle cranial fossa (u) houses the sella turcica (42) formed by
 IX. With its temporal process (55), the zygomatic bone participates in
3
the basisphenoid Cranial to the dorsum sellae, a median hypophyseal fos-
forming the zygomatic arch. Its frontal process (56) is the site of attach-
sa (v) is present to seat the hypophysis. Laterally, the paired piriform fos-
 ment of the orbital ligament.
sae (w) accommodate the pear-shaped olfactory lobes. The caudal fossa of
X. The nasal bone lies dorsal on the nose.
the cranium (x) has a shallow pontine impression (y) on the midline ros-
trally for the pons of the metencephalon and, caudally, the medullary
 Xl. The maxilla has an infraorbital canal situated centrally in its body
(57). The canal is the passage for the infraorbital a. and n. Coming from
impression (z) for the medulla oblongata. In the dog the petro-occipital fis-
the pterygopalatine fossa caudally, these structures enter the canal
[odui aui jo led snouad aun uaamaq ads mouu Aiaa e si (z) ams
bone and the basioccipital bone. It is occasionally lacking.
through the maxillary foramen (58) and leave it by the infraorbital fora-
men (s9) rostrolaterally. The lacrimal sac passes over into the naso-
IV. a. The petrous part of the temporal bone (6) has only the mastoid
lacrimal duct which passes through the lacrimal canal (60) and, rostrally,
process (7) on the external surface of the skull while the petrous pyramid
the lacrimal groove (61). The frontal (62), zygomatic (63) and palatine
limits the cra nial cavity basolaterally. In the midle of the medial surface of
(64) processes respectively, border the bones of like name. The alveolar
the petrous pyramid, the internal acoustic pore (8) marks the beginning of 
 process (65) bears dental alveoli. In contrast to the other domestic mam-
the internal acoustic meatus into which cranial nerves Vll and VIll enter.
mals, the canine maxilla has no paranasal sinus, but rather a laterally
The facial canal (9), housing the facial nerve, proceeds deeply rostrodor-
directed outpouching, the maxillary recess (65').
sally from the internal acoustic meatus and ends externally at the stylo-
Xll. The incisive bone consists of a body (66), an alveolar process (67), a
mastoid foramen (10). Centrally, within the petrous temporal bone, the
palatine process (68), and a nasal process (69).
minates externally at the minute petrotympanic fssure (12). The cerebellar
XIL The palatine bone, by means of the medial surface of its perpendicu-
fossa (13), situated dorsocaudally onthe petrosal pyramid, receives a small
lar lamina (70), participates in the formation of the nasopharyngeal mea-
appendage, the ventral paraflocculus of the cerebellum. Rostroventrally,
tus. Its lateral surface enters into the formation of the orbit. In common
the pyramid is pierced by the canal of the trigeminal nerve ( 14).
with the palatine process of the maxilla, the horizontal lamina (71) forms
the osseous base of the hard palate.
 XIV. The pterygoid bone bounds the nasopharynx laterally and features a
hamulus (72) ca udoventrally.
 XV. The vomer has a dorsomedian septal groove (73) for the reception of
the na sal septum.
XVI. The ventral nasal conchal bone was mentioned previously as the
osseous base of the ventral concha. It is joined by suture to the medial sur-
face of the maxilla.
Temporal bone
XVIl. The mandible consists of a vertical ramus and a horizontal body.
5
The long mandibular canal (for the inferior alveolar a., v. and n.) begins
(medial view)
suan pue (t) uaunn eq aul ie snwn au uo ani
rostrally on the body with several mental foramina (75). The body of the
mandible (76) has a ventral margin (77), an alveolar margin (78), and
6
medially a very faint mylohyoid line (79) for the origin of the m. mylo-
hyoideus. Caudoventrally, the ramus of the mandible (80) exhibits an
13-
angle of the mandible (81) with an angular process (82). The masseteric
7
fossa (83) is a triangular fossa on the lateral surface of the mandible for
8-
the attachment of the m. masseter; whereas, an indistinct pterygoid fos-
14
sa (84) is present medially, providing insertion to the m. pterygoideus.
The condylar process (85) participates with its head of the mandible (86)
in the formation of the temporomandibular articulation and, with the
neck of the mandible (87) passes over into the concave mandibular notch
V. The lamina cribrosa (23) and the median crista galli (24) of the ethmoid
(88) situated caudal to the coronoid process (89). The temporalis muscle
bone lie at the boundary with the nasal cavity. The ethmoidal labyrinth
inserts on the coronoid process.
(25) and its ethmoturbinates project into the nasal cavity. The smaller eth-
moturbinates situated externally are called ectoturbinates (26). The larger,
internal endoturbinates (27), situated near the nasal septum, are numbered
90
Cranium
External lamina (a) 
Xl. Maxilla ★
DJiploe(b)
nternal lamina (c) 
(paramedian section) 
Osseaus tentorium cerebelli(d)
Temporal meatus (e) I
Transverse sinus canal (f) 
 (h) sns eseasuenjo snn
Retroarticular foramen (h)
alu
External sagittal crest ()
61
Nuchal crest (m)
68
69
65
64
26
VIll. 5
Cranial cavity
Rostral fossa
Rosralfdal fossae (s)
f cranium (r) 
Middu sochiasmatanum (u)
(A) essoj leesAydodAH
Piriform fossa (w)
Face
resessio
Petrooccipidal fissure (z)
Bones of face 
Ossa neurocrani
VIll. Lacrimal bone
Fossa of lacrimal bone (54) 
I. Os frontale 
71
IX. Zygomatic bone 
Temporal process (55) 
Frontal process (56)
Medial frontal sinus (3c)
X. Nasal bone 
XIll.
70
I. Os parietale
X. Maxilla★
Tentorial process (4)
Body of maxilla (57) ★
Il. Os interparietale
Infraorbital canal
Tentorial process (5)
Maxillary foramen (58)
IV. Os temporale
a. Petrous part (6)
XIV.1
Palatine process (64)*
72
Internal acoustic pore (8)
men (10)
ani(11)
Maxillary recess (65)
Xll. Incisive bone
Palatine process (68) 
b. Tympanic part (15)
Nasal process (69)
Xll. Palatine bone 
Perpendicular lamir
(0)e
Ostium tympanicum tubae auditivae (17)
Horizontal lamina (71)
XIV. Pterygoid bone 
Pterygoid hamulus (72)
XV. Vomer
Retroarticular process (22)
Septal groove (73)
V. Ethmoidal bone 
 XVI. Bone of ventral nasal concha
★
XVIll. Mandible 
Manlulaeramen(4)
Mental foramina (75)
(ez) eyouoo leseu alpn
V. Os occipitale
Rante d analbe (80) B
lenk
Tentorial pro
s(31)
Masseteric fossa (83)
Lateral part (32)
Occipitalcond
(33) 
88 (85)口
Neak of mandible (87)
Hypoglossal canal (35)
condylar) process (36)
Mandibularnotch(88)
Basilar part (37)
Coronoid [muscular] process (89) 
harcle
Vll. Os sphenoidale
Os basisphenoidale
Foramen ovale (45)
76
Rostral alar foran
men(48)
XVll. Mandible 
Os presphenoidale
Body (50)he
5
Orbital fissure (53) 
91
3. Lymphatic System, Superficial Veins of the Head, Facial Nerve (Vll)
 The skin is removed from the left side of the head taking care to preserve superficial arteries, veins and nerves, and cutaneous muscles. The external ear
is severed at its base and removed. Following this, the m. cutaneus faciei, a part of the platysma, is exposed, detached from underlying structures and 
reflected rostrally, keeping intact the mm. malaris, Zygomaticus and parotidoauricularis. To display arteries, veins and nerves, each of the facial muscles
is either retracted or its coarse muscle bundles are pushed aside serially along the course of the veins and nerves. After its exposure the m. levator
nasolabialis is transected and both parts reflected. The maxillary v. and facial n. are displayed by removing all of the parotid gland except for a small
remnant at the beginning of the parotid duct.
a) The LYMPHATic SysTEM of the head (see also text-illustration) includes
after its origin, the lingual v. (15) dispatches the hyoid venous arch that
the palpable parotid and mandibular lymph nodes, which are situated
 passes transversely to anastomose with the lingual v. of the opposite side.
superficially, and the deeper medial retropharyngeal and inconstant lateral
After that, the lingual v. crosses the caudal border of the m. mylohyoideus
retropharyngeal lymph nodes.
dorsally, and just before entering the tongue gives offthe sublingual v. (11).
1
The parotid lymph node (24) lies at the level of the temporomandibular
The latter vein is seen by displacing the caudal border of the m. stylohy-
joint deep to the rostral border of the parotid gland. Afferent lymphatic
oideus rostra lly.
vessels come from the superficial head regions dorsal to a line joining the
 Initially, the facial v. (14) runs ventrolaterally along the mandible where it
eye and the base of the ear Efferent vessels go to the medial retropharyn-
 gives off the submental v. (10). This vein is directed ventrally across the
geal lymph node.
 insertion of the m. digastricus and continues ventromedial to the body of
The mandibular lymph nodes (29) lie rostroventral to the mandibular
the mandible as far as the chin (mental region). The facial vein, after pro-
 gland. Afferent lymphatic vessels come from the deeper regions of the head
viding the inferior labial v. (9) to the lower lip, and then the angular v. of
and from superficial regions of the head ventral to the line joining the eye
the mouth (12) to the oral commissure, continues obliquely, curving over
and the base of the ear. Efferent vessels also pass to the medial retropha-
the face to the medial angle of the eye. On the caudal aspect of the facial v.
 ryngeal lymph node.
at the level of the angle of the mouth, the deep facial v. (13) runs deeply
The medial retropharyngeallymph node (30) lies deep to and caudal to the
 rostral aspect of the facial v. the superior labial v. (1) branches to the upper
mandibular gland, dorsolaterally and caudal to the pharynx. Lymph is
lip and the small lateral nasal v. (2)is directed rostrally on the lateral aspect
derived from the deeper regions of the head, and from the mandibular and
 of the nose. The facial v. also ana stomoses with the infraorbital v. This vein
parotid lymph nodes. Its efferent vessels unite to form the jugular trunk
-d au ie a  dap al jo ui i  uo s
(tracheal lymphatic trunk). An inconstant lateral retropharyngeal lymph
tine fossa and runs rostrally through the infraorbital canal. (The facial a.
node may be intercalated in the path of lymph vessels passing to the medi-
(14) ends here by anastomosing with the infraorbital a.) Finally, reaching
al retropharyngeal node. The lateral node then also receives a part of the
the dorsum nasi, the facial v. divides in the form of a *T. The dorsal nasal
lymph from the parotid node. When present, the lateral retropharyngeal
v. (3) runs rostrally toward the tip of the nose, while the angular v. of the
node lies at the caudal border ofthe parotid gland, on a level with the wing
 eye (4) runs in the opposite direction to the medial angle of the eye where
 of the atlas. Its efferent vessels run to the medial retropharyngeal node.
it anastomoses with branches of the deep facial and ma xillary vv.
C) The FaCIal Nerve (Vll, InTeRmeDlofaClaL Nerve, 
26) consists of two
2
parts, the facial n. and the intermediate n. The still undivided facial n.
enters the facial canal at the internal acoustic pore of the petrous part of
Lymph nodes of head
the temporal bone. At the sensory geniculate ganglion, it discharges the
intermediate n. from which the chorda tympani runs through the
petrotympanic fissure to join the lingual n. (from V3). The greater petro-
(lateral view)
sal nerve, a parasympathetic nerve, also arises from the facial nerve. After
uniting with the deep petrosal nerve, a sympathetic nerve, the greater pet-
rosal n. continues as the n. of the pterygoid canal to the pterygopalatine
a aod u y a i a um s ih d aa a
off the n. stapedius to the m. stapedius. With the exception of its predom-
inantly sensory internal auricular branches, the facial n. proper conveys
exclusively motor fibers. The sensory fibers of its internal auricular
branches are conveyed to the facial n. by the auricular branch of the vagus
n. (X). After the facial n. emerges from the stylomastoid foramen,
the
internal auricular branches leave the facial n. and subsequently pierce the
auricular cartilage to supply the external acoustic meatus, reaching near-
ly to the tympanic membrane. The facial n. continues by running around
the osseous external acoustic meatus in a ventrally convex arch, deep to
30
the parotid gland. From the convexity of the facial n. terminal branches
arise in a caudorostral sequence and are described below. These are com-
 bined with sensory portions of the fifth cranial nerve and second cervical
 n. and innervate deep and superficial facial muscles, including the platys-
 ma and the caudal belly of the m. digastricus.
 The caudal auricular n. (23) innervates the caudal auricular muscles and
b) The SuPERFiciAL VEINs arise from the external jugular v. (18) that, cau-
provides the 1. platysmatis (21) for the cervical platysma. Consecutive
dal to the mandibular gland, bifurcates into a maxillary v. dorsally and a
 digastric and stylohyoid branches supply the respective muscles. From the
linguofacial v. ventrally. (The superficial arteries of the external ear and
 convexity of the facial n., the common trunk of the ramus colli and ventral
face stem from the external carotid and the facial a. respectively, and will 
 buccal branch (labeled R. buccolabialis ventr. in the figure) passes ventral-
be considered with the veins.)
ly. The ramus coli (27) is directed caudally. It innervates the m. paroti-
doauricularis and provides motor fibers to the transverse cervical n. of the
The maxillary v. (8) collects blood from the external ear and in particular
second cervical n. The ventral buccal branch (28, —labeled R. buccolabi-
from the deeper head regions such as palate, cranial cavity, eye and
alis ventr. in the figure), accompanies the facial v. rostrally. At the level of
mandible. Within the parotid gland, it gives off the caudal auricular v. (7)
the eye, it communicates with the dorsal buccal branch (labeled R. bucco-
to the caudal contour of the ear, and a thumbs breadth rostral to that the
labialis dors. in the figure) and the two nerves innervate the muscles of the
superficial temporal v. (6), which arches across the temporal region. At the
cheek, lips and nose. The dorsal buccal branch (25, —labeled R. bucco-
base of the ear, the large rostral auricular v. (S) branches from the latter to
labialis dors. in the figure) continues the rostral course of the facial nerve,
reach the cranial border of the external ear. The maxillary v. continues
 passing upon the masseter about 2 cm. dorsal and parallel to the parotid
deeply medial to the temporomandibular joint. After forming the ptery-
1 pue pue pd au o daap si u ley aui wouy uauo s ionp
 goid, palatine and ophthalmic plexuses, the maxillary v. anastomoses at the
emerges at the rostral border of the gland a little ventral to the parotid
medial angle of the eye with a terminal branch of the facial v. and deep
facial v. (see below).
lymph node. With the dorsal buccal branch, the auriculopalpebral n. (22)
is a terminal branch of the facial n. Its rostral auricular branches (19) sup-
The linguofacial v. (17) provides for the venous drainage of the tongue and
 ply the rostral and dorsal auricular muscles and its palpebral branch (20)
face. Ventral to the mandibular gland it bifurcates into the lingual v. direct-
forms a broadly ramifying plexus in the temporal region caudal to its entry
ed ventrorostrally and the facial v., which extends dorsorostrally. Shortly
 into the muscles of the eyelids and nose.
92
Lymphnodes, arteries and veins of head and facialis n. (Vll)
(lateral view)
 Superior labial a. and v.
Lateral nasal a. and v.
3 Dorsal nasal a. and v.
Rostral auricular a. and v
4 Angularis oculi a. and v.
6Supf. temporal a. and v.
Caudalauriculara.andv
9 Inferior labial a. and v
10 Submental a. and v.
18 Ext. jugular v.
11 Sublingual a. and v.
14 Facial a. and v
17 Linguofacial v.
12 Angularis oris a. and v.
15 Lingual a. and v.
16 Hyoid venous arch
Legend :
a Mental br.
f Lesser palatine a. and v.
k Ventr. ext. ophthalmic v.
O Transverse facial a. and v.
t Int. carotid a.
b Infraorbital a. and v.
g Buccal a. and v.
 Ophthalmic plexus
and carotid sinus
C Sphenopalatine a. and y.
h Palatine plexus
and ext. ophthalmic a.
Occipital a. and v.
d Greater palatine a. and v.
i Inferior alveolar a. and v.
m Pterygoid plexus
r Ext. carotid a
Y Int. jugular y.
e Rostr. deep temporal a. and v.
 j Dors. ext. ophthalmic v.
n Deep temporal a. and v.
S Cran. thyroid a. and v.
w Com. carotid a.
36
45
19 Rostr. auricular brr.
46
 20 Palpebral br.
48
 21 Platysmal br.
- 22 Auriculopalpebral n.
23 Caud. auricular n.
 24 Parotid In
- 25 Dors. buccolabial br.
26 Facial n.
27 Ramus colli
28 Ventr. buccolabial br.
29 Mandubular Inn.
30 Med. retropharyngeal In.
0
(see pp. 95, 103)
Legend :
31 Levator nasolabialis m.
37 Orbicularis oculi m.
43 Scutuloauricularis supf. m.
49 Parotidoauricularis m.
a Infraorbital n. (V2)
b Transverse facial br. (V3)
c Parotid duct
34 Mentalis m.
40 Zygomaticus m.
46 Cervicoauricularis medius m.
35 Orbicularis oris m.
41 Frontoscutularis m.
47 Cervicoauricularis supf. m.
 53 Sternohyoideus m.
é Great auricular n.
 36 Levator anguli oculi med. m.
42 Interscutularis m.
48 Cervicoauricularis prof. m.
f Transverse cervical n.
93
4. Facial Muscles and Mandibular Muscles
 The superficial facial muscles in the masseteric and temporal regions wil be dissected on the left half of the head and the mandibular muscles will be
aun jae jal paani aa l (en anau jenqiuaw a Aq uoenauui aui paaowai si us aun aaum peay aun jo jiu bu au uo paesuowan
removal of the mandible (see page 97).
The FACIAL MusCLES and MANDIBULAR MusCLES are two of six muscle
to the base of the ear. The m. mandibuloauricularis (26) runs deeply
groups on the head. The division into muscle groups is according to the
between the mandible and the base of the ear. It can vary considerably in
 genesis of the muscles and therefore according to their innervation. The
size or even be lacking.
facial muscles are supplied by the facial nerve (Vll) and the masticatory
Il. Muscles of the eyelids and of the nose are supplied by the auricu-
muscles and mylohyoideus by the mandibular division (V3) of the trigem-
lopalpebral n., a branch of the facial nerve.
inal nerve (V). The muscles that manipulate the eyeball are innervated by
cranial nerves II, IV and VL. The pharyngeal muscles belong to the area of
 The m. orbicularis oculi (2) is the anular muscle that closes the palpebral
innervation of the IX and X cranial nerves and the laryngeal muscles to the
fiss ure.
area of innervation of cranial nerve X. The hypoglossal nerve innervates
 The m. retractor anguli oculi lateralis (3) radiates into the lateral angle of
the muscles of the tongue.
the eye.
a) Corresponding to their innervation by the facial nerve, the MuscLes OF
The m. levator anguli oculi medialis (15) extends into the upper eyelid near
FACIAL ExPREssION are also called FACIAL MuscLEs and subdivided into
the medial angle of the eye.
superficial and deep muscles. The deep facial muscles (the mm. stapedius,
The m. levator nasolabialis (1) begins at the medial angle of the eye and is
occipitohyoideus and stylohyoideus) are either not demonstrated or are
 expanded before it radiates into the upper lip.
discussed with the muscles of the mandibular space (m. digastricus). In the
main, the superficial facial muscles have the characteristics of cutaneous
 The m. malaris (6) is interwoven with muscle fibers of the platysma and,
with very delicate bundles of muscle fibers, extends from the cheek into the
radiate in the skin or are arranged in a sphincter-like manner around facial
lower eyelid.
openings by a looping course of their fibers. Facial muscles are not anta-
 Ill. The muscles of the lips and cheek are innervated by dorsal and ventral
 buccal branches of the facial nerve.
and are therefore also called mimic muscles. In lower animals the facial
muscles are stratified into three more or less uniform layers, one upon the
 The m. orbicularis oris (5) surrounds the opening of the mouth in a circu-
Other, from which, in phylogenetically advanced development, the individ-
lar manner with a median interruption in both the upper and lower lip.
ual facial muscles have derived.
 Rostrally the m. buccinator (17) is situated deep to the m. orbicularis oris
The transverse muscle fibers of the very weak m. sphincter colli superfi-
and is interwoven with it. From the upper lip it crosses over the cheek to
cialis (24) lie in the ventral neck region and are most distinct in the laryn-
the alveolar border of the ma ndible, and from the lower lip to the alveolar
border ofthe maxilla. The intercrossing of muscle fibers on the cheek gives
 geal region No facial muscles are derived from this muscle.
rise to a longitudinal muscle raphe.
The caudal auricular muscles have split off from the longitudinal muscle
fibers of the platysma. By means of its m. cutaneus faciei (23), the platys-
 The m. zygomaticus (7) courses between the angle of the mouth and the
 scutiform cartilage. From its caudal border transverse muscle bundles pass
ma radiates into the lips.
toward the mandibular space.
In the phylogenetic sense, the m. sphincter colli profundus consisted origi-
 The m. caninus (see p. 93) arises ventral to the infraorbital foramen and
nally of a transverse cutaneous muscle layer which, even yet, is evident in
 radiates into the upper lip at the level of the canine tooth.
the direction of the muscle fibers of the mm. malaris, zygomaticus and
parotidoauricularis. In the course of phylogenesis, the original uniform
The m. levator labi superioris (see p. 93) arises rostral to the infraorbital
musle layer, seen for example in themole,has splitup into the individual
 foramen and enters the upper lip dorsoparallel to the m. caninus.
ear muscles, the muscles ofthe eyelid and nose as well as the muscles of the
 b) From a functional-topographical point of view, and corresponding to
lips and cheeks.
their position on the mandible, the MANDiBULAR MuscLEs are subdivided
 Of the auricular muscles with caudal, dorsal, rostral and ventral groups,
 into superficial muscles of the throat and external and internal muscles of
2
two each of the most superficial muscles are represented. Functionally the
mastication. Each group consists of two muscles. As muscles that act to
auricular muscles are classified into tensors of the scutiform cartilage, mus-
 close the mouth, the muscles of mastication, particularly in carnivores, are
cles that turn the funnel-shaped opening of the external ear laterally, mus-
cles that elevate the ear, muscles that depress the external ear, and muscles
 origin or insertion is marked on the bones of the skull by more or less dis-
that turn the opening of the external ear medially. Each muscle derives its
tinct fossae: Temporal fossa, masseteric fossa, pterygoid fossa and fovea
name from its origin and insertion. Innervation: Facial nerve with its auric-
 for the correspondingly named muscles. Of the muscles of the mandibular
ular and cervical branches. The scutiform cartilage (11) lies rostrodorsal to
 space (the space between right and left halves of the mandible), only the
the external ear between individual ear muscles, and is a moveable site of
 digastricus in contracting acts to open the mouth, and the m. mylohyoideus
attachment for several muscles.
aui uaamiaq uouisod e ol eisasui aui saouape anzuoi aul jo 1oieaal e 5e
cheek teeth and in that way supports the masticatory process.
Of the caudal auricular muscles, the m. cervicoauricularis superficialis (9)
and the muscle with which it is continuous rostrally, the m. cervicoscutu-
I. Of the superficial muscles of the mandibular space, the m. digastricus
laris (12), are fused at their origin at the nuchal midline, separating only at
(20) runs from the jugular process to the ventral border of the body of the
their insertions on the auricular and scutiform cartilages, respectively (The
 mandible. A slight, indistinct, intermediate tendon separates its two mus-
underlying mm. cervicoauricularis medius and cervicoauricularis profun-
cle bellies. Only the rostral belly is innervated bythe mandibular nerve, the
dus turn the auricular opening laterally; see page 93.)
caudal belly being supplied by the facial nerve. The m. mylohyoideus (18)
 Of the dorsal auricular muscles.the weak m. occipitalis (13) runs rostrally
has a linear origin from the very weak mylohyoid line on the medial side of
 each half of the body of the mandible, and its transverse muscle fibers run
in an arch from the external sagittal crest of the parietal bone, contacting
the lateral side of the scutiform cartilage on its lateral side. The m. inter-
to a median muscle raphe. Its caudal fibers attach to the basihyoid bone.
The hammock-like muscle elevates and supports the tongue as well as the
sculularis (14) is in association with the occipitalis rostrally. Its transverse
floor of the mouth.
fibers extend between right and left scutiform cartilages.
II. Of the external muscles of mastication, the m. temporalis (16) arises
 Of the rostral auricular muscles, the m. frontoscutularis (4) which is con-
from the circumference and the base of the temporal fossa to the coronoid
tinuous with the interscutularis, runs in a rostrally convex arch across the
midline, connecting the scutiform cartilages of both sides. Rostrally, mus-
muscle fiber direction commences at the caudal end of the zygomatic arch
cle bundles separate from the m. frontoscutularis and, without reaching the
and courses dorsoparallel to the latter as far as the rostral border of the
1
midline, radiate into the upper eyelid. The m. scutuloauricularis superfi-
 coronoid process. The varying fiber direction can be seen after removal of
cialis (10) runs from the scutiform cartilage to the rostral border of the
the temporal fascia. The m. masseter (19) consists of a superficial and a
auricular cartilage.
deep part, which arise laterally or, respectively, medially from the zygo-
Of the ventral auricular muscles, the m. parotidoauricularis (8) extends
 matic arch and insert at the masseteric fossa or, respectively, at its circum-
from the region of the larynx across the lateral surface of the parotid gland
ference.
94
Muscles of head
Regions of face
4 Frontoscutularis m
3 Retractor anguli oculi lat. m
2 Orbicularis oculi m
1  Levator nasolabialis m.
5 Orbicularis oris m.
6 Malaris m.
7 Zygomaticus m.
8 Parotidoauricularis m
 Frontal region
 9 Cervicoauricularis supf. m.
12 Cervicoscutularis m.
 Masseteric and temporal regions
13 Occipitalis m.
10 Scutuloauricularis
supf. m.
14 Interscutularis m.
16 Temporalis m.:
Supf. tendon 
11Scutiform
22
 Principal part 
Accessory part
cartilage
20
17 Buccinator m.
19 Masseter m.
15 Levator anguli oculi med. m.
18 Mylohyoideus m.
 20 Digastricus m.
Legend :
 21  Zygomaticoauricularis m.
 24 Sphincter colli supf. m.
(see pp. 93, 97)
5Mrandihu
 23  Cutaneus faciei m.
27 Stylohyoideus m.
95
 5. Internal (Depp) Muscles of Mastication, Trigeminal Nerve (V), Maxillary Nerve (V2)
and Mandibular Nerve (V3)
pue alqipuew aul jo apis jybu au jo uoeinojuesp ayl sanloau! pue uooassip juasand ayl joj pasn s! yey jyby aul Ajenibespu paloasig s! peay aul
 subsequent demonstration of internal muscles of mastication, and the mandibular and maxillary nn. The masseter muscle is removed in layers so that one
is able to observe the different fiber directions of the superficial and deep parts of the muscle and its strong central tendons. Two centimeters rostral to
 the temporomandibular articulation, the terminal branches of the masseteric n. (3) are then demonstrated on the cut surface of the muscle after the nerve
 courses laterally over the mancibular notch. The zygomatic arch is sawn through at the temporomandibular articulation and rostral to the attachment of
 the orbital ligament. The isolated piece of arch is then removed. The m. cigastricus is detached at its nsertion onto the ventral border of the body of the
mandible, taking care to preserve the branch of the mylohyoid n. innervating it. Subsequently the m. mylohyoideus is incised at its origin along the mylo-
hyoid line in common with the oral mucous membrane lying deeper. With a strong sideways movement of the mandible it is possible to transect: a) the
 insertion of the m. temporalis onto the medial and lateral surfaces of the coronoid process of the mandible; and b) the mm. pterygoideus medialis and lat-
 eralis at the pterygoid fossa. Following this, the inferior alveolar a., V, and n. are cut through at the mandibular foramen, the entrance to the mandibular
canal. The preparation is completed by disarticulating the mandible after transecting associated ligaments. The articular cavity is subdivided into two
'storeys' by the articular disc. To widen the field of dissection, the m. temporalis is removed in part as far as the dorsal contour of the periorbita. The deep
temporal nn. (2) within the m. temporalis are preserved and followed retrogressively to their ramification from the masticatorius n. in common with the
 masseteric n. To demonstrate the branches of the maxillary n., the zygomatic gland is retracted from the pterygopalatine fossa.
 a) The INTERNTAL MuscLEs OF MASTICATION include the strong m. ptery-
IL. The maxillary n. (V2, —16) passes through the foramen rotundum
goideus medialis and the weak m. pterygoideus lateralis. They extend from
(round foramen) into the alar canal. This purely sensory nerve ramifies
the pterygoid and adjacent bones to the indistinct pterygoid fossa on the
with three main nerve branches:
medial surface of the ramus of the mandible. The mm. pterygoideus medi-
 The zygomatic n. (14) proceeds to the 0cular bulb and bifurcates within the
alis and pterygoideus lateralis are innervated by the deeply situated nerves
 of like name. They leave the mandibular n. ( V3) immediately after its emer-
periorbita into a ventral zygomaticofacial ramus (13) and a dorsal zygo-
maticotemporal ramus (12). The latter receives autonomic fibers from the
 gence from the foramen ovale.
pterygopalatine ganglion and conveys these to the lacrimal gland. After
The origin of the m. pterygoideus medialis (8) exhibits a conspicuous, glis-
leaving the orbit both rami supply the skin of the face dorsolateral to the
tening tendon on its external surface and is crossed superficially by the
eye.
mandibular n.
The infraorbitaln. (15), a sensory nerve, continues the rostral course ofthe
3
The m. pterygoideus lateralis (18) is significantly smaller. It lies dorsal to
maxillary n. and, in the pterygopalatine fossa, enters into the infraorbital
the caudal border of the medial muscle, in the bifurcation between the buc-
cal n. and the parent mandibular n.
gives off alveolar branches that enter alveolar foramina of the maxilla to
 b) The TrIGEMINAL N. (V; see also text-illustration) has a large sensory root
reach the caudal cheek teeth, and within the infraorbital canal it supplies
 and a smaller motor root. After leaving the brain but before passing
branches to the remaining teeth of the upper jaw. After leaving the infra-
through the skull,the sensory fibers of the large root are associated with
 orbital foramen, the infraorbital nerve furnishes sensory branches to the
the trigeminal ganglion (see p. 137). At the ganglion, the peripheral
external nose and the upper lip.
processes of the nerve cells form the three branches of the trigeminal n. The
 The pterygopalatine n. (17) leaves the maxillary n. rostrovenrally. On its
first branch, the sensory ophthalmic n. (V1), passes through the orbital fis-
 dorsal border, medial to the infraorbital n., the pterygopalatine n. exhibits
sure. The second branch, the sensory maxillary n. (V2), passes from the
   s  a d  
alar canal to ramify in the pterygopalatine fossa. The third branch, the
 parasympathetic and sympathetic fibers from the slender nerve of the
mandibular n. (V3), joins the motor root before passing through the fora-
 pterygoid canal from VIll and the sympathetic trunk respectively. The
men ovale.
parasympathetic fibers synapse here with second neurons of the ganglion,
 1. The mandibular n. (V3, —5) passes from the foramen ovale medial to the
and from the ganglion both sympathetic (without synapse) and parasym-
temporomandibular articulation and gives off the following nerve branch-
 pathetic fibers then pass to the end-branches of the pterygopalatine nerve.
The following three end-branches, in dorsoventral sequence, supply senso-
es:
ry fibers to the mucous membrane and autonomic fibers to the glands of
The n. masticatorius (4) supplies purely motor branches, the deep tempo-
 their area of supply, the palatine and nasal glands:
ral nn. and the masseteric n. (see p. 95), to the like-named muscles of mas-
 The caudal nasal n. (21) passes through the sphenopalatine foramen to the
tication.
lateral nasal gland and the nasal conchae.
With the n masticatorius, the buccal n. (1) passes rostrodorsolaterally over
 The greater palatine n. (20) reaches the hard palate through the greater
the m. pterygoideus lateralis. Its sensory fibers supply the oral mucous
membrane, and its autonomic fibers pass to the zygomatic and buccal
 palatine canal.
glands.
 The lesser palatine n. (19) extends rostroventrally and medially around the
The lingual n. (10) is the direct continuation of the mandibular n. The chor-
 rostal border of the medial pterygoid muscle to reach the soft palate.
da tympani of the facial nerve passes rostroventrally from the tympanic fis-
sure, crosses the external carotid artery medially and joins the commence-
Trigeminal n. (V)
 ment of the lingual n. at an acute angle. The special sensory fibers of the
chorda tympani supply the taste buds of the rostral two-thirds of the
tongue. Its autonomic fibers reach the mandibular gland and, rostrally, the
sublingual gland. Sensory fibers of the lingual n. supply the rostral two-
thirds of the tongue. A branch, the sublingual n. (11), supplies the mucosa
of the floor of the mouth.
Frontal n.
The auriculotemporal n. (7) branches near the emergence of the mandibu-
Infratrochlear n.
lar n. from the foramen ovale and runs caudally around the temporo-
Lacrimal n.
Ethmoidal n
mandibular articulation in a ventrally convex arch. Its autonomic fibers
 Nasociliary n.
Long ailiary nn.
supply the parotid gland, and a sensory branch, the n. of the external
sh 'auquu sueduai au se iey se suu aui saddns 'sneu ssnon
sensory rostral auricular branches pass on the rostral border of the exter-
nal ear, and its sensory transverse facial branch supplies the face.
The mylohyoid n. (9) supplies motor innervation to the mylohyoideus mus-
cle and the rostral belly of the m. digastricus; whereas, its sensory sub-
 mental branches ramify in the chin region.
The inferior alveolar n. (6) enters the mandibular canal at the mandibular
foramen (where it was previously transected). Here, it provides sensory
fibers to the teth of the lower jaw, and the skin of the chin by way of the
 mental branches that emerge through mental foramina.
96
Mandibular n. (V3), maxillary n. (V2), salivary glands
1 Buccal n.
 2 Deep temporal n.
3 Masseteric n.
4 Masticatorius n.
5 Mandibular n. (V3)
6 Inferior alveolar n.
 7 Auriculotemporal n.
 8 Pterygoideus med.
9 Mylohyoid n.
10 Lingual n.
11  Sublingual n.
(lateral view)
oral br.
13 Zygomaticofacial br.
14 Zygomatic n
15 Infraorbital n.
16 Maxillary n. (V2)
17 Pterygopalatine n
18 Pterygoideus lat. m.
 19 Lesser palatine n
20 Greater palatine n.
21 Caud. nasal n.
(see pp. 95, 99, 105)
Legend :
 22 Auricle (Scapha)
30 Sternothyreoideus m.
38 Tongue
a Med. retropharyngeal In
h Supf. gl. of third eyelid
b Mandibular gl. and duct
9
enugns snis 
25 Temporalis m.
33 Hyopharyngeus m.
41 Rostral alar foramen
 gl. and duct 
Polystomatic sublingual gl.
26 Orbital lig.
34 Stylohyoideus m.
d Parotid gland and duct
I  N. of pterygoid canal
 27 Periorbita
35 Hyoglossus m.
e Parotid inh.
m Pterygopalatine gl. and
28 Infraorbital for.
36 Digastricus m.
fChorda tympani
orbital branches
29 Parotid papilla
37 Mylohyoideus m.
16 je7 6
 n Superior alveolar branches
97
6. Lacrimal Apparatus, Optic Nerve (ll), Ophthalmic Nerve (V1), Nerves and Muscles of the Eye,
and External Nose
With the separation of upper and lower eyelids, parts of the lacrimal apparatus are exposed as a result. Following this, the apex of the triangular cartilage
 supporting the third eyelid is freed from its site of attachment in the orbital cavity. On the lateral surface of the cartilage, the cutaneous covering is removed 
to expose the accessory lacrimal glands, namely the superficial gland of the third eyelid, while numerous ymph nodules are observed on the medial sur-
face of the third eyelid. To expose and dissect the ocular bulb, more of the m. temporalis is ablated, the remaining periorbita removed, and the cone of
 eye muscles retracted ventrolaterally away from the osseous part of the orbital cavity. At this stage, one can see the trochlea (21) dorsomedial to the ocu-
Aq paraans s! pue salosnw ara oisuuxe jo auon au u! Aeuan say u odo aul lqio aul ot juawyoeie jo ais st woy 1 yoeiap pinous pue qinq jel
retracting them.
1
 a) The LAcRIMAL APPARATus (see also text-illustration) includes the lacrimal
in retrograde fashion to their origins. The muscles of the ocular bulb (eye-
 glands and their system of excretory ducts. The lacrimal gland (16), which
ball) include the mm. rectus dorsalis, —medialis, —ventralis, and -lateralis,
lies medial to the orbital ligament and the superficial gland of the third eye-
the mm. obliquus dorsalis and -ventralis, the m. levator palpebrae superi-
lid (20) secrete the lacrimal fluid. This flows from the glands through nar-
 oris; and the m. retractor bulbi, which surrounds the optic n. like a cloak.
row ductules into the superior conjunctival fornix (A) of the conjunctival
 In the main, the rectus muscles move the eyeball medially toward the nose
sac. With movement of the eyelids, the cornea is moistened by a film of
or laterally toward the temporal region, as well as dorsally and ventrally.
lacrimal fluid. This collects within the depth of the medial angle of the eye
 The mm. obliquus dorsalis and ventralis produce inward and outward
at the lacrimal lake (B) in the middle of which is the lacrimal caruncle (C)
 rotation of the bulb respectively.
appearing above the surrounding fluid. A few millimeters away from the
 I. The oculomotor n. (Ill) innervates all extrinsic muscles of the eye except
medial angle of the eye, the lacrimal puncta (17) lie near a margin of pig-
the mm. obliquus dorsalis and rectus lateralis. (Some authors exclude the
mented epithelium on the bulbar surface of the upper and lower eyelids.
retractor bulbi muscle.)
Lacrimal fluid flows through these small openings to superior and inferior
 lacrimal canaliculi (18), which, in turn, unite at the lacrimal sac (19). The
 II. The trochlear n. (IV) supplies only the m. obliquus dorsalis.
nasolacrimal duct, which begins here, lies at first in the oseous lacrimal
IIL. The abducent n. (VI) innervates the m. rectus lateralis and the lateral
canal and then more rostrally in the lacrimal groove of the maxilla. The
 portion of the m. retractor bulbi. (Some authors include the entire retrac-
duct conveys the lacrimal fluid to the nasolacrimal ostium, a millimeter-
tor bulbi muscle.)
sized opening in the nasal vestibule about one centimeter caudal to the ven-
 The oculomotor n. terminates with its ventral ramus (12) passing distally
tral angle of the naris. The opening is found one centimeter caudal to the
 into the m. obliquus ventralis (23). The ramus can be followed in retro-
ventral angle ofthe naris at the beginning ofthe ventral nasal meatus where
 grade fashion between the mm. rectus lateralis and ventralis and finally
a distinct pigmented border is visible.
through the m. retractor bulbi to the lateral aspect of the optic n. The cil-
iary ganglion (15) can be seen there as a brownish body the size of a millet
pue u yudo au auedun uua au uy uu ae hous au aas
and sphincter pupillae and sympathetic fibers to the m. dilatator pupillae.
The dorsal ramus (11) of the oculomotor n. innervates the m. rectus dor-
salis (3) and the more superficial m. levator palpebrae superioris (2), both
of which are crossed over in succession by the frontal n. (from V1). The
trochlear n. (6) enters the m. obliquus dorsalis (1) at the junction of its cau-
 dal and middle thirds. The tendon of insertion of the latter muscle passes
over the trochlear carilage, turning here from a longitudinal to a trans-
verse direction and ending on the eyeball ventral to the insertion of the m.
rectus dorsalis. The m. rectus medialis (14), which lies ventromedial to the
 dorsal rectus, is supplied by the oculomotor n. The m. rectus lateralis (24),
an abductor of the eyeball (turns the anterior pole of the eyeball laterally),
17
 is entered on its dorsal border by the abducens n. (7).
e) The ExTERNAL NosE (see text-illustration) extends from the root of the
nose (D) over the dorsum nasi (E) up to the apex of the nose (G). At the
b) The OpTic N. (ll, —13) consists of a large bundle of nerve fibers that
apex, each of the nares is bounded laterally by the wing of the nostril (H,
4
begins at the retina and the fibers of which, proceeding from the eyeball,
—ala nasi) and medially by the planum nasale (F). These rostral features
receive medullary sheaths. The nerve passes to the optic chiasm, where the
 are supported by the cartilages of nose and septum. The planum nasale is
 Optic tract, the continuation to the diencephalon, begins. Developmentally,
formed by hairless, modified skin in the region of the nares and exhibits a
Aq papunouns si ll uieuq aut jo ued e se papiesau aq oisi aaiau sudo aul
 median philtrum (I). The nasal septum is membranous in the region of the
a continuation of the three meninges, and the myelin sheaths of its fibers 
 are formed by glial cells (oligodendroglia) of the central nervous system.
nares and cartilaginous in its rostral two-thirds and supported by bone in
its caudal third.
3
c) The OpHTHALMIc N. (V1, see text-illustration p.96) is the first branch of
the trigeminal n. (V). Its branches are the lacrimal, frontal and nasociliary
nerves.
The lacrimal n. (5) is slender; it accompanies the artery of like name and
the previously discussed ramus zygomaticotemporalis (V2). Its autonomic
fibers, which pass from the pterygopalatine ganglion, supply the lacrimal
gland; and its sensory fibers, the upper eyelid.
The frontal n. (4) leaves the orbit lateral to the trochlea. It supplies senso-
ry innervation to the skin of the frontal region.
 The nasociliary n. (10) branches into the infratrochlear, ethmoidal and long
 o n sa     u 
the trochlea and supplies the skin at the medial angle of the eye. The eth-
moidal n. (8) contains sensory and autonomic fibers. It passes through the
ethmoidal foramen {and is most easily identified here in the dissection) and
then through the lamina cribrosa to the fundus of the nasal cavity It can be
followed between the m. rectus medialis and the m. obliquus dorsalis to its
 origin from the nasociliary n. Likewise, the long ciliary nn. (9) branch here
from the nasociliary n. and accompany the optic n. laterally. Their sympa-
thetic fibers innervate the m. dilatator pupillae and their sensory fibers sup-
ply the cornea.
 d) The NERvES AND MuscLEs OF THE EYE are discussed together. In the
 ongoing dissection, the nerves to the extrinsic eye muscles (Il, IV and VI)
are used to identify the muscles themselves and the nerves are also followed
98
Lacrimal apparatus, accessory organs of eye and cranial nn. Il, Ill, IV, V1, V2 and Vl
(lateral view)
Legend :
16 Lacrimal gl.
17 Lacrimal punctom
25Frontoscutularism.
18 Lacrimal canaliculus
26 Temporalis m.
19Lacrimalsac
 20 Supf. gl. of third eyelid
29 Maxilla
30 Straight fold
31  Alar fold 
34 Pterygoideus med.m.
35 Retractor bulbi m.
36
 Rectus ventr. m.
37 Zygomatic bone
38 Pupil
39 lris
40 Sclera
41Tunicaconjunctivaof bulb
(dorsolateral view)
21 Trochlea
22
Infratrochlear n.
1 Obliquus dors. m.
 2 Levator palpebrae
superiorism.-
3 Rectus dors. m.-
4 Frontal n.
5 Lacrimal n.
23 Obliquus ventr. m.
6 Trochlear n. (IV)
24 Rectus lat. m.
7 Abducens n. (VI) -
29
(dorsolateral view)
(rostral view)
22
8 Ethmoidal n.
38
 9 Long diliary n.
39
38-
40
39-
10 Nasociliary n.
24
41
Oculomotor n. (lll)
40-
1
 Dorsal br.
12
Ventral br. 
23-
36
24
13 Optic n.(ll)
(see pp. 97, 103, 105)
Legend :
14 Rectus med.m.
15 Ciliary ggl.
a Maxillary n. (V2)
f Infraorbital n.
 Superior alveolar brr.
b Zygomatic n.
g N. of pterygoid canal
Caud. nasal n.
 Zygomaticotemporal br.
h Pterygopalatine n.
 Greater palatine n.
Zygomaticofacial br.
i Pterygopalatine ggl. and
m Lesser palatine n.
é Nasolacrimal duct 
orbital brr.
n   Short ciliary nn.
99
7. Nose, Larynx, Oral Cavity and Pharynx
a) NosE:
vocalis muscle, a wedge-shaped cuneiform process rostrodorsally, and a
1 1. The nasal cavity begins at the naris with the nasal vestibule (1), which is
corniculate process caudodorsally. The unpaired cricoid cartilage (22) sup-
covered by a pigmented cutaneous mucous membrane. The vestibule hous.
 ports the laryngeal lumen dorsally between the laminae of the thyroid car-
es the straight fold (4) dorsally, a mucosal fold extending rostrally from the
tilage.
dorsal nasal concha; the alar fold (3) a cartilage-supported mucosal fold
 IV. Of the laryngeal muscles the m. cricoarytenoideus dorsalis is the only
8
extending rostrally from the ventral nasal concha; and an indistinct basal
 one that functions to widen the rima glottidis and is important clinically. It
fold (2) ventral to the alar fold. The nasal cavity proper is covered with res-
 extends from the cricoid cartilage to the muscular process of the arytenoid
piratory mucous membrane and contains the dorsal and ventral nasal con-
 cartilage and by lever action tenses the vocal ligament, which is attached to
chae (see p. 90). The middle nasal concha coming from the caudal part of
the vocal process. (For muscles that narrow the rima glottidis, see Table of
the nasal cavity inserts between them. The lateral nasal gland lies in the
Muscles.)
maxillary recess of the maxilla and, like the nasolacrimal duct, opens into
 The innervation of the laryngeal muscles and mucous membrane is by the
the nasal vestibule. Both the secretion from the gland and the lacrimal flu-
 vagus n. Its caudal laryngeal n. innervates all laryngeal muscles except the
id moisten the planum nasale. The fundus nasi (9) houses the ethmoidal
 m. cricothyroideus, which is the most caudal and external of them. The
labyrinth which is in part clothed with olfactory mucous membrane.
cricothyroideus m. is supplied by the cranial laryngeal n., which is also a
II. Four nasal meatuses extend through the nasal cavity. The dorsal nasal
branch of the vagus (see p. 103). Cranial to the rima glottidis sensory inner-
meatus (8)is between the dorsal nasal concha and the nasal bone and leads
 vation is provided by the internal ramus of the cranial laryngeal n. and cau-
to the olfactory organ (therefore, the olfactory meatus). The middle nasal
 dal to it by the caudal laryngeal n.
meatus (6) first lies between the dorsal and ventral nasal conchae and then,
c) The ORAL CAvITy comprises the vestibule (11), which is the space
at the middle nasal concha, splits into a dorsal passage and a ventral pas-
between cheeks and lips and the dental arcades, and the oral cavity proper
sage that lead to paranasal sinuses. Hence it is also called the simus meatus.
(10), which is the space internal to the dental arcades. Caudal to the last
2
 The ventral nasal meatus (S) is also called the respiratory meatus. It lies 
 cheek teeth, the oral cavity passes over into the oral pharynx. The roof of
between the ventral nasal concha and the palate and reaches to the fundus
 the oral cavity is formed by the hard palate whose transverse palatine rugae
nasi where it is continued by the nasopharyngeal meatus to the choanae.
10
(13) are bisected by a median palatine raphe (not illustrated). Caudal to the
Olfactory, sinus and respiratory meatuses merge medially into the common
upper central incisor teeth, is the median incisive papilla (12), oneither side
nasal meatus (7), which is the narrow passage alongside the nasal septum
 Of which is the opening of an incisive (nasopalatine) duct. Each duct pass-
the entire dorsoventral extent of the nasal cavity.
es through the palatine fissure of its side and before opening into the nasal
I. The olfactory organ lies in the fundus nasi, its olfactory mucous mem-
cavity is connected to the ipsilateral vomeronasal organ. The floor of the 
brane clothing here part of the ethmoidal labyrinth.
 oral cavity proper contains the tongue and its frenulum.
IV. The vomeronasal organ (see p. 123) is also lined with olfactory mucous
 d) The PHARYNx surrounds the pharyngeal cavity. Within it, an intrapha-
membrane. It is on the floor of the nasal vestibule at the transition to the
ryngeal ostium is the opening between the nasal pharynx and the laryngeal
nasal cavity proper and lies directly on the cartilaginous nasal septum. It
 part of the pharynx (Pars laryngea pharyngis).
communicates with the roof of the oral cavity through the incisive (or
 I. Oral and laryngeal parts ofthe pharynx form a part of the digestive path-
nasopalatine) duct. Functionally it serves as an oral olfactory- or scent-
way, pars digestoria (B - D). The oropharynx (oral pharynx) is also called
organ for the reception of odors, especially pheromones.
the istbmus fauciu. The oral pharynx (Pars oralis, —B) extends from the
V. The olfactory nn. (I) are composed of the processes of olfactory cells run-
last cheek teeth to the base of the epiglottis. The floor of the oral pharynx
ning chiefly from the olfactory organ in the fundus nasi and also from the
is formed by the base of the tongue, its lateral walls by the palatoglossal
vomeronasal organ in the nasal vestibule (vomeronasal n.). The nerves pass
 arches, which house the palatine tonsil within the tonsillar sinus, and the
through the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone into the olfactory bulb of
 roof by the soft palate. The laryngopharynx (Pars laryngea pharyngis, -
the telencephalon (see p. 137).
C) commences at the intrapharyngeal ostium into which the rostral part of
b) The LARyNx is palpable ventral at the boundary of head and neck, form-
the larynx projects.
. The caudal part of the laryngopharynx is the
esophageal vestibule. This passes over into the esophagus at a distinct
ing part of the respiratory pathway and serving in phonation. Its entrance
can be sealed off from the pharynx and from the path of food as occurs in
 prominence of the mucosa, the limen pharyngoesophageum (18).
swallowing. From within outwards the wall of the larynx consists of
II. The nasopharynx (Pars nasalis pharyngis, —A) extends from the
mucous membrane, cartilage and laryngeal muscles.
choanae to the intrapharygeal ostium. The intrapharyngeal ostium is
 3  I. The laryngeal mucosa lines the lumen of the larynx. At the entrance of
bounded by the caudal free border of the soft palate, arcus veli palatini
the larynx, on the vocal folds, and in the laryngeal ventricles it is a cuta-
(16), and the palatopharyngeal arch (17). The paired pharyngeal ostia of
neous mucosa with a stratified squamous epithelium; whereas in the
the auditory tubes (14) open into the nasopharynx about halfway along its ↑
remaining areas a ciliated respiratory mucosa is present.
length. Each auditory tube opens into the middle ear.
IL. The cavity of the larynx includes the vestibule of the larynx, the rima
 The tonsils surround ring-like the oro- and nasopharynx. In the tonsils
glottidis with its vocal apparatus (glottis), and the infraglottic cavity.
there are tonsillar lymphatic nodules and diffusely distributed lymphatic
tissue in close relationship to the overlying epithelium of the oral mucous
The vestibule of the larynx (E) extends from the free margin of the epiglot-
 membrane. Lymphocytes and also granulocytes migrate from the underly-
tis to the vestibular folds (F'"). The vocal apparatus (glottis, -F) is formed 
 ing lymphoreticular tissue into the epithelium, in which they widen the
4
by both vocal folds (F) whose free borders bound the intermembranous
sui aul idaaa aueadde renoau e ll aaia pue saoeds renra
part of the rima glottidis. The intercartilaginous part of the rima glottidis
 are separated from neighboring tissues by a fibrous capsule. The tonsils are
is formed by the arytenoid cartilages and their lining of mucous membrane.
richly vascularized and have only efferent vessels. No afferent vessels pass 
The mucosa ofthe vocal folds is underlain by the vocal ligament and is sup-
5
to the tonsils.
ported laterally by the vocalis muscle. Between the vestibular fold and the
vocal fold is the entrance to the laryngeal ventricle (F'). The infraglottic
The lymphatic pharyngeal ring is formed by the pharyngeal tonsil on the
6
cavity extends from the vocal folds to the first tracheal ring.
roof of the nasopharynx, by the palatine tonsil (15) on the sides of the
12
 oropharynx, and by the lingual tonsil on its floor.
7
Il. Of the four laryngeal cartilages, portions of the arytenoid cartilages
 and the epiglottic cartilage (21) are elastic carilage. The remaining laryn-
geal cartilages are hyaline. With its laminae, which are open dorsally, the
thyroid cartilage (20) extensively encloses and protects the remaining parts
Nasopharynx/
Ofthe larynx. The rostral cornu ofthe thyroid lamina is attached to the thy.
Pharyngeal cavity
 Intrapharyngeal ostium
rohyoid element of the hyoid apparatus, the caudal cornu to the cricoid
'Oropharynx ↓!
— Laryngopharynx
Pars
sad reno e s i ad si (ai ae pe au a
caudally, a vocal process ventrally for attachment ofthe vocalligament and
Esophageal vestibule
digestoria
100
Median section of head
13 Palatine rugae
14 Pharyngeal ostium
of auditory tube 
12 Incisive papilla
15 Palatine tonsil
11  Vestibule of mouth 
Intrapharyngeal ostium:
16 Arch of soft palate
18 Limen pharyngo-
10 Oral cavity proper
17 Palatopharyngeal arch
 esophageum 
(see pp. 91, 103, 106, 107,111)
Laryngeal cartilages
(craniolateral view)
Cavity of pharynx
19 Arytenoid cartilage
Pars nasalis
B - D Pars digestoria
Pars oralis
Pars laryngea
 20 Thyroid cartilage
D
Vestibule of esophagus
Cavity of larynx
21 Epiglottic cartilage
Vestibule of larynx
Glottis (vocal fold)
F'
Laryngeal ventricle
Vestibular fold
G
Infraglottic cavity
22 Cricoid cartilage
Legend :
 23 Nasolacrimal ostium
35 Genioglossus m.
46 Cuneiform process
Glossopharyngeal n. (X):
Nasal cavity proper:
36 Geniohyoideus m
47 Corniculate process
 Lingual br.
24
Ventr. nasal concha
37 Mylohyoideus m.
48 Muscular process
38 Basihyoid
49 Vocal process
b Pharyngeal br.
25
 Dors. nasal concha
C Pharyngeal br. of n. vagus (X)
26 Middle nasal concha
39 Hard palate
50 Rostral cornu
d Cran laryngeal n.
27 Nasal septum (section)
40 Soft palate
51
 Caudal cornu
e Cran.cervical gl.
28 Rostr. frontal sinus
(Velum palatinum)
f Vagosympathetic trunk
29 Med. frontal sinus
41 Tensor veli palatini m.
53 Lamina of cricoidcarilage
30 Lat. frontal sinus 
42 Levatorveli palatinim.
54 Thyrohyoid articulation
31 Lingualis proprius m.:
43 Palatopharyngeus m.
55 Cricothyroid articulatin 
i Occipital a.
32
Transverse fibers
44 Pterygopharyngeus m.
56 Trachea
Internal carotid a.
33
 Perpendicular fibers
 45 Longus capitis m. (section)
k Com. carotid a.
34 Longitudinal fibers
101
8.
 Pharyngeal Muscles, Cranial Nerves of the Vagus Group (IX, X, Xl), Autonomic Nervous
System of the Head, Arteries of the Head, External Acoustic Meatus
ud aui woy xuydosu i yo eon eidsai au uaads ai jo sis leae pue i o snis pad si os a
 ostium of the auditory tube as far as the intrapharyngeal ostium, is dissected away from underlying tissue in order to display muscles of the soft palate,
 the rostral constrictor muscles of the pharynx and cranial nerves X-Xl. The m. longus capitis is also detached from its insertion on the muscular tuber-
 cle of the occipital bone (see p. 101). To demonstrate the external acoustic meatus a wedge-shaped piece of tissue is excised from the auricular cartilage
 and removed, beginning cranial and caudal to the quadrangular tragus (J). This is similar to the technique used in the surgical treatment of otitis externa.
 For this purpose one begins the rostral incision at the pretragic incisure and the caudal incision at the intertragic incisure. Both incisions converge to the
osseous external acoustic meatus.
 a) The PHARYNGEAL MuscLEs include dilator of the pharynx (I), muscles Of
I. The sympathetic trunk (see p. 49), containing preganglionic nerve fibers,
3
the soft palate (Il), and rostral, middle and caudal constrictors of the phar-
passes to the junction of head and neck in the vagosympathetic trunk (18).
ynx (III-V)
There the vagosympathetic trunk bifurcates, the vagus n. lying dorsally, the
I. The m. stylopharyngeus caudalis (14) is the only dilator of the pharynx.
sympathetic trunk and its cranial cervical ganglion ventrally. After synaps-
ing in the cranial cervical ganglion (12) unmyelinated postganglionic sym-
It extends from the caudal aspect of the stylohyoid element to the dorso-
al auijo euape au ui sasnxad rensauad se ssed saqy ouauied
lateral wall of the pharynx. Il. Both muscles of the soft palate arise rostral
vessels ofthe head (e.g., Plexus caroticus intermus, Plexus caroticus exter-
to the tympanic bulla at the base of the skull. The m. tensor veli palatini (2)
rmus) to their areas of supply (e.g., glands, mucosae and internal muscles of
proceeds rostroventrally around the hamulus of the pterygoid bone to the
the eye).
soft palate. The m. levator veli palatini (7) extends perpendicularly into the
ds
 IL. Emerging from the brain with their parent cranial nerve, preganglionic
 gopharyngeus (S) arises on the hamulus of the pterygoid bone and crosses
 parasympathetic fibers continue with those cranial nerves (Ili, Vll, IX and
lateral to the m. levator veli palatini before attaching to the wall of the
i oi youq raaamu uoos aaui asnoo aui jo hed isy aui nog (x
pharynx. The m. palatopharyngeus (6) runs between the aponeurosis of the
respective parasympathetic ganglia where synapse occurs and the excitato-
soft palate and the wall of the pharynx. IV. The middle constrictor of the
ry state is then carried by postganglionic fibers. These reach their areas of
pharynx, the m. hyopharyngeus (18), extends from the basihyoid and thy-
innervation in common with branches of other cranial nerves. Only the
rohyoid elements dorsally to the rostral part of the pharyngeal raphe. V. Of
vagus, cranial nerve X, conducts itself differently in that it extends with its
the two caudal constrictors of the pharynx, the m. thyropharyngeus (19)
 parasympathetic fibers into the large body cavities. It gives off no parasym-
 arises from the thyroid cartilage and the m. cricopharyngeus (17), which is
 pathetic fibers to other cranial nerves.
not clearly set off from the thyropharyngeus, from the cricoid cartilage.
 d) The ARTERIEs OF THE HEAD arise from the common carotid a. (33) which
 Both insert into the dorsal wall of the pharynx at the pharyngeal raphe,
 dispatches the cranial thyroid artery (34) to the thyroid gland and at the
 caudal to the hyopharyngeus.
junction of head and neck bifurcates (the carotid bifurcation) into the small
 The innervation of most of the pharyngeal muscles is by the pharyngeal
internal carotid a., which extends rostrodorsally, and a large external
branches of the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves, which form the pha-
 carotid a. that continues the rostral direction of the common carotid. At its
ryngeal plexus on the dorsolateral wall of the pharynx. The m. tensor veli
 origin, the internal carotid a. (27) exhibits a localized swelling, the carotid
palatini, supplied by the mandibular n. (V3), is an exception, as is the m.
sinus (27), which contains pressor receptors. The glomus caroticum, which
 stylopharyngeus caudalis, which is innervated only by the glossopharyn-
 Contains chemoreceptors, lies in the carotid bifurcation. The internal
 carotid a. passes through the carotid canal in a typical loop-formation, and
geal n.
 gives off several cerebral arteries within the cranial cavity. The extermal
b) The CRANIAL NERvEs OF THE VAGUs GRouP all pass through the jugular
carotid a. (29) reaches the temporomandibular joint where it passes over
foramen and, except for the accessory n. (XI), are crossed laterally by the
i  o a ie s o s i 'e a i oi o
hypoglossal n. (Xll).
external carotid gives off the occipital a. (28), which initially runs parallel
 to the internal carotid a. and then continues dorsally to the occipital region.
The glossopharyngeal n. (IX, —9), shortly after its emergence from the
At about the same level, the cranial laryngeal a. (30) leaves the ventral
jugular foramen, gives off the parasympathetic tympanic n. which is con-
 aspect of the external carotid a. to enter the thyroid notch along with the
tinued as the minor petrosal n. and extends across the otic ganglion to
same-named nerve. The lingual a. and the facial a. also proceed from the
reach the mandibular n. (V3; see p. 137). After that, the glossopharyngeal
 ventral aspect of the external carotid artery about a fingerbreadth rostral
n. innervates the m stylopharyngeus caudalis and, medial to the tympanic
to the cranial thyroid artery. The lingual a. (32) passes between the mm.
bulla, divides into lingual and pharyngeal branches. The lingual branch
ceratohyoideus and hyoglossus to reach the tongue and tonsils. At first, the
(13) crosses the stylohyoid element, and the m. styloglossus arising from it,
facial a. (31) extends medial to and alongside the mandible and gives off
 medially. It supplies general sensory innervation to the base of the tongue
here the sublingual a. (41) (the accompanying sublingual v. arises from the
 and special sensory innervation to the taste buds of the vallate and foliate
-s u au jo uoas au uaamaq su uu e le aui ia ien
papillae. With the pharyngeal branch of the vagus n., and sympathetic
cus and the ventral border of the mandible, and arches dorsally onto the
fibers from the cranial cervical ganglion, the pharyngeal branch (10) forms
lateral surface of the mandible. Its further course on the face is described
the pharyngeal plexus on the dorsolateral pharynx. The plexus furnishes 
 on p. 93. The caudal auricular a. (23) and the superficial temporal a. (22),
the motor and sensory supply to the pharynx.
with its branch, the rostral auricular a. (21), proceed from the dorsal con-
The vagus n. (X, —8), after passing through the jugular foramen, gives off
vexity of the terminal curve of the external carotid a. They supply the exter-
2
 a sensory part to the facial n., which as the internal auricular ramus, sup-
nal ear and the temporal region. As the rostral continuation of the external
plies the external acoustic meatus (see p. 93). Its pharyngeal branch (10)
carotid a., the maxillary a. (24) passes medially, ventral to the temporo-
communicates with the same-named branch of the glossopharyngeal n.,
mandibular joint, giving off here the inferior alveolar a. (26) into the
forming the pharyngeal plexus. The vagus n. bends around caudally,
 mandibular canal and the caudal deep temporal a. (25) to the m. tempo-
exhibiting here the distinct distal (nodose) ganglion, where the cranial
ralis. After its passage through the alar canal, the maxillary a. gives off the
laryngeal n. (15) begins. With its external branch, the cranial laryngeal
external ophthalmic a. (35) to the ocular bulb and the rostral deep tempo-
nerve supplies the m. cricothyroideus and with its sensory internal branch
ral a. (36) to the m. temporalis. The terminal branches of the maxillary a.
0hluus soonu eauiel aui addns ot yiou piouu au yanoy sased
(infraorbital a., —37, greater palatine a., 39, lesser palatine a., —40, and
the rima gloidis. The vagus n. runs in the vagosympathetic trunk dor-
sphenopalatine a., 38) run, with the exception noted below, with like-
soparallel to the common carotid a. and, within the thoracic cavity (see p.
 named nerves through appropriately denoted osseous canals or foramina
49), gives off the recurrent laryngeal n. The recurrent laryngeal n. ascends
l sasaan e auous ai iddns a iee se ai o
the neck applied to the lateral surface of the trachea. After supplying tra-
 sphenopalatine foramen with the caudal nasal n.)
 cheal and esophageal rami, it continues as the caudallaryngeal n. (20), pro-
 e) The ExTERNAL AcousTIc MEATus (3) is supported proximally by the
ceeding to the larynx deep to the m cricopharyngeus. With the excetion
5
scrolled auricular cartilage (1) followed by the anular cartilage and finally
 of the cricothyroideus m., the caudal laryngeal n. innervates all intrinsic
 by the osseous external acoustic meatus. The external acoustic meatus is
laryngeal muscles and the laryngeal mucosa caudal to the rima glottidis.
subdivided into a long auricular (perpendicular) part and a short tympan-
ic (horizontal) part, which can be observed after it is opened. Between the
The accessory n. (Xl, —11) runs dorsolateral to the distal ganglion (X) to
 two parts is an approximate right-angled bend (about 100 degrees in
innervate the mm. trapezius and sternocleidomastoideus.
breeds with erect ears and more than 1i0 degrees in breeds with pendant
c) The AuToNomIc NeRvous SysTEM oF THE HeAD (see p. 137) includes: the
ears). As extensions of the auricular cartilage in the formation of the tym-
parasympathetic division, whose nerve cells of origin lie in the mesen-
 panic (horizontal) part, the ringlike anular cartilage (4) and the osseous
cephalon and rhombencephalon; and the sympathetic division, which has
external acoustic meatus (which extends only a few millimeters up to the
origin from the thoracic spinal cord.
tympanic membrane that closes off the canal) take part.
102
Cranial nerves V2, IX, X, Xl, Xll, arteries of head, muscles of tongue,
muscles of pharynx and external ear
Legend :
42 Cleidocervical m.
 Sternocleidomastoid m.:
43
 Sternooccipital m.
44
Sternomastoid m.
45
Cleidomastoid m.
46
Esophagus
1 Auricular cartilage (section) -
47Sternothyroideus m.
 2 Tensor veli palatini m.-
48 Sternohyoideus m.
 3 Cartilaginous ext.
49 Thyrohyoideus m.
acoustic meatus:
50 Temporal m.
 Perpendicular part 
51  Periorbita
Horizontal part
52 Dors. oblique m.
53 Levator palpebrae
4 Anular cartilage 
superioris m.
5 Pterygopharyngeus m.
54 Dorsal rectus m.
6 Palatopharyngeus m.-
55 Retractor bulbi m.
7 Levator veli palatini m.
56 Lat.rectus m.
8 Vagus n.(X) and distal ggl
57 Ventral oblique m.
9 Glossopharyngeal n.(x)
58 Lat. pterygoideus m.
10 Pharyngeal brr. of nn. IX + X
59 Med. pterygoideus m.
11 Accessory n. (Xl)
60 Styloglossus m.
12 Cranial cervical ggl
61 Hyoglossus m.
13 Lingual br. of n. IX 
62 Genioglossus m.
14 Stylopharyngeus caud
62
63 Stylohyoideus m.
15 Cran laryngeal n.
64 Geniohyoideus m
16 Vagosympathetic trunk.
65 Mylohyoideus m.
17 Cricopharyngeus m.
66 Digastricus m.
18 Hyopharyngeus m.
19 Thyropharyngeus m.
20 Caudallaryngeal n.
Legend :
 A Cutaneous marginal sac
E Helix
Incisura intertragica
BLat.process of antitragus
F Med. crus of helix
JTragus
(lateral view)
C Med process of antitragus
G Lat. crus of helix
K Pretragic incisure
D Scapha
H Antitragus 
21 Rostr. auricular a.
22 Supf. temporal a.
23 Caud. auricular a.
35 Ext. ophthalmic a.
36 Rostr. deep temporal a.
37 Infraorbital a.
 38 Sphenopalatine a.
 39 Greater palatine a.
- 40 Lesser palatine a.
26 Inferior alveolar a.
27 Internal carotid a. and
carotid sinus
30 Cran. laryngeal a.
31 Facial a.
32 Lingual a.
 33 Common carotid a.
41  Sublingual a.
 34 Cran. thyroid a.
(see pp. 93, 95, 99)
Legend :
a Facial n. (Vll)
Lacrimal n.
Parathyroid gl.
b Cervical n. (C1)
K
 Pterygopalatine n. and 
s  Thyroid gl.
C Ansa cervicalis
pterygopalatine ggl.
t  Transverse facial a.
d Mandibular n. (V3)
Ventr.br.ofoculomotorn.(l)
u Lacrimal a.
e Hypoglossal n. (xil)
 Infraorbital n.
y Lacrimal gl.
fMaxillary n. (V2)
 Superior alveolar n.
g Zygomatic n.
Lesser palatine n.
X Buccal a.
h Trochlear n.(IV)
Infratrochlear n.
y Buccal gll.
iAbducens n. (VI)
Frontal n.
b
103
9. Tongue, Lingual Muscles, Hypoglossal Nerve (Xll), Salivary Glands, and Dentition
1
 a) The ToNGuE with its frenulum (17) occupies the floor of the mouth and
The parasympathetic nerve supply of the palatine glands (see p. 137) is by
contains in its root (Radix linguae) the basihyoid element and is flanked on 
-Ad au ui asdeuas suonu asoum eueo piohiad au jo aausu au
either side by the ceratohyoid elements; whereas, the body and apex of the
gopalatine ganglion. The zygomatic, buccal and parotid glands are inner-
tongue project rostrally into the oral cavity. The mucous membrane of the
vated by way of the minor petrosal nerve of the glossopharyngeal nerve
2
 dorsum of the tongue (Dorsum linguae) bears mechanical papillae, that is
(IX) and the otic ganglion. The mandibular and sublingual glands are
to say, the entire dorsum being covered by fine, thread-like, filiform papil-
 innervated by the chorda tympani from ( VI1).
lae (13) and on the root of the tongue the strikingly larger and more plump
d) With respect to the DeNTITioN of the upper and lower jaws, the individ-
3
 special forms as conical papillae (10). The gustatory papillae bear taste
buds and are innervated by special sensory fibers. These include vallate,
ual teeth of the upper and lower dental arcades can be identified on the
foliate, and some of the fungiform papillae. The four to six vallate papillae
 basis of a dental formula. In mammals this is derived from a full dentition
(11) lie at the root of the tongue. Each is surrounded by a wall and by a
 numbering forty-four teth, which among the domestic mammals is com-
 plete only in the pig.
 groove. At the same level, a less distinct leaf-shaped foliate papillae (12) is
present on either side of the tongue. The mushroom-shaped fungiform
 Temporary dentition i c opppoo0
= (7+7) x 2 = 28 deciduous teeth
papillae (14) are present over the entire dorsum of the tongue. Marginal
(deciduous teeth)
ili c opppooo
papillae are present only in the newborn pup. For general sensation ( pain,
pddns anuo a yo uequu snonu a (anad pue ono
by the lingual nerve (from V3) and the lingual branch of the glossopha-
 Perma nent dentition III C LPPPMMO
ryngeal n. The chorda tympani (from VIl) supplies the fungiform papillae
in the rostral two-thirds of the tongue, while the glossopharyngeal nerve
(permanent teeth)
III C LPPPMMM
teeth
(IX) innervates the vallate and foliate papillae in the caudal third of the
tongue with special sensory fibers. The parasympathetic part ofthe chorda
 To interpret the dental formula, the numerator represents the teeth of the
vallate papillae belong (these glands secrete into the groove surrounding
upper arcade, the denominator, the teeth of the lower arcade. mbols 
the papilla). The lyssa is a rod-shaped formation with a maximum length
lower case represent deciduous teeth; symbols in capitals, perma nent teeth.
 of 4 cm. It is a morphological characteristic of carnivores and is ventrome-
Small zeros (o) symbolize that in this place a tooth will be present in the
 dian at the apex of the tongue. The lyssa consists of an envelope of con-
 permanent dentition. A large zero (O) symbolizes a total absence of a tooth
nective tissue containing striated muscle cells, fat and cartilaginous tissue.
 in the canine dentition. The permanent teeth either replace the deciduous
teeth or develop without having temporary precursors; e.g., the first pre-
molar (P1 = L) and all molars (M). The incisor teeth (I) of the upper jaw
tongue, the extrinsic tongue muscles, which come from outside the organ
are larger than those of the lower. In the upper jaw, a distinct diastema (20)
 and radiate within it, and the hyoid muscles that insert into the basihyoid
 or interdental space is present between the third incisor and the canine
11
element.
tooth (C); whereas in the lower arcade the diastema is between the canine
I. The m. lingualis proprius, the proper muscle of the tongue, contains lon-
 and the first premolar The first premolar tooth (P1) of each arcade is some-
12
4  gitudinal, transverse and perpendicular fibers (see page 101).
times referred to as a wolf tooth (Dens lupinus, L). Like the incisor and
IL. The extrinsic tongue muscles radiate into the tongue from the stylohy-
canine teeth, it has only one root. The remaining three premolar teeth (P2
oid element of the hyoid apparatus (m. styloglossus, 9), from the basihyoid
- P4) of each arcade are cutting teeth, each having two roots. An exception
13
element (m. hyoglossus, 8) and from the body of the mandible lateral to the
to this is P4 of the upper arcade, which has three roots. It is the strongest
intermandibular joint (m. genioglossus, 16).
tooth of the upper jaw and is also called a sectorial tooth. The sectorial
tooth of the lower jaw is the first molar (M1). The molar teeth (M) have
IIL. Of the hyoid muscles,the m. geniohyoideus (18) runs from the body of
14
surfaces used for crushing. They have three roots in the upper jaw, two
the mandible near the intermandibular joint to the basihyoid element and
roots in the lower jaw.
the m. thyrohyoideus (7, as the cranial continuation of the m. sternothy-
 In animals, the eruption and wear of the teeth permit an approximate esti-
muscles: mm. sternohyoideus and sternothyroideus, see p. 14). The mm.
 mation of age of the animal. Both criteria however are related to breed and
stylohyoideus, occipitohyoideus and ceratohyoideus are not given atten-
the maintenance of the animal. Regarding the eruption ofthe teeth, the fol-
tion in the dissection.
uou yom aie suwixoudde Sumo
The innervation of the muscles of the tongue is by the hypoglossal n. (Xll);
 Up to the third week of age: edentulous;
except for the hyoid muscles, which are supplied predominantly by way of
 From the sixth week: complete deciduous dentition;
the ansa cervicalis that joins the hypoglossal n. and first cervical nerve.
 From the third month: commencement of growth of permanent incisors;
After its emerging from the hypoglossal canal, the hypoglossal nerve (XIL,
 From the sixth month: complete permanent dentition.
5
—6) crosses the sympathetic trunk and glossopharyngeal nerve laterally
and communicates with the first cervical nerve by the ansa cervicalis before
Three hard substances, enamel, cementum, and dentin, participate in tooth
it reaches the lingual muscles. Although the vagus nerve participates in the
structure. Enamel (22) covers the free part of the tooth, the crown. It is a
15
innervation of the canine tongue, its role is not absolutely clear As a
very hard, conspicuously white, layer approximately one millimeter thick.
branchial arch nerve, it takes part in the genesis of the tongue. In human
 Cementum (27) consists of interwoven osseous tissue, approximately one
beings,its innervation ofthe root ofthe tongue near the base of the epiglot-
 millimeter thick, surrounding the whole root of the tooth (28) and extend-
tis is proven.
ing to the neck (24) to the beginning of the enamel layer and the crown.
c) The SALIvARy GLANDs of the oral cavity are divided into those lying in
Dentin (21) is a tissue free of cells and resembling bone. It consists of a cal-
 the surrounding wall, which have many short ducts, and accessory glands 
cified ground substance and collagenous fiber bundles. Internal to the cov-
 ering layers of enamel and cementum, it forms the bulk of the tooth and
more or less far removed from the oral cavity and connected to it by a rel-
idind euap aui suus aiae dnd au i) a dmd aui spunons
atively long excretory duct. The accessory glands that open into the oral
nerves, blood and lymph vessels. These enter the cavity through the apical
vestibule are the parotid and zygomatic glands. Those that open into the
foramen (31) and the root canal (30). On the crown of the tooth (23), five
oral cavity proper are the mandibular and monostomatic sublingual
 contact surfaces are distinguished; namely, the occlusal surface or mastica-
 glands. The parotid gland (3) is triangular It lies laterally at the base of the
tory surface, the vestibular surface, the lingual surface, the contact surface
7
 ear and ends with its parotid duct (3) on the parotid papilla (2) dorsal to
with mesial (rostral) and distal (caudal) surfaces. From the anatomical
the sectorial tooth (P 4) of the upper jaw. The zygomatic gland (1) lies ven-
point of view, the neck of the tooth is regarded as the site of contact
trolaterally in the orbit under the rostral end of the zygomatic arch. It
 between enamel and cementum; whereas, clinically, the term encompasses
opens with one large and several small excretory ducts caudal to the upper
the region between the alveolus and the gingiva (25). In that view, the
sectorial tooth (p. 4). The mandibular gland (5) and the monostomatic sub-
16
 crown projects beyond the gingiva and the clinical root is that portion of
8
 lingual gland (4) that is applied to it rostrodorsally discharge with parallel
 the tooth fixed in the alveolus and covered by gingiva.
coursing excretory ducts rostrally on the caruncula sublingualis (19). The
caruncle lies on the floor of the oral cavity rostral to the lingual frenulum.
 Teeth are “wedged’ into the osseous alveoli by means of the parodontium
17
At the level ofthe lingual frenulum,the polystomatic sublingual gland (15)
(26), which produces a resilient, springy, fibrous union (gomphosis). The
opens into the oral cavity with many short excretory ducts and is thus a
term parodontium embraces the alveolus, the periodontium and the cemen-
gland of the oral wall. This is true also for the buccal and palatine glands.
tum. Collagen fibers of the periodontium run in varying directions between
 the cementum and the alveolus.
104
Tongue, lingual mm., hypoglossal n. (Xll) and salivary glands
(lateral view)
 1 Zygomatic gland and duct
 2 Parotid papilla
3 Parotid gland and parotid duct 
 4  Monostomatic (- major) sublingual
gland and duct
 5 Mandibular gland and duct -
6 Hypoglossal n. (Ill) -
 7 Thyrohyoideus m.
8 Hyoglossus m.
9 Styloglossus m.
10 Conical papillae
19 Caruncula sublingualis
11  Vallate papillae
18 Geniohyoideus m.
12 Foliate papillae
17 Frenulum
 13 Filiform papillae
16 Genioglossus m.
14 Fungiform papillae 
 15 Polystomatic sublingual gland 
 Maxillary dental arch
Legend :
32 Zygomatic arch
40 Occlusal surface
33Horizontal lamin
na of palatine l
34 Lesser palatine forr.
35 Greater palatine forr.
43 Palatine fissure
36 Contact surface:
44Palatine process of incisive bone
39 Vestibuar surface
47 Alveolar canal
Permanent teeth
Canine tooth
(lateral view)
(median section)
15
21 Dentin
22 Enamel
23 Crown of tooth
24 Neck of tooth
 25 Gingiva
 26 Parodontium:
elle
27 Cementum
28 Root of tooth (clinical)
46
 29 Pulp cavity
30Root canal
 31 Apical for.
(see pp. 89, 91, 97)
105
10. Joints of the Head
Name
 Bones forming
Type/
Function
 Comment
the joint
Composition
 1. Temporomandibular joint:   Condylar process
Condylar joint/
Hinge joint;
A fibrocartilaginous articular disc subdivides
of the mandible and the
simple joint;
the joint cavity into dorsal and ventral cavities.
mandibular fossa of
the temporal bone;
 II. Intermandibular symphysis (articulation): This joint connects right and left halves of the mandible.
 Il. Hyoid bone (hyoid apparatus): The hyoid bone is connected with the temporal bone by the tympanohyoid (consists of connective tissue), and its
thyrohyoid element forms a synovial joint with the rostral cornu of the thyroid cartilage. Except for the union of the tympanohyoid with the stylo-
hyoid, the individual elements of the hyoid apparatus are joined by synovial joints.
The temporomandibular joint is an incongruent condylar joint which is
Articulations and Ligaments of the Larynx
subdivided by a fibrocartilaginous articular disc into two compartments,
Articulations, ligaments and muscles connect all laryngeal cartilages with
lying one above the other The dorsal compartment is the larger. The trans-
each other and enable intralaryngeal movements.
versely located condylar process of the mandible is smaller than the artic-
The cricothyroid joint is located between a small articular surface of the
 [dun a jo ess renauu au aq pag si eun uissadap rn
 cricoid cartilage at the dorsal part of the arch and an articular surface on
bone at the temporal base of the zygomatic arch. Caudally the fossa is sup-
the medial aspect of the caudal cornu of the thyroid cartilage. It permits a
ported by the retroarticular process, which limits caudal displacement of
 hinge-like rocking movement between cricoid and thyroid cartilages.
the mandible. The joint capsule attaches to the margins of the articular sur-
faces of the temporal bone and mandible and at the circumference of the
 The cricoarytenoid jointlies between the base of each arytenoid cartilage and
cartilaginous articular disc. The capsule is reinforced laterally by dense
the rostral margin ofthe lamina ofthe cricoid cartilage. The chief movement
connective tissue, the lateral ligament. The locomotor activity, which takes
 is one in which the muscular process of the arytenoid cartilage is drawn cau-
 place synchronously on right and left sides, is restricted in the dog chiefly
 domedially as its vocal process is moved craniolaterally. The reverse move-
to the hinge-like opening and closing of the mouth. Some side-to-side
ment also takes place. Some axial rotation (the axis passes through the ary-
movement is possible when the mouth is not fully opened. Canine breeds
tenoid caudal to rostral) of the arytenoid at its joint with the cricoid is also
with a relatively large coronoid process, as, for example, the Basset, tend
 possible. A cricoarytenoid ligament reinforces the joint capsule.
to lock’ the jaw in the case of extreme opening of the mouth. The joint is
 The ligaments of the larynx (see text-illustration) become visible after
fixed and there is an inability to close the mouth.
 removal of the mucous membrane of the larynx. Broad-surfaced ligamen-
 The intermandibular symphysis (in the most recent nomenclature it is des-
 tous connections are called membranes.
ignated an intermandibular articutation) joins right and left halves of the
 The vocal ligament contains predominantly elastic fibers and is drawn
mandible. The joint consists of a cartilaginous part (intermandibular syn-
 between the internal surface of the thyroid cartilage and the vocal process
chondrosis) and a larger fibrous connective tissue portion (intermandibu-
 of the arytenoid.
lar suture). The tight connection permits only a litte movement that allows
 alignment of the upper and lower dental arcades. A traumatic separation
and courses between the ventral extremity of the cuneiform process of the
 of the intermandibular symphysis is possible. Ossification of the joint may
 arytenoid carilage and the internal surface of the thyroid cartilage.
occur in old age.
 The thyrohyoid membrane stretches between the rostral border of the thy-
The sutures of the upper jaw (this term includes the cranial and facial bones
 roid cartilage and the basihyoid.
 excepting the hyoid bone, mandible, and ear ossicles) are located between
 The hyoepiglottic ligament connects the basihyoid with the epiglottic car-
the individual bones of the neuro- and viscerocranium, which are partially
tilage.
interdigitated in a zigzag line. In the area of the cranial vault, the connec-
 The cricothyroid ligament joins the ventral part of the rostral border of the
tive tissue portions of the cranial sutures are the remnant potential of the
membranous osification which after the final breed-specific development
 Cricoid cartilage to the caudal margin of the thyroid cartilage.
 of the skull is finished by the formation of a bony growth zone. Broad con-
 The laryngeal fibroelastic membrane is the broad-surfaced lateral continu-
nective tissue parts are present perinatally as fontanelles.
 ation of the cricothyroid ligament.
The temporohyoid ariculation fixes the tympanohyoid to the mastoid
 The thyroepiglottic igament connects the epiglottic cartilage with the ros-
 tral border of the thyroid cartilage.
process of the petrosal part. Between individual elements of the hyoid bone
(tympano-, stylo-, epi-, cerato-, basi-, and thyrohyoid) are also articula-
 The cricotracheal ligament is the fibrous connection between the cricoid
tions (see Ill. above).
 cartilage and the first tracheal cartilage.
At the thyrohyoid articulation the thyrohyoid is connected with the rostral
 The transverse arytenoid ligament extends between the apposed medial
horn of the thyroid cartilage by a synovial joint.
 borders of the two arytenoid cartilages and fixes here the roughly millet-
sized interarytenoid cartilage and the sesamoid cartilage (not depicted),
which is about the same size.
Larynx
(median section)
(medial view)
 Cricotracheal lig.
D
Legend :
 A Epiglottic cartilage
 B Arytenoid cartilage
 C Thyroid cartilage
D Cricoid cartilage
Hyoepiglottic lig 
E Trachea
Basihyoid
Thyrohyoid membrarte
C
Vestibular lig.
Cricothyroid lig
Vocal lig.
Laryngeal fbroelastic membrane 
106
Joints of head and sutures of skull
(lateral view)
XI.
15
XL.
Articular capsule
 Articular disc
Lateral lig.
XVll.
Temporomandibular joint and sutures of skull
(medial view)
(see pp. 89, 91, 101, 105)
Intermandibular
synchondrosis
Intermandibular suture
Xvll.
Intermancibular symphysis (articulation)
Legend:
Frontal bone
 Parietal bone
Joints of head and sutures of skull
Interparietal bone
IV.
Temporal bone 
V.
Ethmoidal bone (see p. 91)
Vl.
Occipital bone
Vll.
 Sphenoid bone
Vll.
 Lacrimal bone 
(lateral view)
IX.
Zygomatic bone 
X.
Nasal bone
Maxilla
XVll. Mandible
1113
VIl.
IX
15
12
IV.
emporohyoid joint
XVll.
Thyrohyoid joint
 Cricothyroid joint
Anular lig.
Legend:
1  Maxilloincisive suture
 6 Lacrimomaxillary suture
11  Sphenofrontal suture
16 Parietointerparietal suture
 2 Nasoincisive suture
7 Frontolacrimal suture
17 Occipitointerparietal suture
3 Nasomaxilary suture
Lacrimozygomatic suture
18 Lambdoid suture
 4 Frontonasal suture
 9 Zygomaticomaxillary suture
14 Sphenopetrosal synchondrosis
19 Occipitosquamous suture
 5 Frontomaxillary suture 
10 Coronal suture
15 Squamous suture
20 Occipitomastoid suture
107
Chapter 10: Central Nervous System
 Spinal Cord and Meninges
a) At the foramen magnum, the THREE SPINAL MENINGEs are continuous
between the dorsal lateral sulcus dorsally and the less distinct ventral later-
with the three cerebral meninges. The external ectomeninx invests the
 al sulcus ventrally. The ventral lateral sulcus, is indistinct or lacking and is
 arachnoidea, and the soft pia mater, which is closely applied to the spinal
 demarcated by the origin of the ventral roots of the spinal nerves. Ventro-
cord. The arachnoidea and pia mater are also designated endomeninx or
 medial to the ventral root filaments is the white matter designated the ven-
leptomeninx ( se corresponding relations of the cerebral meninges, p. 110).
tralfumiculus; it is bounded medially by the ventral median fissure. The ven-
The ectomeninx consists of two layers. The external layer is identical in
 tral funiculus consists of several fiber-tracts, not named here, that connect
 structure and function to the periosteal lining of the vertebral canal (perios-
 different parts of the spinal cord and the brain and that cannot be precisely
teum, —1). The tough internal layer is the dura mater (3). It envelops the
distinguished gross anatomically.
1
spinal cord and the roots of the spinal nerves up to the spinal ganglion and
 c) On CROss-SECTION OF THE SPINAL CoRD (see text-illustration), internal
is continuous with the external covering ofthe first part ofthe spinal nerve,
 to the white substance with its myelinated nerve tracts, the gray substance
the epineurium. Cranial to the fourth cervical vertebra the dorsal and ven-
 can be located as a butterfly figure.' It exhibits a dorsal horn and ventral
tral roots of the spinal nerve have a common dural sheath; whereas, cau-
 horn and, in the thoracic and lumbar regions of the spinal cord, there is in
dal to it, each root has its own dural sheath (middle figure, opposite page).
addition, a lateral horn. The gray substance is present the length of the
 The epidural space (2) is between the two layers of the ectomeninx; it con-
spinal cord and, considered in three dimensions, the horns are more cor-
2
tains adipose tissue,lymph vessels and large calibered venous plexuses. The
 rectly designated columns. Between the dorsal and ventral horns there are
fat tissue cushions the spinal cord which is passively deformed by the cur-
scattered groups of cells and white substance that are part of the reticular
 formation, which is continuous up to the brain. In the central area of the
vatures of the vertebral column.
 gray substance, the central canal pierces the spinal cord.
The endo- or leptomeninx is internal to the dura mater and also consists of 
 d) The RooTs OF THE SpINAL NERvEs are dorsal and ventral. Axons of the
superficially of a layer of epithelioid cells that is continued as the neu-
 motor (efferent) neurons (37) are situated in the ventralroot (28), and have
rothelial inner lining of the perineurium internum upon the peripheral
nerves (not illustrated). The deeper layer of the arachnoidea is a connective
Legend :
tissue layer that is relatively avascular. From it there radiates a loosely
C3
T3
arranged trabecular network of connective tissue that contains within its
a  White substance
 meshes the subarachnoid space (32). The subarachnoid space is filled with
Gray substance
3
ui illl d ueq ai jo suoeu supuodsauos sas p eudsoaia
 Dorsal horn
subarachnoid space extends to the spinal ganglion and is remarkably
Lateral horn
enlarged between the cerebellum and the beginning of the spinal cord as the
d
Ventral horn 
cerebellomedullary cistern (see p. 111). It is also relatively wide around the
é  Substantia gelatinosa 
conus medullaris and the filum terminale (see below) and at these sites is
f
 Reticular formation
suitable for puncture to obtain cerebrospinal fluid. The pia mater (33) is a
 g  Dorsal median septum 
vascular membrane and is closely attached to the surface of the spinal cord.
h Central canal
 Externally the pia mater forms the denticulate ligaments (22) that are fixed
i  Median fissure [ventr.] 
with a broadened base between the roots of the spinal nerves. The liga-
i
 Dorsal funiculus
ments penetrate the arachnoidea and taper here, attaching with their api-
cal part to the internal surface of the dura mater. They attach the spinal
k  Lateral funiculus
1I Ventral funiculus
cord to its surrounding tunics.
 m Dorsolateral sulcus 
The arterial supply ofthe spinal cord is chiefly by the ventralspinal artery (6)
 n Ventrolateral sulcus
that runs alongthe ventral median fssurethe entire length ofthe spinal cord.
The venous ventral internal vertebral plexus (29) is on the floor of the ver-
their origin in the large cells of the ventral horn of the gray substance.
tebral canal embedded in epidural fat tissue. (The ventral external vertebral
Axons of sympathetic neurons (38) arise from nerve cells in the lateral horn
plexus (30) runs externally, ventrally along the vertebral column.)
of the thoracic and lumbar part of the spinal cord and also pass in the ven-
 b) The SpINAL CoRD (see also text-illustration) proceeds from the myelen-
tral root. (Parasympathetic neurons have their cell bodies in the interme-
4
cephalon atthe level ofthe first cervical vertebra. Atthe junction of neck and
diocentral cellular column of the gray substance of the sacral part of the
thorax,it exhibits the cervical enlargement (4), the origin of the nerves ofthe
spinal cord, which is also called lateral horn (column) by some authors;
brachial plexus, and, in the lumbar part of the spinal cord, the lumbar
their axons pass in the ventral root of sacral spinal nerves.) The dorsal root
enlargement (14), the origin of the nerves of the lumbosacral plexus. Cau-
(26) of the spinal nerve contains the axons (central processes) of afferent
dal to the lumbar enlargement, at the level of the fifth lumbar vertebra, it
(sensory) neurons (36) whose peripheral processes, dendrites, (some
narrows like a cone (Conus medullaris, 15) and is continued by the filum 
authors refer to these peripheral processes also as axons or axis cylinders)
terminale (16) at the level of the seventh lumbar vertebra. The filum termi-
 proceed from receptors in the skin, muscle, fascia, etc. of the particular
nale and the accompanying roots of the caudal lumbar, sacral, and caudal
body segment. The perikarya of these sensory neurons are located in the
(coccygeal) spinal nerves altogether form within the vertebral canal the cau-
spinal ganglion (27).
 da equina (17). The roots of the spinal nerves in the cervical and thoracic
e) From their perikarya of origin in the lateral horn, the axons of SyMPA-
region run approximately transversely and, after a brief course, exit the ver-
 THETIc Neunons (see also p. 149) leave the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord
tebral canalat an intervertebral foramen (5). In the lumbar region, and even
in the ventral root. At the origin of the spinal nerve from the union of its
more distinctly in the sacral region, the roots of the spinal nerves leave the
 dorsal and ventral roots, these axons leave the spinal nerve in myelinated
vertebral canal only after a long course and one increasingly parallel to the
 spinal cord. In the embryo, in allregions ofthe spinal cord, the origins of the
in the trunk, the axons pass especially to the sympathetic trunk ganglia
 spinal nerves and the passage ofthe nerves through the intervertebral fora-
(34), where most synapse on a second neuron. From some of the perikarya
mina are approximately atthe same level. With increasing age,the reduced
 of the trunk ganglia (second neurons), axons return in the non-myelinated
growth of the spinal cord relative to the vertebral canal results in a differ-
 gray communicating rami (8) to the segmental (somatic) spinal nerve.
ence in the level of the spinal cord segment from which the roots of the spinal 
 Those myelinated sympathetic fibers that pass within the sympathetic
 nerve take origin, and the level at which the nerve exits the vertebral canal.
trunk without synapsing in the trunk ganglia leave the trunk and extend to
This result is the ascensus medullae (ascent of the spinal cord'). In the cer-
the more distal paravertebral ganglia; e.g., the celiac ganglion (10). They
vical spinal cord, the spinal roots of the accessory nerve (23) arise. They lie
reach the paravertebral ganglia in the major splanchnic nerve (see p. 49)
along thelateral surface ofthe cord, dorsal tothe denticulate ligaments, and
 and minor splanchnic nerve (9) and in the lumbar splanchnic nerves and
run cranially between the dorsal and ventral roots of the cervical spinal
 synapse on perikarya within the paravertebral ganglia. The unmyelinated
nerves. After passing through the foramen magnum, they join the medullary
axons of the second neurons of the paravertebral ganglia pass to the vis-
roots of the nerve. The accessory nerve is formed by the union of its spinal
cera in the adventitia of the visceral arteries. They form a periarterial
and medullary roots and lea ves the cranial ca vity at the jugular foramen. On
 plexus extending to the stomach, duodenum, jejunum, etc. Within the vis-
the surface of the spinal cord, and in cross-section, the dorsal median sulcus
cera, they pass to intramural plexuses, which are designated, according to
(25) can be seen on the dorsal midline and a dorsal lateral sulcus (24) can be
their position as subserosal (11), myenteric (12) and submucosal plexuses
seen at the origin of the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves. These sulci form
(13). (The ganglion cells in the intramural plexuses belong predominantly
the medial and lateral boundaries, respectively, of white substance (white
 to the parasympathetic nervous system.) Nerve fibers of parasympathetic
matter), the longitudinally coursing dorsal fumiculus (19). In the cervical
neurons (39) within the dorsal vagal trunk (40) and ventral vagal trunk (see
spinal cord a dorsal intermediate sulcus (18) can be observed between the
 p. 49) are axons of first neurons. They reach the different abdominal vis-
dorsal median and dorsal lateral sulci. The fasciculus gracilis (20) lies medi-
cera by way of the celiacomesenteric (solar) plexus and the perivascular
al to the dorsal intermediate sulcus and the fasciculus cuneatus (21) is later-
 plexuses surrounding the branches of the celiac and mesenteric arteries to
 al to it. The lateral funiculus (see text-illustration) is the white substance
 reach the different parts of the gut.
108
Spinal cord
Medulla oblongata 
and cervical part
18 Dors. intermediate sulcus
19 Dors. funiculus:
21
 Fasciculus gracilis 
Fasciculus cuneatus-
 22 Denticulate lig.
nC2
 23 Accessory n. (Xl)
(spinal root)
24 Dors. lateral sulcus
Ectomeninx
25 Median sulcus
1 Periosteum
nC5
2 Epidural space
nC
3 Dura mater
26Dorsalroot
27 Spinal ggl.
nC6
28Ventral root
4 Cervical enlargement
nC
29 Ventr. int. vertebral plexus
30 Ventr.ext.vertebral plexus
Bou
Endomeninx:
(Leptomeninx)
nT
31
Arachnoidea
32 Subarachnoid space
33 Pia mater
- 34 Sympathetic trunk ggl. (autonom.)
- 35 Sympathetic trunk
Sensory neur. (afferent)
n14
Motor neur. (efferent)
6 Ventral spinal a
38
Sympathetic neur. (autonom.)
nT5
39
Parasympathetic neur. (autonom.)
Mening
nT13
7 White communicating br
Dors. vagal trunk
nT-
nTg
8Gray
9 Minor splanchnic n.
10 Celiac ggl. and celiac a.
nT10
Celiac plexus
nT11
 Small interstine
Muscle
nT12
Skir
nT13
Tunicaserosa
Subserosal plexu:
Tela subserosa
Tunica muscularis:
Conus medullaris and
Longitudinal layer
Circular layer
 Cauda equina
12 Myenteric plexus
Tela submucosa
13 Submucosal plexus -
nL
Tunica mucosa
14 Lumbar enlargement 
31
15 Conus medullaris
16Filum terminale
nL7
17 Cauda equina
nS1
5
nS2
nS3
(see pp.149, 157)
nCy1
109
2. Brain (Encephalon) and its Meningeal Coverings
1  a) The CEREBRAL MENINGEs are continuous with the spinal meninges.
parable to the relations ofthe lateral horn ofthe spinal cord. Cranial nerves
 I. The external meninges (Ectomeninx) consist of the periosteal lining of
V - Xll arise from the rhombencephalon. (XI has an additional root from
the endocranium (periosteum, —
 the spinal cord, and V has additionally sensory nuclei in the mesencephalon
24) and the dura mater (pachymeninx).
Both layers are separated in the vertebral canal by the epidural space; but
 and spinal cord.) In the rhombencephalon as well as the mesencephalon
in the cranial cavity they fuse to form the united ectomeninx. The layers are
 and spinal cord there is the reticular formation (42). It consists of scattered
separated in two places: (1) in the formation of the diaphragma sellae (33)
concentrations of nerve cells in the meshes of irregularly arranged nerve
of the hypophysis; and (2) where the sinuses of the dura mater (26) are pre-
fibers and, as a superior center of nervous function, coordinates sensory,
sent. At the hypophysis the periosteal layer lines the sella turcica and sur-
motor and autonomic functions (e.g, cardiovascular and respiratory cen-
ters). Moreover, it serves as a functional coordinator of the cranial nerves
rounds the hypophysis, which projects into the 'saddle-space' here. The
dura mater itself separates from the margins of the sella turcica and covers
with each other and with adjacent parts of the central nervous system.
the hypophysis dorsally as the diaphragm of the sella turcica. Within the
 Important nerve tracts traverse the ventral area of the rhombencephalon.
diaphragm is a central opening for the stalk of the hypophysis, which con-
 One of these, the pyramidal tract (43), exhibits the pyramidal decussation
 at the transition to the spinal cord.
nects the hypophysis with the hypothalamus of the brain. In the removal of
the brain from the cranial cavity, this stalk is usually ruptured at the
 The metencephalon (44) is the rostral part of the rhombencephalon. Its
diaphragm. The ectomeninx covers the entire internal surface of the cranial
 ventral part is the pons (45); its dorsal part is the cerebellum. The ventral
cavity with the two fused layers. The dura mater (25) separates from the
periosteum on the dorsal midline between right and left cerebral hemi-
 continued dorsally into the cerebellum as the middle cerebellar peduncle
(see p. 115). Longitudinal nerve tracts, the pyramidal and other tracts that
 and the cerebellum. On the dorsal midline, it extends as a dorsal median
connect the brain and spinal cord traverse the central area of the pons.
fold, the falx cerebri (27) and, between the cerebrum and cerebellum as a
dorsal membranous transverse fold, the tentorium cerebelli mem-
 The cerebellum is the dorsal part ofthe metencephalon and is connected to
 branaceum. The falx cerebri extends from the ethmoid bone rostrally to the
the other parts of the central nervous system by the cerebellar peduncles
 Occipital bone caudally. The membranous tentorium cerebelli is supported
(see text-illustration, p. 112). The rostral cerebellar peduncle leads to the
 dorsally by a thin transverse plate of bone, the tentorium cerebelli osseum
mesencephalon, the middle cerebellar peduncle to the pons of the meten-
an u ausi slid un ai jo id ss a ()
 cephalon and the caudal cerebellar peduncle to the medulla oblongata.
interparietal and occipital bones; it lies within the base of the membranous
 Rostrally the cerebellum is separated from the cerebral hemispheres by the
tentorium, which projects over the cerebellum like a tent and thus separates 
tentorium cerebelli. The unpaired cerebellar vermis (see p. 113) is median
the cerebellum from the cerebrum.
and flanked by the paired cerebellar hemispheres or lateral lobes. This is
II. The internal, soft meninges (Endomeninx, Leptomeninx) consist of the
seen most clearly on dorsal view of the brain. On median section can be
seen the external gray substance of the cerebellar cortex (29) and the inter-
arachnoidea and the pia mater. With its neurothelium, the arachnoidea
nal white substance of the corpus medullare (medullary body). The cere-
(21) is applied to the internal surface of the dura mater and is separated
bellar cortex is much more finely divided and subdivided than the cerebral
from the pia mater by the subarachnoid space (22). A network of connec-
 cortex and the white substance of the medullary body is so strongly
tive tissue trabeculae pass from the deep surface of the arachnoidea, cross
 branched that it appears as the arbor vitae (30) or tree of life.?
the subarachnoid space and join the pia mater. Within the meshes of the
arachnoid trabeculae, the subarachnoid space is an expansive chamber that
The myelencephalon (medulla oblongata, " —41) extends from the pons to
contains the cerebrospinal fluid. The space with its cerebrospinal fluid
the roots of the first cervical nerves.
invests the brain, which in a certain manner floats in a fluid environment.
The subarachnoid space is variably wide in relation to the different parts
 II. Three main parts of the mesencephalon (16) are described: The tectum 
ofthe brain. On the superficial convexities of the cerebral gyri it is very nar-
(35) with the lamina tecti quadrigemina (Corpora quadrigemina 
—36
row and here the dura and pia mater are closely attached. On the other
forms the roof of the mesencephalic aqueduct (39). The rostral colliculus
hand, the subarachnoid space is very wide at the cerebral sulci where the
(37) is associated with the visual pathway and the caudal colliculus (38)
pia mater passes deeply. The dura mater passes over the sulcus at a consid-
with the auditory pathway. The tegmentum (17) is ventral to the mesen-
erable distance and the meshes of the arachnoidea fill the wide space
 cephalic aqueduct. It contains the motor nuclei of the oculomotor (ll) and
between them. The wide passages of the subarachnoid space are designat-
 trochlear (IV) nerves and a part of the reticular formation as well as the
 ed cisterns. The cerebellomedullary cistern (31) is dorsolateral between the
rucleus ruber (red nucleus) and the substantia nigra. The paired cerebral
cerebellum and the spinal cord. The intercrural cisterm (34) is ventromedi-
 pedumcle (crus cerebri, —18) lies ventrally separated by the median inter-
an between the two cerebral peduncles. The arachnoidea with its arachnoid
crural fossa (19).
 granulations (20) projects into the sinuses of the dura mater and at other
e snuoi pue snuda sne ') uup au jo 
sites into openings into the internal surface of the cranial bones. The arach-
 described here. The thalamus (3) bounds laterally the circular third ventri-
noid granulations were thought to be sites of resorption of cerebrospinal
7
fluid. That is placed in doubt onthe basis of more recent investigations (see
 cle (15). The paired parts contact each other on the midline at the interthal-
 amic adhesion (4) and bear laterally the geniculate bodies. The lateral
p. 116). The pia mater (23) is tightly attached to the surface of the brain
 geniculate body (see p. 115) lies at the end of the optic tract and is con-
and follows into the depth of the cerebral sulci.
nected with the rostral colliculus of the corpora quadrigemina. The medi-
3
 b) The STRUCTURE OF THE INDIVIDUAL PoRTIONS OF THE BRAIN is COnsidered
al geniculate body (see p. 115) is connected to the caudal colliculus of the
in rostral-caudal sequence on median section of the brain. The parts of the
 corpora quadrigemina. Functionally the thalamus is the last site of synapse
brain develop embryologically from the neural tube and the three cerebral
 of all tracts ascending to the cerebral cortex with the exception of the olfac-
vesicles (according to another opinion, two cerebral vesicles), which dif-
tory tract. Thus the thalamus is the 'door to consciousness", the door to the
 ferentiate into the five parts of the brain:
cerebral cortex; for it is in the cerebral cortex that the phenomenon of con-
sciousness, awareness of the stimulus, is chiefly realized. The epithalamus
 prosencephalon
telencephalon
diencephalon
of the third ventricle, bounds the corpora quadrigemina rostrally. It is
homologus to the parietal eye of lower vertebrates. The hypothalamus (5)
is ventrolateral to the third ventricle and has predominantly autonomic
 mesencephalon
mesencephalon
function. The hypophysis (7) is ventral to the hypothalamus and connect
 metencephalon
ed to it by a narrow stalk. Its neural part, the posterior lobe (9), develops
rhombencephalon <
 as a ventral extension of the hypothalamus and its anterior lobe (8) has ori-
myelencephalon
10
gin from the roof of the pharynx. Caudal to the attachment of the stalk of
the hypophysis to the hypothalamus is the mammillary body (32,
,—see
 I. The rhombencephalon (46) is subdivided into the metencephalon and
also p. 1is). It is partly divided and rounded and forms the floor of the
myelencephalon. It contains the fourth ventricle (40) and is distinctly sim-
third ventricle at the boundary of the diencephalon with the mesen-
ilar in its basic plan to the spinal cord. This is also valid, with increasing
 cephalon. Rostral to the attachment of the hypophyseal stalk, the optic
limitation, for the mesencephalon and diencephalon. The nuclei and the
 nerve (6) arises from the diencephalon.
place of departure of the hypoglossal nerve (Xll) is ventromedial (see p.
115), which is comparable to the relations of the ventral motor column of
IV. The telencephalon (10) consists of the cerebral hemispheres (11) and
the spinal cord. The exits of the sensory nerves (such as Vlll) are dorsolat-
their commissures. The rhinencephalon (12) is the olfactory part of the
eral, which is comparable to the relations of the dorsal sensory column of
hemisphere. Right and left cerebral hemispheres are separated on the mid-
the spinal cord. Nuclei and the place of exit of nerves with predominant
line by the falx cerebri of the dura mater The central commissures of the
 parasympathetic portions (such as X) are located in between, which is com-
 corpus callosum (13) and the rostral commissure (14) remain undivided.
110
Brain and Meninges
Ectomeninx:
24
 Periosteum
(Endocranium)
25
Dura mater 
 26 Sinus of dura mater
(sagittal)
27Falxcerebri
 28 Tentorium cerebelli 
1 Pineal gland
osseum
Cerebellum:
 2 Diencephalon 
29
 Cerebellar cortex 
30 Arbor vitae
3 Thalamus
4 Interthalamic adhesion
 Cerebellomedullary
5 Hypothalamus -
6Opticnerve
32Mammilary body
cistern
33 Diaphragma sellae
7 Hypophysis
 34 Intercrural cistern 
Anterior lobe
9Posterior lobe
(Median section)
10 Telencephalon:
Rhinencephalon-
Cerebrum
12
Mesencephalon:
Tectum
 Tectal lamina 
Rostr. colliculus
13 Corpus callosum and septum
38
Caud. colliculus
telencephali pellucidum) -
39
 Mesencephalic aqueduct
14 Rostr. commissure
15 Third ventricle
40Fourth ventricle
41 Medulla oblongata
42 Reticular formation
43 Pyramidal tract 
16 Mesencephalon:
44 Metencephalon
45 Pons
17
18
46 Rhombencephalon
19
Intercrural fossa 
Legend :
a Rostr. cerebral a.
 é Choroid plexus of third ventricle
b Ventr. cerebral v.
fChoroid plexus of fourth ventricle
c Dors. cerebral vw.
d Great cerebral v.
(see pp. 113, 115, 116, 117)
(Transverse section)
 20 Arachnoid granulations 
Endomeninx:
 Arachnoidea
 22 Subarachnoid space
23 Pia mater
Cerebral v.
Cerebral a.
Gray matter
White matter
111
3. Cerebrum (Telencephalon), Brain Stem and Limbic System
 Examination and study of the brain is done after removal of the brain from the cranial cavity. In doing this, the cranial nerves are cut at the base of the brain
 proximal to their perforating the meninges. Cross-sections of the brain at the level of the optic chiasm are drawn on for study.
The telencephalon is further classified according to phylogenetic criteria.
diencephalon. The fan-like part penetrates the area of the basal nuclei
In phylogenesis there are three phases of cerebral development. The phy-
(basal ganglia), passing between the caudate nucleus and the lentiform
logenetically oldest part of the cerebral cortex, the paleopallium and the
nucleus, and is designated the internal capsule (9). A thinner fiber-tract lat-
part of the cortex whose development soon follows, the archipallium,
eral to the lentiform nucleus is designated the external capsule (13). From
form the rhinencephalon in the broader sense. In mammals, the archipal.
the diencephalon the projection fibers pass in the cerebral peduncle of the
lium has lost most of its olfactory function and the paleopallium has tak-
 mesencephalon. In the area of the basal ganglia, at the site of penetration
en on additional functions. For this reason, some authors no longer use
 of the internal and external capsules, the alternating bands of gray and
the term 'rhinencephalon.° However, by international agreement the term
 white substance give the cut surface of the brain a striate appearance and
 for this reason this area is named the striate body or corpus striatum.
netically youngest part of the cerebral cortex, the neopalium, in the dog
 b) The BRAIN STEM is defined differently by the individual textbook
 develops as a gyrencephalic brain.
3
 authors. Without doubt, the mesencephalon, pons and medulla oblongata
1
 a) In the process of ontogenesis, the CenEsRum (the term cerebrum' is used
 belong to the brain stem. Beyond this, some authors include the dien-
here to designate the cerebral hemispheres and their commissures), as the
cephalon, and some include the basal nuclei (basal ganglia), which were
largest part of the brain, grows from rostral to dorsalto caudoventral, and
 named accordingly the stem ganglia.'"
covers over the rest of the brain excepting only the cerebellum, pons, and
medulla oblongata. This process of development is called dorsal rotation in
which parts of the hemispheres, including cerebral ventricles I and II, actu-
ally roll in.* This is seen distinctly in lateral view of the brain, and also in
(dorsal view)
casts demonstrating the cerebral ventricles (see text-illustration, p. 116).
 Third ventricle
I. On account of the hemispherical form of the cerebrum, its two halves,
Pineal gland
the cerebral hemispheres (1), are, e.g., in brachycephalic breeds, not hemi-
Lat. geniculate body
line by the falx cerebri. On section of the hemispheres, it is clear that there
is, similar to the cerebellum, a segregation into a peripheral cerebral cortex
 Or gray substance (4) and a more centrally located medulla or white sub-
Med. geniculate body
stance (S). In ontogenesis, the great majority of neuroblasts of the telen-
cephalic vesicle emigrates to the periphery in a process in which the periph-
Rostral colliculus
eral gray of the cortex or pallium develops with accumulations of perikarya
VIlO
Caudal colliculus
and the central, white, medulla with myelinated fibers.
VII
IL. The cerebral sulci (2) and cerebral gyri (3) of the hemisphere are, in their
 Cerebellar peduncles 
degree of development, a reflection of the developmental level of the par-
ticular species. Primitive mammals and birds do not yet have gyri and sul-
Ci and for this reason are designated lissencephalic (smooth brain). Differ-
Fourth ventricle
ent from this, our domestic mammals are gyrencephalic (a brain with gyri
ude aui u uas aq ues u sue aenaau a ns pe
Area postema
-ppe ul ll d anay iamol aui ul pue (azed aisoddo 'auny doi) sauna
peoq e ui nso ieu sauo aiossm osie aue aaui juas uisuo at oi u
range of variation and can be observed as differences in the two hemi-
 spheres of an individual.
Il. The lobes of each hemisphere are located in relation to bones of the
Fasciculus gracilis
same-name: frontal lobe, occipital lobe, temporal lobe and parietal lobe.
Fasciculus cuneatus
Some authors differentiate additionally a rhinencephalic (olfactory) lobe
(see illustration, p. 117).
IV. The cerebral cortex is of varying thickness. According to their specific
I. The basal nuclei of the corpus striatum are gray substance, consisting of
cytoarchitecture, a number of cortical areas are distinguished (in human
neurons that do not migrate to the peripheral cortex during ontogenesis.
beings, areas 1 - 52), which are drawn on to designate certain details ofthe
 They remain in the area bordering the diencephalon. The basal nuclei are the
brain.
caudate nucleus (8), the lentiform nucleus, the claustrum (14) and the amyg-
A somatotopic division into sensory and motor areas divides the cortex
daloid body (12). The caudate nucleus projects into the lateral ventricle. The
according to functional aspects. A certain sensation at a restricted area of
lentiform nucleus consists of the putamen (10), which is lateral, and the pal-
lidum (Globus palldus), which is medial. Many authors do not account the
the body or a certain movement of parts of the body can be assigned to a
 pallidum as part of the cerebral hemisphere but consider it a part of the dien-
circumscribed sensory or motor projection-area of the cerebral cortex.
Research into the somatotopic classification could be done because a
cephalon, and in this area the two parts of the brain cannot be sharply sepa-
peripheral loss of function could be assigned to a certain area of cerebral
rated from one another. Topographically, the amygdaloid body belongs to
the basal nuclei, but functionally to the rhinencephalon. The function of the
cortical damage, e.g., traumatic injuries. In addition, specific peripheral
reactions could be elicited by electrical stimulation of a certain area of the
basal nuclei has not been completely resolved. In human beings, they are
involved in pathways that coordinate the pattern of movements, and they
cerebral cortex.
 modify the output from motor areas of the cerebral cortex, especially the pro-
The sensory and motor regions of the cerebral cortex are connected with
 gram of slow movements. Some of the basal nuclei take partin the functions
 one another and with deep parts of the central nervous system by afferent
 Of the limbic system.
 and efferent fiber-tracts, groups of fibers of similar function, that compose
the central white substance of the hemisphere.
 c) The LiMBic SysTEM is the imprecisely defined border zone (limbus = bor-
 der) between the diencephalon and telencephalon and, within the telen-
V. The white substance of the hemisphere consists of three systems of
cephalon, between the neopallium and the rhinencephalon. The limbic sys-
fibers:
tem consists of limbic cortical parts such as the piriform lobe and the hip-
 Association fibers are fibers that extend between different parts of the
pocampus and more deeply placed pars of the hemisphere. Of the more
hemisphere of the same side.
deeply placed parts, the following are mentioned: septal nuclei of the telen-
 cephalic septum (previously designated the Septum pellucidum) and parts of
the corpus striatum: caudate nucleus, putamen and the amygdaloid body.
hemispheres. They are represented by the rostral commissure (see p. 111),
There is extensive communication (connection) between the parts of the lim-
 corpus callosum (6) and commissural fibers of the fornix (7).
 bic system and other regions of the brain. Many functions of the limbic sys-
Projection fibers are connections of the cerebral cortex with other deep,
tem are unclear. The system is involved in the control of feelings, of moods,
more caudal parts of the central nervous system such as the brain stem and
of'drives' as well as other emotional behavior and, for this reason, this part
spinal cord. Projection fibers are arranged fan-like and converge to the
 of the nervous system is also called the visceral or 'emotional brain.
112
Brain (Neopallium)
(dorsal view)
 Olfactory bulb
1 Cerebral hemisphere
Longitudinal fissure
 2 Cerebral sulci
3 Cerebral gyri
Cerebellum
Legend :
(see pp. 111, 115, 116, 117)
A Caudal ectosylvian sulcus
F Ansate sulcus
a Sylvian gyrus
 e Caud. ectomarginal gyrus
B Suprasylvian sulcus
G Cruciate sulcus
b Caud. ectosylvian gyrus 
f Marginal gyrus
C Ectomarginal sulcus
G' Postcruciate sulcus
C Rostr. ectomarginal gyrus
g Postcruciate gyrus
D Marginal sulcus
H Prorean 
Middle ectomarginal gyrus:
h Precruciate gyrus
E Coronal sulcus
I  Presylvian sulcus
 Lateral part 
i Prorean gyrus
d'
Medial part
Thalamus (section) and striate body
(transverse section)
 4 Cerebral cortex (gray substance)
 5 Medull (white substance)
Lateral ventricle
 6 Corpus callosum
 Choroid plexus of lateral ventricle 
7 Fornix
Third ventricle
Corpus striatum:
Thalamus:
 8 Caudate nucleus 
 Rostral nucleus
 Internal capsule 
Lateral nucleus 
Lentiform nucleus: 
Medial nucleus
10
 Putamen 
Interthalamic adhesion
11
 Pallidum [Globus pallidus] 
 Subthalamic nucleus
 12 Amygdaloid body
Third ventricle
13 External capsule
14 Claustrum
 Piriform lobe
 Optic chiasm 
113
4. Rhinencephalon, Sites of Egression of the Cranial Nerves, Arterial Supply of the Brain
With the assistance of the instructors, the dorsal part of the cerebral hemispheres and all of the cerebellum are removed by horizontal section of the brain
across the corpus callosum, opening the lateral ventricles of the brain. To demonstrate the area of the geniculate bodies and the optic tact, the hip-
'ahed allsoddo ayi uo ainbiy jamal au Aq umoys mal aul anli ot yo payll s! sndweood 
a) The RHINENcEPHALON, a part of the telencephalon, begins with its basal
from the temporal half of the retina, continue on the same side. Beyond the
part (2) rostrally at the olfactory bulb (3). Here the fibers of the olfactory
optic chiasm, optic nerve fibers from the same and contralateral side con-
nerve (Fila olfactoria, —1) end. The perikarya and dendrites of these olfac-
tinue as the optic tract (8) and end with synapse in the lateral geniculate
tory neurons are in the olfactory mucous membrane of the nasal fundus
 body (29). From the lateral geniculate body, the optic pathway passes by
 and of the vomeronasal organ. The second neurons of the olfactory path-
way of the internal capsule to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe of the
way begin in the olfactory bulb. They course at first in the short olfactory
hemisphere, where conscious visual perception takes place. Collateral
 peduncle (4) and, after its division, in the lateral (5), intermediate, and
 branches from fibers of the optic tract and from the lateral geniculate body
medial (6) olfactory tracts. In the lateral olfactory tract, after synapse on
reach the mesencephalon and the rostral colliculus (31), the oculomotor
another neuron, this olfactory pathway reaches the primary olfactory cor-
 nucleus and the parasympathetic nucleus of the oculomotor nerve. These
tex of the piriform lobe (9) and, beyond the piriform lobe, the limbic sys-
 connections regulate the movements of the ocular and some other muscles
 and, by way of the parasympathetic nucleus, the diameter of the pupil.
in the septal part of the rhinencephalon, neurons of the medial olfactory
The oculomotor nerve (Il) emerges from the mesencephalon caudolateral
tract run chiefly to the septal nuclei of the telencephalic septum (Septurm
 pellucidum). The olfactory trigone is the triangular area bounded by the
to the mamillary body (11).
medial and lateral olfactory tracts. Many of the fibers of the intermediate
 The trochlear nerve (IV) originates from the dorsal mesencephalon at the
 olfactory tract end in the olfactory trigone.
 caudal border of the caudal colliculus. Right and left nerves cross the mid-
b) The HippocAMPus (28) is a nuclear area of the limbic system and, in
line and then curve laterally and rostroventrally between the hemisphere
human beings, takes part in memory function. It lies caudally on the floor
 and the cerebellum to the base of the brain, then to the orbital fissure (see
 of the lateral ventricle (25). Its common name, “Ammon's horn', is derived
 pp. 89 and 91) to reach the apex of the periorbita and the dorsal oblique
from its smooth surface and its form, which is curved like a ram's horn. A
muscle of the eye.
transverse section through the hemisphere at the level of the epiphysis (27,
 The trigeminal nerve (V) emerges from the brain with its large sensory root
-see also pp. 111 and 117) reveals the coiled course of the hippocampus.
 and its small motor root laterally between the pons (14) and the trapezoid
The hippocampus covers the lateral and medial geniculate bodies like a
body (15) of the rhombencephalon. The perikarya of the sensory, afferent,
shell and, with its dorsomedial firmbria hippocampi, lies beneath the
choroid plexus (26) of the lateral ventricle.
between the rostal end of the petrous temporal bone and the foramina by
c) Of the CoNDucTION PATHWAys (FiBER-TRACTs) leading to and from the
which its three branches leave the cranial cavity.
brain, only two descending (motor) tracts and two ascending (sensory)
The abducens nerve (VI) passes from the rhombencephalon caudal to the
tracts are considered here.
 pons, in the angle between the pyramid (17) and the trapezoid body (15).
 I. The pyramidal and extrapyramidal systems are motor pathways.
 The facial nerve (VIl) emerges from the rhombencephalon, laterally from
 The pyramidal system is responsible for fine coordinated movements and
the trapezoid body at its junction with the medulla oblongata. It enters the
in human beings is of more importance than in the domestic mammals. It
porus acusticus intermus from which it then passes in the osseous facial
begins with projection fibers in the motor cortex of the neopallium and
 canal to the stylomastoid foramen.
the peduncle, its fibers follow different paths. One bundle of fibers crosses
The vestibulocochlear nerve (VIll) emerges from the brain at the trapezoid
to the motor nuclei of the contralateral cranial nerves. Another bundle (col-
body, dorsal to the facial nerve, and, like that nerve, also enters the porus
lateral branches) courses to the pons and, further, by way of the middle
acusticus internus. The auditory pathway is multisynaptic, beginning in the
cerebellar peduncle, to the cerebellum. The largest group of fibers contin-
 internal ear and ending in the cerebral cortex. Peripheral processes of nerve
ues ventromedially on the medulla oblongata as the pyramid (17) where
cells of the spiral ganglion lead from the cochlear duct of the internal ear.
caudally most of the fibers cross the median plane in the pyramidal decus-
 Central processes (axons) ofthe ganglion cells pass in the vestibulocochlear
sation (22). These fibers reach motor nuclei of the spinal cord directly or
by multisyna ptic pathways.
laterally and contralaterally in the trapezoid body to nuclei of the trapezoid
body, to the nuclei of the caudal colliculus (32) and to the medial genicu-
The extrapyramidal system is responsible for coarser movements and dom-
late body (30). From the medial geniculate body, fibers pass in the internal
inates as the motor system in our domestic mammals. It begins in the cere-
 capsule to the auditory cortex of the temporal lobe of the hemisphere. The
bral cortex. Synapses onto lower neurons take place in the caudate nucle-
vestibular pathway leads from the vestibular ganglia of the internal ear to
us (24), in the tegmentum of the mesencephalon (see p. 111), especially in
aq ai  u aa n al jo io a jo lnu n
the substantia nigra and the nucleus ruber, and in the olive (21) of the
diverse pathways to the cerebellum, the spinal cord, and the cerebral cor-
medulla oblongata. Fibers from these nuclei pass in the lateral funiculus of
tex.
the spinal cord to motor neurons of the ventral horn. The extrapyramidal
 The glossopharyngeal nerve (IX) leaves the medulla oblongata from the lat-
the caudal cerebellar peduncle (33) and, by way of the cerebellar circuitry,
 eral aspect of the medulla oblongata and runs to the jugular foramen (see
bring about excitatory and inhibitory impulses. The rostral and middle
(16 pue 68 dd
cerebellar peduncles (33) furnish the connection between the cerebellum
The roots of the vagus nerve (X) arise from the lateral aspect ofthe medul-
 and the midbrain or the pons of the metencephalon.
la oblongata caudal to the roots of the glossopharyngeal nerve. With the
 II. Sensory pathways run in the fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus cuneatus.
glossopharyngeal and accessory nerves, it passes from the cranial cavity
The fasciculus gracils (34) ascends dorsomedially in the dorsal funiculus
through the jugular foramen.
 of the spinal cord. Its fibers conduct sensory proprioceptive (muscle and
The accessory nerve (Xl, —18) has a thick part that arises from the spinal cord
joint sense) impulses from receptors in the pelvic limb and caudal trunk
 and a thin part that arises from the medulla oblongata ofthe brain. The spinal
regions to the dorsocaudal area of the medulla oblongata. Here, synapses
roots (20) arise from the cervical spinal cord. They pass cranially on the later-
take place in the nucleus gracilis (at the tubercle of the nucleus gracilis)
 al contour of the cord between the dorsal and ventral roots of the cervical
with further conduction to the cere bral cortex.
 nerves, entering the cranial cavity at the foramen magnum. The medullary
The fasciculus cuneatus (35) runs dorsolaterally in the dorsal funiculus of
 roots (19) arise from the medulla oblongata caudal to the vagus nerve. Both
the spinal cord. It is composed of sensory proprioceptive fibers from the
 parts pass together through the jugular foramen. The medullary part joins the
thoracic limb and cranial thoracic region to the nucleus cuneatus at the
vagus asthe internal ramus. The spinal part, as the external ramus,innervates
tubercle of the nucleus cuneatus. The cuneate tubercle is dorsoca udal in the
 the tra pezius, sternocleidomastoid and cleidocervical muscles.
medulla oblongata, cranial and lateral to the tubercle of the nucleus gra-
 The hypoglossal nerve (Xll) passes from the brain ventrally at the caudal
cilis. Synapses take place in the cuneate nucleus from which the pathway is
end of the medulla oblongata, its numerous nerve fibers emerging near the
continued to the cerebral cortex.
lateral border of the olive (21). Its fibers unite to a single bundle that leaves
d) EmeRGence Of The Cranial NeRves From The BraiN (see pp. 136/137)
the skull through the hypoglossal canal and peripherally extends to the
The olfactory nerves (I) pass through the foramina of the cribriform plate
muscles of the tongue.
of the ethmoid bone to reach the olfactory bulb of the rhinencephalon.
e) The ARTERIAL SupPLY OF THE BRAIN proceeds from the cerebral arterial
2
The optic nerve (ll) extends from the ganglion cell layer of the retina to the
circle (12), which is fed laterally by the internal carotid artery (10) and cau-
optic chiasm (7) by way ofthe optic canal (see p. 91). At the chiasm, about
dally by the unpaired basilar artery (13). The basilar artery originates at the
75 % of the fibers cross the midline. They are predominantly those from
level of origin of the first cervical nerves from the confluence of right and
the nasal half of the retina; whereas, 25 % of the fibers, especially those
left vertebral arteries (23).
114
Brain and cranial nerves
1  Fila olfactoria
 2 Basal part of rhinencephalon
Base of brain (ventral view)
3 Olfactory bulb
4 Olfactory peduncle
 5 Lateral olfactory tract 
 6 Medial olfactory tract
Internal ethmoidal a.
Internal ophthalmic a.
Rostral cerebral a.
7 Optic chiasm
Middle cerebral a.
8 Optic tract
9 Priform lobe
Hypophysis
10 Internal carotid a.
11  Mamillary body 
12 Arterial circle of cerebrum 
Caudal cerebral a.
Rostral cerebellar a.
Brr. to pons
13 Basilar a.
IV-
V-
14 Pons
Vl-
VII
 15 Trapezoid body
Mll.
Labyrinthine
I区
16 Cerebellum
17 Pyramid
Caudalcerebellara
18 Accessory n. (Xl)
XI
XIl
19 Medullary root 
 20 Spinal root
21 Olive
 22 Pyramidal decussation 
23 Vertebral a.
Ventral spinal a.
 Cerebral section (dorsal view)
Cerebral cortex (gray substance)
 Medullary body (white substance)
 24 Caudate nucleus
 25 Lateral ventricle
 26 Choroid plexus
 27 Pineal gland 
 28 Hippocampus (section)
 29 Lateral geniculate body
 30 Medial geniculate body
 31 Rostral colliculus
V
Rostral medullary velum 
 32 Caudal colliculus
VIl-
Vl-
 33 Caudal, rostral and middle 
cerebellar peduncles
Lateral recess and
 Lateral aperture of fourth ventricle 
Fourth ventricle 
 Tela chorioidea (section)-
and choroid plexus 
 34 Fasciculus gracilis
(see pp. 111, 112, 113, 117)
- 35 Fasciculus cuneatus
115
 5. Cerebral Veins, Sinuses of the Dura Mater, Cerebral Ventricles and Choroid Plexuses
a) The CEREBRAL VEINs, unaccompanied by arteries, discharge into the
 The interventricular foramen (W) connects the lateral ventricles with the
sinuses of the dura mater. Like the sinuses they have no valves and are with-
unpaired third ventricle (Y) that centrally surrounds ring-like the interthal-
out smooth muscle in their walls. Superficial and deep cerebral veins are
amic adhesion of the diencephalon. The third ventricle outpouches ven-
 distinguished.
trally in the direction of the optic chiasm and the neurohypophysis, form-
 Of the superficial veins of the brain, two to four dorsal cerebral veins (1)
 ing a recess (Z, Z') at each. The narrow mesencephalic aqueduct (X) pro-
 ceeds from the third ventricle at the transition to the mesencephalon and
open into the dorsal sagittal sinus. The ventral cerebral veins (lower illus-
tration on opposite page, A and B) are superficial atthe base of the brain
joins the spacious fourth ventricle (V) at the transition to the rhomben-
cephalon. The fourth ventricle is continuous caudally with the narrow cen-
and laterally on the temporal lobe; they open at different places into the
tral canal (U) of the spinal cord. The floor of the fourth ventricle (see p.
ventral sinus system of the dura mater.
115) appears rhomboid in dorsal view, which is responsible forthe naming
The deep cerebral veins come chiefy from the corpus callosum, the area of
 of this part of the surrounding brain. The roof of the fourth ventricle is
the basal nuclei and the choroid plexuses of the lateral ventricles (see
 formed rostrally in the metencephalon by the very thin rostral medullary
below) and unite to form the great cerebral vein (6). As the straight sinus,
 velum and, in the myelencephalon, by the caudal medullary velum and the
the latter continues caudodorsally between the hemispheres and the cere-
tela choroidea. (With fixation, the rostral medullary velum tends to col-
bellum within the membranous tentorium cerebelli.
lapse and adhere to the floor of the fourth ventricle, which blocks the con-
 b) The SINUsEs OF THE DuRA MATER are modified venous channels within
nection to the mesencephalic aqueduct.) The very thin caudal medullary
1
the ectomeninx (see p. 111) that run predominantly between its periosteal
velum is closely attached to the cerebellum and to the cerebellar peduncles.
and dura mater layers. Owing to their position in the ectomeninx or in
It bears the tela choroidea (see p. 115) with the choroid plexus. In the lat-
Osseous canals of the cranial bones, the width of their lumens is kept con-
eral recess (T) on each side of the fourth ventricle is a lateral aperture by
stant even in the absence of a muscular coat. The absence of venous valves
which the fourth ventricle communicates with the subarachnoid space.
facilitates a blood flow in different directions. The dural sinuses take up
d) The CHoRoip PLexusEs (see pp. 111 and 115) that lie in all four cerebral
 mainly the above-mentioned cerebral veins and the veins of the wall of the
ventricles, but not in the mesencephalic aqueduct, produce cerebrospinal
cranium (diploic veins, -2). By way of emissary veins, they drain the blood
fluid In addition to the choroid plexuses, cerebrospinal fluid is formed by
to the veins of the head and to the intermal jugular vein (15). Correspond-
the blood vessels of the pia mater. To form the choroid plexuses, the pia
ing to their position with respect to the brain, dorsal and ventral systems
mater with its contained blood vessels projects garland-like into the lumen
of dural venous sinuses are distinguished.
 of the ventricle and is covered here by a modified cuboidal ependyma, the
I. The ventral system of dural venous sinuses begins with right and left cay-
 internal lining of the ventricle.
ernous sinuses (8), both of which are connected rostrally with the oph-
 The cerebrospinal fluid originates from the blood and passes into the ven-
thalmic plexus (17) of the orbit. Rostral to the hypophysis, the cavernous
3
tricle through the pores of the capillary endothelium, the basal membrane
sinuses are connected by a variably present intercavernous sinus and, cau-
and the modified ependymal cells, while at the same time retaining the
 dal to the hypophysis, by a constant intercavernous sinus (14). Caudally,
 blood cels and plasma proteins. The fluid fills the ventricles, including the
 each cavernous sinus is continued in the petro-occipital canal by the ven-
 mesencephalic aqueduct and the central canal of the spinal cord. These
tral petrosal sinus (12). The latter is connected to the internal jugular vein
internal chambers are connected to the subarachnoid space (see p. 111)
by the emissary vein of the jugular foramen. Caudal to the emissary vein,
which is external to the brain and spinal cord. The connection is by the lat-
the ventral petrosal sinus anastomoses with the sigmoid sinus (11) before
eral aperture at the lateral end of each lateral recess of the fourth ventricle
joining the basilar sinus (10). After passing through the condylar canal and
(see p. 115). Cerebrospinal fluid is formed in considerable amounts, in the
the foramen magnum, the basilar sinus joins the ventral internal vertebral
 dog about 350 ml per day. However, the total amount of fluid within the
plexus (9). The dorsal petrosal sinus ( 7) passes in the membranous tentori-
 ventricles, aqueduct, central canal and subarachnoid space remains con-
um cerebelli to the tra nsverse sinus.
stant, and there is a balance between fluid formation and fluid resorption
II. The dorsal system of dural venous sinuses begins rostrally with the dor-
(lower illustration, p. 111). Sites of resorption are the arachnoid granula-
sal sagittal sinus (3), which takes up venous branches from the nasal cavi-
tions and the extensions of the subarachnoid space upon the first part of
ty. Caudally, after having taken up the straight sinus (4, —the continuation
the spinal nerves, and upon the afferent and efferent blood vessels of the
of the great cerebral vein), it bifurcates dorsal to the oseous tentorium
brain. Also the meningeal coats of the olfactory (l) and optic (Ill) nerves are
 cerebelli into the paired transverse sinuses (5). The transverse sinus runs
 sites of absorption of cerebrospinal fluid. By means of the meningeal coats
laterally in the osseous canal and sulcus of the transverse sinus. Here it
 of the olfactory nerves, cerebrospinal fluid reaches from the brain to the
 gives off the sigmoid sinus, an anastomosis to the ventral system of dural
olfactory mucous membrane of the nasal fundus by way of the lamina
venous sinuses, and, in the temporal meatus passes over into the temporal
cribrosa of the ethmoid bone. The fluid is taken up and removed by nasal
sinus (13). The temporal sinus is continued by the emissary vein of the
 lymph vessels. In a similar manner, the cerebrospinal fluid reaches the tis-
retroarticular foramen, which opens into the maxillary vein (16).
 sues surrounding the optic nerve, passing from the subarachnoid space by
 pores and microcanals into the retrobulbar loose connective tissue of the
2
 c) The VENTRIcLEs OF THE BRAIN (see text-illustration) develop during onto-
eye from which it is drained by lymph and blood vessels. In the case of an
 genesis from the lumen of the neural tube. The right and lef lateral ventri-
 imbalance between formation and absorption, an internal hydrocephalus
cles (S) lie within the corresponding cerebral hemisphere (see also p. 113).
 may develop after excessive formation or reduced or blocked drainage. In
such a case, depending on the site of blockage, the cerebral ventricles are
 enlarged and the surrounding brain tissue compressed and thin. The head
is disproportionately large and the cranial bones are abnormally thin.
 Pathological increases in volume, especially in the narrow passages of the
 internal spaces, are regarded as the cause.
 In healthy animals the cerebrospinal fluid has in addition to nutritive func
tions also thermoregulatory functions, but its function is chiefly mechani
cal in providing a protective fluid covering. In the case of trauma to the
head, the movement of the brain is retarded by the cerebrospinal fluid. At
the site of the trauma, lesions develop and after a certain time also on the
 opposite side. With violent rotation of the head, there arise shearing forces
at the passage of vessels and nerves upon the skull, which can lead to hem-
 orrhage at the openings of the cerebral veins into the venous sinuses.
Legend:
 S Lateral ventricle
W Interventricular foramen
T Lateral recess of the fourth
 X Mesencephalic aqueduct 
ventricle
Y  Third Ventricle
U Central canal of the spinal
Z Optic recess
cord
Z' Neurohypophyseal recess
V Fourth ventricle
116
Sinuses of dura mater and brain
Sinuses of dura mater
1 Dors. cerebral vw.
2 Diploic v.
 3 Dors. sagittal sinus
 4 Straight sinus
 5 Transverse sinus
6 Great cerebral v.
7 Dors. petrosal sinus
 8 Cavernous sinus
 9 Ventr. int. vertebral plexus
10 Basilar sinus
11  Sigmoid sinus
12 Ventr.petrosal sinus
13 Temporal sinus 
14 Intercavernous sinus 
15 Internal jugular v.
16 Maxillary v.
17 Ophthalmic plexus
 Cranial cavity and 
 sinuses of dura mater 
a  Optic canal
b Orbital fissure
C
 Foramen rotundum
d  Alar canal
 Foramen ovale
f  Petrooccipital canal
g  Carotid canal
g' Ext. carotid for.
 Jugular foramen
 Condylar canal
 Retroarticular foramen 
k
 Canal of temporal sinus
I  Temporal meatus 
m Falx cerebri
15
 n  Membranous tentorium cerebelli 
0  Tentorial process
Brain (lateral view)
A Ventr. cerebral w. (rostr.)
B Ventr. cerebral w. (caud.)
C
Dors. cerebellar vw.
Parietal lobe
Dccipital lobe
D Int. carotid a.
 E Rostr. cerebellar a.
F  Labyrinthine a.
G Caud. cerebellar a.
H Presylvian sulcus 
Frontallobe
J Lat. rhinal sulcus 
K  Cruciate sulcus
 Marginal sulcus
L
 Marginal gyrus
nc
 M Suprasylvian sulcus
M' Middle ectosylvian gyrus
N Caud. ectosylvian sulcus
AD
 N' Caudal ectosylvian gyrus 
Olfactory bulb
IPiriform lobe
!Temporal
O Rostr. ectosylvian sulcus
lobe
IIX IX X XI IIAIIAIAAAI
 P  Pseudosylvian fissure 
Q Rostr. sylvian gyrus
R Caud. sylvian gyrus
(see pp. 111, 113, 115)
117
Chapter 11: Sense Organs
1. The Eye
The sense organs receive adequate sensory stimuli of physical or chemical
pupillae (12) with radial fibers lies in the posterior part ofthe iris. The pos-
nature by way of their receptor cells that, with supporting cells and one or
terior surface of the iris is covered by a heavily pigmented epithelium that
more afferent neurons, form the receptor organ. Sensory cells are classified
is the cecal part of the retina (see below). Also the stroma of the iris con-
into primary and secondary according to morphological criteria. Primary
 tains pigments that are responsible for its genetically determined color.
sensory cells are modified nerve cells with a short dendritic receptor and a
long axon that leads to the central nervous system. Secondary sensory cells
 The ciliary body is also a constituent of the vascular tunic and forms a cir-
are non-neural receptor cells of certain sense organs that by way of synaps-
cular thickening around the lens. In accomodation, it functions by con-
es with investing nerve fibers conduct stimuli to the central nervous system.
traction of its ciliary smooth muscle (17) with mediation by the zonular
fbers (14) that extend from the ciliary body to the elastic lens capsule.
The OnGAN oF VisloN consists of the eye (eyeball, bulb or globe of the eye),
Varying the tension on the lens capsule alters the form of the ocular lens.
including the optic nerve with its coverings (extermal sheath of the optic
 In this regard, the lens and ciliary body with the zonular fibers can be com-
nerve, —25), the central visual pathways and the visual centers of the brain.
 pared to a variable objective lens (4) of a photo camera, which permits the
The globe of the eye (Bulbus oculi) is nearly spherical and for that reason
focusing of light on the retina (film). At its base, the surface of the ciliary
directional terms such as equatorial or meridional can be used without mis-
body forms the orbiculus ciliaris (7) and is enlarged in the area of the coro-
understanding. With accessory structures such as the external ocular mus-
na ciliaris (6) by about 80 ciliary processes (6). The ciliary processes, with
cles and including the periorbita, orbital structures have a pyramidal form
the zonular fibers that pass from them, produce the connection to the ocu-
that extends from the base at the orbital margin to the apex at the
lar lens. With contraction of the meridional fibers of the ciliary muscle, the
 openings of the optic canal and orbital fissure. Directional terms with
ciliary processes are brought nearer to the lens, relaxing the tension on the
respect to the eye correspond to terms used in human anatomy and, if log-
zonular fibers. In so doing, the lens ca psule, which is elastic and surrounds
ically used, misunderstandings can be avoided. The terms anterior and pos-
the lens, acts to round off (increase the curvature of) the lens. The greater
terior, which are not used in other regions of the animal body, refer to the
curvature increases the refractive power of the lens, making the final cor-
rostral aspect of the globe of the eye or, respectively, to the ocular fundus.
rection to bring near objects into focus on the retina. Accomodation is
Also, the terms superior and inferior can be applied tothe eye if they relate,
achieved most easily in younger animals in which the lens is more pliable
for example, to the upper or, respectively, lower yelid. The bulb of the eye
and its form more easily altered by varying the tension on the elastic lens
is an outpouching of the brain and the meninges. The external, fibrous,
capsule. With far vision, the ciliary muscle is relaxed and the ciliary
 Coat ofthe eyeball can be understood as the continuation ofthe dura mater
 a o ui ps m a  a   sss
and the middle, vascular, coat as a continuation of the leptomeninx. The
lar fibers. The lens is flatter' with its curvature reduced and its focallength
internal coat of the eyeball is a continuation of the nerve cell-rich cerebral
increa sed.
surface.
IL. The internal coat is the nervous tunic of the globe of the eye, the reti-
 Functionally, the eyeball can be compared to the five main constituents of
了
- aaael u6 au pue (ojosy aas sal ol jo pasodus si 1 'eu
a photo camera.
ers are numbered from internal to external— contains the photoreceptors,
1
The eyelids or palpebrae (superior palpebra, 1, and inferior palpebra, 
the cone cells and rod cells. The retina is for this reason comparable to the
 9) are auxiliary, protective organs that bring about the closure of the palpe-
film image-carrier, —S) of a photo camera. The light sensitive optic part of
bral fissure, the space between the eyelids, and correspond to the shutter of
the retina (19) extends from the ocular fundus to the base of the ciliary
the camera (1). The third eyelid (8) lies in the medial angle of the eye.
2
 body where, at the ora serrata (20), it is continued by the part of the reti-
 na that is free of photoreceptors and heavily pigmented. This is the blind
 I. The external coat of the eyeball is the fibrous tunic. It consists posterior-
ly of the sclera that, at the limbus of the cormea (15), is continuous with the
 aspect of the ciliary body and the posterior surface of the iris. The pho-
 cornea, which is anterior. The fibrous tunic gives form to the eyeball and
 toreceptors consist of about 95% rods and only 5% cones. The sensitivity
corresponds to the box of the camera with the cornea as the lens (2).
3
 The transparent cornea (2) maintains its transparency with a certain nor-
tive films (= DIN number), in the retina is regulated by the pigment epithe-
 mal degree of moisture, which is provided anteriorly by the lacrimal fluid
lium. With light stimulation, the processes of the pigment epithelium pro-
and posteriorly by the aqueous humor (see below). Light rays are refract-
ject into the area of the photoreceptors and actually 'embrace' them. In
ed at the external surface of the cornea, but refraction is negligible at its
darkness, the pigment epithelium retracts from the area of the rods and
internal surface. The corneal epithelium, which forms the superficial layer
cones.
of the cornea, is not cornified.
 In the sclera (22) the direction of the tensile fibers corresponds to mechan-
 of penetration of the sclera by the optic nerve (26) and the retinal blood
ical stresses; that is, to the considerable internal ocular pressure and to the
vessels (24), which can be seen in the examination of the fundus of the eye.
traction of the external ocular muscles. At the site of the optic disc, the scle-
A few millimeters dorsolateral to the disc, is the macula, the place of most
ra is modified to a cribrosal area for the passage of the optic nerve axons.
acute vision. Compared to primates, the macula is underdeveloped in the
Scleral pigment cells are predominantly at the boundary with the middle
dog and scarcely visible. The concentration of cones is only slightly
coat of the eyeball and serve to darken the internal chamber of the eye
increased here. The corresponding area in human beings is especially rich
(comparable to the box of the camera).
in cones for which, because of its color, it is designated the 'yellow spot?
5
 II. The middle coat is the vascular tumic of the eyeball. The part designat-
(Macula lutea).
ed the choroid (23) is approximately coextensive with the sclera of the
fibrous tunic. It is rich in melanin pigment and has a limiting internal mem-
 IV. The lens (5) does not originate from the brain but from the cutaneous 
8
brane, the basal lamina of the choroid (BRUCH'S membrane) that forms
 ectoderm. It lies posterior to the pupil and iris. The lens is contained with-
the surface next to the internal coat of the eyeball, the nervous tunic. A
 in the elastic lens capsule, a product of the lens epithelium that is the
well-developed network of coarse vessels permeates the pigmented choroid
 attachment of the zonular fibers. In ontogenesis, the anterior surface ofthe
lens is monolayered (lens epithelium); whereas, the cells of the posterior
internal limiting membrane. The tapetum lucidum (21) is a circumscribed
lens epithelium, with loss of their nuclei, elongate and form lens fibers.
layer of cells within the choroid that reflects the incident light, increasing
 They have a length up to 1 cm and fillthe hollow space of the original lens
the stimulation of the photoreceptors of the internal tunic. Carnivores have
vesicle. The lens fibers have a course that is roughly hemispherical, their
a tapetum cellulosum, its cells containing a latticework of microscopic
ends meeting at the anterior and posterior surfaces of the lens in two lens
rodlets that reflect and scatter the light. (Other domestic mammals with a
stars' that have an upright or, respectively, upside-down 'Y' form.
[ads sueu ieu unsoau uad e ais suie aa upin unadel
V. In the interior of the eye there is an anterior chamber of the eye (10) that
fibers.) Owing to its reflection by the tapetum, the incident light acts twice
is anterior to the iris and a posterior chamber (13) that is posterior to the
on the photoreceptors. Its reflected colors, which vary with species, are
iris and anterior to the lens. Behind the lens there is a vitreous chamber of
produced by interference phenomena, much like the colors produced by a
the eye (28) occupied by the vitreous body. The anterior and posterior
thin film of oil on water. In the area of the tapetum, the choroid has little
 chambers contain a clear fluid, the aqueous humor, which is secreted by the
Or no pigment. Depending on breed and the size of the dog, the tapetum
'pars ceca cells of the retina that cover the anterior surface of the ciliary
occupies a roughly triangular area dorsal to the blind spot' of the retina,
body,the surface that faces the posterior chamber. Absorption of the aque-
the optic disc.
 ous humor is by way of the sponge-like trabecular system of spaces formed
The iris (3) corresponds to the diaphragm (3) of a photo camera. It belongs
by the pectinate ligament at the iridocorneal angle (16). In the depth of
to the vascular tunic and is anterior to the lens, located between the ante-
these spaces, the aqueous humor is absorbed into the scleral venous plexus-
rior and posterior chambers of the eye. Its central opening is the pupil (4).
es, which are equivalent to SCHLEMM'S canal (scleral venous sinus) of the
It regulates the passage of light by means of two smooth muscles that have
 human being. The plexuses are drained by ciliary veins. In case of a block-
their origin in the neuroectoderm. The circular m. sphincter pupillae (11)
age of the drainage system, the interior pressure of the eye increases and,
surrounds the pupil with a circular fiber course; whereas, the m. dilatator
 depending on its extent, results in the condition of glaucoma.
118
 Organ of vision
Right eye
(nasal view)
1  Superior palpebra
Retina:
18Blind part of retina
19  Optic part of retina
 20 Ora serrata
 21 Tapetum lucidum
2 Cornea
 22 Sclera
23 Choroid
3lris
 24 Retinal blood vessels
4 Pupil
 25 External sheath of optic n.
5 Lens
 26 Optic n.
6 Ciiary body:
 27 Optic disc
Corona ciliaris and 
 28 Vitreous chamber of eye
Ciliary processes
m
 7 Orbiculus ciliaris
8 Third eyelid
9 Inferior palpebr
10 Anterior chamber of eye
11 Sphincter pupillae m.
Legend :
a Upper tarsus
12 Dilatator pupillae m.
b Upper fornix of conjunctiva
13 Posterior chamber
c Buibar conjunctiva
d Palpebral conjunctiva
é Cilium
14 Zonula fibers 
fTarsal gland
g Ciliary gland
15 Limbus of cornea
h Lower tarsus
i  Lower fornix of conjunctiva
16 Iridocorneal angle
17 Ciliary muscle
I  Dorsal rectus m.
m Retractor bulbi m.
0 Intraperiorbital fat body
p Capsule of lens
q Epithelium of lens 
r Lens fibers
s Scleral ring
tSderal venous plexus
u Major arterial cirle of iris
Pectinate lig.
-23
119
2. The Ear
The ear (Auris) is a double sense-organ, serving as an auditory organ for
 IIl. The auditory tube (15) connects the middle ear with the nasal pharynx.
the perception of sound and as an organ of equilibration for the perception
It serves to equalize the pressure in the tympanic cavity with the pressure
au go uoeu aui 's ieui tuauua shi ui apoq at jo uoisod ai jo
 external tothe tympanic membrane. It also provides drainage for the secre-
body to the force of gravity. The ear consists of the external, middle and
tion of glands that are in the region of the pharyngeal ostium of the tube.
the internal ear. Whereas the structures serving the function of hearing are
 The auditory tube consists of an osseous part and a cartilaginous part. It is
found in all parts of the ear, the vestibulocochlear organ is found only in
 trough-like, open ventrally and lined by a tubular mucous membrane bear-
the internal ear.
 ing a ciliated epithelium. It is compressed from side to side and ends in the
a) The ExTERNAL EAR (see also pp. 102 and 103) serves to receive and con-
 nasal pharynx at the pharyngeal ostium of the auditory tube.
duct sound waves to the tympanic membrane (eardrum). It is composed of
d) The INTERNAL EAR consists of a closed system of thin-walled membra-
1
the auricle (1) and the external acoustic meatus. The basis of the auricle is
 nous vesicles and channels, the membranous labyrinth. It is surrounded by
2
formed by an elastic auricular cartilage (3) covered by a thin cutis. Exter-
a bony capsule, the osseous labyrinth, the spaces of which correspond to
's aseds Aaaeau Aq Aluau s asuap Aq paaas s ea a xiu
the different parts of the membranous labyrinth that each contains. The
and at the beginning ofthe external acoustic meatus there are coarser, pro-
cross-section of the entire internal ear measures about 12 mm in the dog.
 The bony labyrinth contains a clear fluid perilymph (cerebrospinal fluid)
hairs may reach a considerable length. At the caudal border of the auricle,
that surrounds the membranous labyrinth as a water-cushion. The peri-
sne aui ii yonod snoo jeui e wog on papioy si uys aul
 lymphatic spaces (20) are connected to the subarachnoid space of the cra-
 cartilage is curved to form the horn-like concha auriculae, which at its base
 nial cavity by the perilymphatic duct (23). A viscous endolymph is within
is continued by the external acoustic meatus. The meatus begins as the car-
the membranous labyrinth. The endolymphatic duct (27) lies within the
tilaginous extermal acoustic meatus (4), which at first descends and runs
vestibular aqueduct, a narrow passage that leads from the vestibule of the
perpendicularly (perpendicular part),then turns medially and horizontally
 osseous labyrinth to the interior of the cranial cavity. The endolymphatic
(horizontal part, -see p. 103). At the level of the turn, the auricular carti-
 duct ends blindly in the endolymphatic sac, which lies between the two lay-
age is continued by the semi-ringlike cartilage of the acoustic meatus (5),
ers of the ectomeninx.
The bony labyrinth consists of the vestibule, the osseous semicircular
tubular osseous external acoustic meatus (7) of the tympanic part of the
 canals and the cochlea.
temporal bone. The osseous external acoustic meatus ends at the tympan-
ic anulus, which attaches the tympanic anulus.
I. The undivided vestibule (16) occupies the center of the osseous labyrinth
 and contains two membranous sacs, the dorsal utriculus (25) and the ven-
Auricular muscles (see pp. 93 - 95).
tral sacculus (24).
b) The TyMPANIc MEMBRANE (8) lies at the boundary between the external
 Caudodorsally, the osseous semicircular canals lead from the vestibule; ros-
acoustic meatus and the middle ear. Its cutaneous external surface is free of
 troventrally, the bony cochlea. The membranous semicircular ducts (26)
hair and glands, and is without pigment; its internal surface is the aglan-
dular mucous membrane of the tympanic cavity. Centrally, between the
 originate from the utriculus, the membranous cochlear duct (28) from the 
 sacculus by way of the ductus reuniens.
two layers, is a vascular connective tissue, which is attached by a ring of
fibrocartilage to the tympanic anulus. The tympanic membrane bulges into
 II. The osseous semicircular canals (17) and the membranous semicircular
the tympanic cavity with its pars tensa (tense part). A dorsal, flaccid part
 ducts (26) that they contain are oriented to one another roughly at right
(Pars flaccida) closes the gap in the bracelet-like tympanic anulus.
angles. The anterior canal and duct lie transversely, the posterior ones
sagitally, and the lateral ones horizontally. At one end of the attachment
3
 c) The MipoLE EAR consists of the tympanic cavity, the auditory Ossicles 
of the semicircular duct to the utriculus and the associated communication
which are within the cavity, and the auditory tube. The walls of the tym-
 of the semicircular canal with the vestibule, there is formed an enlarge-
panic cavity and the surface of the auditory ossicles are covered by a
ment, the membranous ampulla, and, in the canal, the osseous ampulla.
mucous membrane with a monolayered squamous epithelium and, in part,
by a ciliated epithelium.
 The anterior and posterior osseous semicircular canals unite posteriorly to
 form a short common canal, and there is a corresponding union of the asso-
(o) n odii a oui salnd auqu sudi aui kat 1
 ciated semicircular ducts.
 and, medially, the promontory of the petrous temporal bone. The dorsal
Sacculus, utriculus and the semicircular ducts contain the vestibular appa-
part of the cavity with the auditory ossicles and chorda tympani is called
 ratus, which functions in equilibration (orientation of the head with respect
the epitympanicum; the middle part,the mesotympanicum; and the ventral
to the force of gravity, linear and angular acceleration of the body). The 
 part or floor, which corresponds to the tympanic bulla (9), the hypotym-
 sensory cells are found on circumscribed areas that, according to their posi-
panicum. There are two openings in the medial wall. The more dorsal
tion and shape are called macula sacculi, macula uriculi and ampullary
opening is oval and is designated the vestibular window (13); it is closed
 off from the vestibule of the internal ear by the foot-plate of the stapes,
 crests. Afferent sensory nerve fibers lead from synapse with the hair cells to
the superior and inferior vestibular ganglia (d), then to the brain by the
vestibular nerve (6). The vestibular nerve joins the cochlear nerve (see
tral opening is the round cochlear window (14), which is closed off by
 below) to form the vestibulocochlear nerve (VIl, —a).
membrane.
 IIL. The cochlea (18) winds rostro-ventrolaterally around the modiolus
IL. The auditory ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes) form a chain reaching
 and, in the dog, has three coils. From the modiolus, the osseous spiral lam-
from the tympanic membrane laterally to the vestibular window medially.
ina projects into the cochlea and with the cochlear duct divides the cochlear
The tympanic membrane and auditory ossicles together represent the
 space into an upper spiral chamber, the scala vestibuli (21) and a lower spi-
sound conducting apparatus.
ral chamber, the scala tympani (22). The scala vestibuli begins in the
The malleus (hammer, 10) lies farthest laterally and is anchored to the
 vestibule, and the scala tympani ends at the cochlear window. The scalae
fibrous layer of the tympanic membrane by its handle, the manubrium (A).
 communicate at the helicotrema of the cochlear cupula. In a cross-section
The neck of the malleus (B) is followed by the head of the malleus (C),
 of the cochlea, the scalae are separated centrally by the osseous spiral lam-
which articulates by a synovial joint with the body (D) of the incus (11).
ina, peripherally by the triangular cochlear duct (28). The dorsal separa-
The incus has a long (E) and a short (F) crus. A small lenticular bone (E")
tion of the cochlear duct from the scala vestibuli is formed by REISSNER'S
fits on thelong crus at a right angle and articulates with the head (G) ofthe
membrane (vestibular membrane, —K); its ventral separation from the
 stapes (12). The rostral crus (H) and caudal crus (I) of the stapes rest upon
 scala tympani by the spiral membrane (L). The peripheral wall of the
the oval foot-plate (Basis stapedis, ——J) of the stapes, which closes the
 Cochlear duct is formed by the vascular, thickened spiral ligament of the
vestibular window. The auditory ossicles are held in place by ligaments.
 cochlea (M), which is fused with the periosteum lining the cochlear wall.
The intensity of the sound is regulated by two antagonistic muscles that act
The spiral organ (ORGAN oF CoRTl, N) lies within the cochlear duct; it
consists of sensory hair cells that rest on the basilar (spiral) membrane.
the tensor tympani muscle draws the malleus toward the tympanic cavity,
 sd p so  a  a s au aos 
thus tensing the tympanic membrane. It is innervated by the tensor tympa-
 to the spiral ganglion (O) at the base of the oseous spiral lamina. Their
ni nerve, a branch of the mandibular nerve (V3). The stapedius muscle
 peripheral axons unite within the central axis of the modiolus to form the
alters the position of the base of the stapes in the vestibular window; it is
cochlear nerve (c). Efferent nerve fibers also pass in the vestibulocochlear
supplied by the stapedial nerve, a branch of the facial nerve (VIl).
nerve and synapse on the sensory hair cells.
120
Vestibulocochlearorgan [ear]
(see p. 103)
Extermal ear
1 Auricle 
 Cutaneous pouch
Auricular cartilage and concha
4 Cartilaginous external acoustic meatus
(Petrosal part of the petrous
5 Auricular carilage
temporal bone, rostral view)
Anular cartilage
7 Osseous external acoustic meatus 
Middle ear
8 Tympanic membrane
 9 Tympanic cavity and
Tympanic bulla
10 Malleus
11 Incus
12 Stapes
13Vestibular window
14 Cochlear window
15 Auditory tube
Internal ear
Legend:
Osseous labyrinth:
a Vestibulocochlear n.
16
Vestibule
b
Vestibular n.
Cochlear n.
>°
Osseoussemicircular canals
18
Cochlea 
d Vestibular ganglion
19
 Intermal acoustic meatus
23
Membranous labyrinth 
20
21
 Scala vestibuli
22
 Scala tympani
23
 Perilymphatic duct
24
Sacculus
25
Utriculus
26
 Semicircular ducts
27
 Endolymphatic duct 
28 Cochlear duct 
Tympanic membrane and auditory ossicles 
Canalis spiralis cochleae
(medial view)
(Transverse section)
21
Legend:
Malleus:
Incus:
Stapes:
Vestibular membrane
Manubrium
D
Body
G
Head
 Spiral membrane 
B
Neck
E
Long crus
H
 Rostral crus
M
 Spiral ligament of cochlea
CHead
Lenticular bone
s
Caudal crus
N
 Organ of corti
 Short crus
F
 0 Spiral ganglion of cochlea
121
3. Olfactory and Gustatory (Chemical) Senses; Superficial, Deep, and Visceral Sensibility
a) The OLFACToRy ORGAN is especially well developed in the dog and, with
remarkable size, up to 3 mm, and consist of flattened cells that form cone-
the olfactory sense (sense of smell), serves for orientation in the environ-
 shaped lamellae wrapped around a central afferent nerve-ending. They are
ment.
sensitive to pressure stimuli. Disc-shaped nerve-endings (tacile menisci)
The nasal fundus is clothed with an olfactory mucous membrane and is
act presumably as touch (tactile) receptors (see also p. 5).
designated the olfactory region or olfactory area. It is lined by an olfacto-
 Sinus hairs with their associated nerve endings are very sensitive to tactile
ry epithelium in which the olfactory neurosensory epitheliocytes (b) are
stimuli (see also p. 5).
flanked by supporting cells (a) and basal cells (c). With the olfactory
glands, they give the entire olfactory region a yellow-brown tint. The dif-
 I. Deep sensibility is mediated by proprioceptors that are sensitive to
ference in color with respect to the adjacent respiratory mucous membrane
 stretch. They are found in skeletal muscle, tendons, joint capsules and joint 
 does not permit a precise identification of the olfactory area with the naked
ligaments. The term 'proprioceptor is based on the fact that the exciting
eye. The ofactory clls live only a short time about 30 - 60 days in human
stimulus does not have its origin from outside the body but instead from
 the animal's own proper' body. Joint receptors are sensitive to the angula-
cells are nerve cells and their replacement in the adult is a special case. The
 tion of the joint and the rapidity of movement. Deep receptors are neuro-
1
dog as a macrosmatic animal has an olfactory region of considerable size,
muscular spindles, neurotendinous spindles, and according to many
fifteen times larger in a medium-sized dog than in human beings. The dog
authors lamellar corpuscles. The neuromuscular spindle is a receptor in
is able to perceive olfactory stimuli in very low concentrations, far beyond
skeletal muscle. The receptors are located near the transition of the muscle
the capability of a human being.
to its tendon. They are up to 3 mm long and up to 0.5 mm thick. Wrapped
 b) The VoMERoNAsAL ORGAN is also called JACOBSON'S organ according
 in a connective tissue capsule, they are composed of modified, especially
thin, skeletal muscle fibers, the cell nuclei of which are arranged chain-like
to its discoverer. The organ lies directly on the cartilaginous nasal septum
 One-after-the-other (chain fiber) or in which the cell nuclei are in a central
and extends from the incisive papila (1) to the level of the second premo-
cluster within the muscle fiber (cluster fiber or nuclear bag fiber).
lar tooth. It communicates with the roof of the oral cavity by a
vomeronasal duct (2) and an incisive duct (3). In the case of the
 Afferent and efferent nerve fibers pass onto the neuromuscular spindle in
vomeronasal organ, we are dealing with a tube, the vomeronasal duct, a
 different formations. Efferent (gamma) motor neurons end with motor
few millimeters thick, that on its inner surface is lined with a modified
 end-plates at both ends of the muscle spindle and regulate the resting tone
olfactory epithelium and externally is supported by cartilage (vomeronasal
 of these modified spindle fibers. Afferent nerve endings proceed from the
cartilage, 4). The function of the organ is still not entirely clear. But it is
 central region of the muscle spindle and are stimulated by distension of the
certain that it functions as an accessory olfactory organ. It perceives olfac-
modified muscle fibers. The stimulus is conducted to the spinal cord and
tory stimuli from the food, and pheromones by which an impact on repro-
here there is a direct synapse with the normal (alpha) motor neurons,
 duction is recognized. The vomeronasal organ is a receptor for non-volatile
effecting a monosynaptic reflex. The alpha motor neurons pass peripheral-
substances that do not reach the olfactory region of the nasal fundus. Sen-
ly to the hilus ofthe muscle, ending with motor end-plates on normal skele-
sory innervation of the organ is by the vomeronasal nerve (5), which is 
tal muscle fibers and thus giving rise to contraction of the muscle. In addi-
 accounted as one of the fla olfactoria. In human beings and many mam-
 tion to carrying out a monosynaptic reflex, the afferent neuron ascends the
mals, the organ undergoes involution early in ontogenesis.
 spinal cord with synapse on multisynaptic pathways. In examining reflex-
c) The GusTAToRY ORGAN serves with the sense of taste (gustatory sense) for
es, e.g., the patellar reflex, the function of other conducting tracts of cer-
) san roeis ieioads po suea aq suiqns isna po uouaid
 tain segments of the spinal cord is also evaluated.
With supporing, sustentacular, cells (f) and basal cells (g) the gustatory
 The neurotendinous spindle is structured similar to the neuromuscular
cells are integrated in a barrel-like gustatory bud (taste-bud) that reaches
1
spindle. But the spindles are thinner and shorter. They are within the ten-
the surface at a gustatory pore (d). The taste-buds are in the surface epithe.
 don where it passes over into the muscle belly. They should be considered
lium of the tongue in association with certain lingual papillae designated
gustatory papillae. The gustatory papillae are the foliate (6), vallate (7) and
 as tension-receptors and cooperate in their function with the neuromuscu-
 lar spindles. In addition, they are present in low numbers in the joint liga-
fungiform papillae (8,—see also p. 105). The gustatory cells are secondary
sensory cells from which the stimulus is conducted to the brain by synap-
 ments, e.g., in the cruciate ligaments of the stifle joint. Functionally they
 regulate the coordination of movements.
tic contact of the receptor cell with a sensory nerve fiber.
 d) SuPERFICIAL, DEEP AND VisCERAL SENSIBILITY is nOt bound to Specific
 Information passes by the afferent limb of a reflex arc to the central ner
sense organs as is the case with the visual, vestibulocochlear, gustatory and
vous system and, from here, following synapse(s), the efferent limb of the
olfactory sense organs in which there is a great concentration of the recep-
 arc activates the pertinent muscle groups. When the muscles (or the ner-
tor cells. The density of receptors and their associated afferent nerves can
vous system) tire, the activity is slowed and may result in instability of
be relatively high or low; or receptors may be entirely absent. From the
movement (e.g., stumbling). Running parallel to the afferent neurons of the
peripheral receptors, long dendrites (in some textbooks, these long den-
 deep receptors are pain-conducting nerve fibers that pass to the spinal gan-
drites may be denominated “axons') extend centrally to their perikarya,
 glion and finally to the central nervous system.
which are located near the central nervous system in the spinal and cranial
IIL. Visceral sensibiity ha ving its origin in stimuli resulting from distension
ganglia. From the perikarya, an axon enters the brain or spinal cord.
 of the internal organs gives rise to a deep, dull and imprecisely localized
 I. Superficial (surface) sensibility is provided by touch, pressure, pain and
 pain. The intramural receptors of the viscera are sensitive to stretch, and
temperature receptors in the skin. The receptors are either free nerve end-
to strong contractions and spasms, e.g., in the case of colics. The smooth
ings of afferent neurons, which function as pain receptors and, with loss of
 muscle of the viscera and the striated musculature of the body wall react
their myelin sheaths, penetrate the deeper layers of the epidermis, or they
with a reduced respiratory movements and reflex contraction of the striat-
are receptor-corpuscles. The latter are club-shaped, lamellar or disc-like
 ed muscle of the body wall the tension of the abdominal muscles is signif-
and are found predominantly in the dermis or subcutis. Club-shaped cor-
 icant for diagnosis). Visceral pain is projected by spinal cord mechanisms
 puscles are probably temperature receptors. Lamellar corpuscles attain a
 onto cutaneous regions ( referred pain).
122
Olfactory and gustatory organs
Vomeronasal organ 
(medial view)
nasalr
1 Incisive papilla
Epithelium olfactorium
 Supporting cells
bOlfactoryneurosensory
epitheliocytes
b' Cilium
b² Bulb of dentrite
Vomeronasalcartilage
b Dentrite
b* Axon [Olfactory neurofiber] 
c Basal cells
(see pp.101, 105)
Tongue [Glossa]
dorsalview
 Caliculus gustatorius [Gemma gustatoria]
Conicalpapillae
8Fungiformpapillae
d Gustatory pore
g Basal cells
h Gustatory neurofiber
f  Sustentacular cells
j Gustatory glands
123
Tables
1. Myology
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Inmervation
Function
Comments
(h 'd oi un) yunn aun jo uoisuadsns - qwg soeoun pue yunn aun bunoauuoo sasnw jesoa
M. trapezius
 Dorsal median raphe of Cervical part: Dorsal two-
Together, muscles of right and
the neck from the 3d
thirds of the scapular spine
sory n. (XI)
Jeft sides form a trapezium.
cervical vertebra to the
p esoa aied seo
drawsthe scapula craniodor-
spinous processes of
 of the scapular spine
sally. Thoracic part: draws the
thoracic vertebrae
 scapula caudodorsally
1-9
M. cleidocervicalis
 Dorsal median raphe of Clavicular intersection
 Dorsal branch of acces- Draws the thoracic limb for-
Homologous to clavicular
the neck cranial to
sory n. (XI)
ward
trapezius of human beings.
trapezius
M. omotr ans-
Acromion of
Wing of atlas
Ventral branch of
Draws thoracic limb forward,
Covers superficial cervical
versarius
scapula
fourth cervical n.
bends neck to one side
lymph nodes.
M. rhomboideus,
 Nuchal crest {capital 
 Medial surface of scapular
Ventral branches
 Fixation of thoracic limb, ele-
Muscles of right and left sides
capitis,
part), dorsal median
cartilage
of cervical nerves
vates scapula and draws it for-
 are rhomboid in form in 
-cervicis,
raphe of the neck from
ward
 human beings, covered by m.
thoracis
second cervical to first
thoracic vertebra (cer-
tra pezius.
vical part, cranial tho-
racic spines {thoracic
part)
M. latissimus dorsi
 Thoracolumbar fascia
Teres major tuberosity with
Thoracodorsal n.
Draws the thoracic limb cau-
the m. teres major tendon
dally; flexor of shoulder joint;
with limb fixed, drawsthe
trunk forward
Ventral muscles connecting the trunk and thoracic limb - suspension of the trunk (turn to p. 14)
Mm, pectorales super-
Manubrium and cra-
 Crest of the greater tubercle  Cranial pectoral n.
Trunk-limb attachment:;:
 Forrms the lateral pectoral
ficiales:
nial part of body of the
adductor, protractor and
groove with the clavicular
M. pectoralis descen-
stern urm 
retractor of thoracic limb
dens, M. pectoralis
tra nsversus
M. pectoralis
Body of the sternum
Greater and lesser tubercles
Caudal pectoral nn.
 Supports trunk; retractor of
 Divided into a principal and
profundus
of humerus; brachial fascia
thoracic limb; fixes shoulder
an accessory part.
joint
M. serratus ventralis,
Ventral branches of
Most important muscle sup-
A serrated muscle; the dorsal
cervicis,
cervical vertebrae
cervical nn. (cervical
porting trunk; raises neck;
 scapular a. courses on the
thoracis
2 - 7 (cervical part),
part), long thoracic n.
when thoracic limb is fixed, an
deep face of the muscle,
ribs 1 - 7{10)
(thoracic part)
auxiliary inspiratory muscle
between its two parts.
M. stemocleidomas-
Clavicular intersection
Mastoid process of temporal Accessory n. (XI)
 Protractor of thoracic limb; 
The external jugular v.
toideus:
[m. cleidomastoideus),
bone (m. cleidomastoideus,
draws the head ventrally and
crosses the lateral side of the
M. cleidomastoideus, M.
manubrium of sternurn
m. sternomastoideus),
to the side of the muscle act-
muscle.
sternormastoideus, M.
{m. sternomastoideus
nuchal crest (m. sterno-
ing; turns the head and neck to
sterno-occipitalis
and m. sterno-occipita-
 occipitalis)
the side of the muscle acting
Jis)
M. brachiocephalicus
(M. cleidobrachialis,
M. cleidocervicalis, and
M. cleidomastoideus, 
see p. 14)
M. deltoideus
[see Laterat Shoutder and Arm Musctes)
Long hyoid muscles (turn to p. 14)
M. sternchyoideus
 Manubrium of sternum  Basihyoideum
Ventral branch of first
 Draws the hyoid apparatus
Right and left muscles are
and first costal carti-
cervical n.
and tongue caudally
joined at their medial bor-
Jage
ders.
M. sternothyroideus
Manubrium of sternum Thyroid cartilage of larynx
Ventral branch of first
Synergist of m. sternohy
At its origin, connected to m.
and first costal carti-
cervical n.
oideus, draws the larynx cau-
sternohyoideus.
lage
dally
124
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Inmervation
Function
Comments
Medial shoulder and arm muscles (turn to p. 18)
M teres major
 Caudal margin of the
 Teres major tuberosity
Axillary n.
 Flexor of shoulder joint
scapula
M. subscapularis
 Subscapular fossa
Lesser tubercle of the
Subscapular (main
Adductor of the shoulder joint
Serves as a contractile medial
humerus
 part) and axillary mn.
collateral *ligament’ of the
(caudal part)
shoulder joint.
M. coracobrachialis
 Coracoid process of the Caudomedial area of
Musculocutaneous n.
 Extensor and adductor of
Its tendon of origin is.
scapula
proximal humerus
shoulder joint; rotates
enveloped by a synovial
humerus and distal limb, turn-
sheath.
ing the cranial face of the limb
Jaterally
M. biceps brachii
Supraglenoid tubercle
 Radial tuberosity and
Musculocutaneous n.
 Flexor of the elbow joint
In human beings, this muscle
of the scapula
proximomedialulna
has two heads of origin.
M. tensor fasciae ante-
Caudal margin of the
 Olecranon and antebrachial  Radial n.
Extension of elbow joint,
brachii
scapula and m. latis-
fascia
tensor of forearm fascia
simus dorsi
Lateral shoulder and arm muscles (turn to pp. 14 and 20)
M deltoideus:
Clavicular intersection
Humeral crest (clavicular
Axillary n. {scapular
 Scapular and acromial parts,
 A surgical approach to the
P. scapularis,
and acrormial parts),
P. acromialis
of the scapula by
accessory axillary n.*
acromial part and the
P.clavicularis
aponeurosis (scapular
(clavicular part),This
brachiocephalicusm, dras
parts)
supraspinatus m.
(M. cleidobrachialis)
part), acromion
nerve may also be
the lirmb forward
(acromial part)
called the n. brachio-
cephalicus.
M teres minor
Infraglenoid tubercle
Teres minor tuberosity
Axillary nh.
Flexor of the shoulder joint
Lies deep to the scapular part
and distal infraspinous
of the deltoideus m.
fossa
M. supraspinatus
Supraspinous fossa andGreater tubercle of the
Suprascapular n.
Extends and fixes' the
spine of the
humerus
shoulder joint
scapula
Infraspinatus m. surface of
M. infraspinatus
 Infraspinous fossa and
 Suprascapular n.
Flexor and abductor of the
spine of the scapula
the humerus
shoulder joint
toid m.:; a bursa underlies its
tendon of insertion.
M triceps brachi: Caput
 Caudal margin of the
 Olecra non
Radial n.
Extensor of the elbow joint;
Fills the triangle between scapu-
longum,
scapula (long head),
the long head also flexes the
la, humerus and olecranon. Its 
laterale,
 proximal lateral hu-
shoulder joint
caudal contour forms thetricipi-
mediale,
merus, (lateral head),
tal margin (Margo tricipitalis)
accessorium
medial humerus
frorn the withers descending to
(medial head), caudal
the olecranon; a bursa underlies
neck of the humerus
the common tendon of inser-
(accessory head)
tion.
Margin of the olecra-
 Fleshy; laterally with the tri- Radial n.
Extensor of the elbow joint
Can be regarded as a
non fossa
ceps tendon on the olecra-
fth head of the triceps
brachi m.
non.
M flexor digitalis super-
 Medial epicondyle of 
Flexor tuberosity of the
Median n.
Flexor of the digital and carpal  The superficial flexor tendon is
ficialis
the humerus
middle phalanx of digits
joints
formed in the distal forearm.
Ⅱ-V
The manica flexoria of each
corresponding deep flexor ten-
don.
M flexor digitalis
Medial epicondyle of 
Flexor tuberosity of the dis-
 Ulnar and median nn.
Flexor of the digital and
Tendons of its 3 heads unite in
profundus:
the humerus, radius,
tal phalanx of digits
(humera] head), rmedian
 carpal joints
the distal forearrm to form the
Caput humerale,
una
1-V
n. (radial head), ulnar
deep flexor tendon, which
radiale,
n. (ulnar head)
passes through the manica
ulnare
flexoria of the superficial flex-
or tendon.
M flexor carpi
Medial epicondyle of the Accessory carpal bone
Unar n.
Flexor of the carpal joints
The two heads of the muscle
ulnaris
humerus {humera]
are separated throughout.
head), olecranon (ulnar
head)
M flexor carpi
Medial epicondyle of 
Mc II and III
 Median n.
Flexor of the carpal joints
Its tendon of insertion is
radialis
the humerus
M. pronator teres
 Medial epicondyle of 
 Proximal craniomedial
 Median n.
 Pronator of the antebrachium
Lies medial at the elbow
the humerus
radius
and manus (turns the cranial
joint.
face of the forearm and distal
limb medially)
M. pronator
Bridges over the interosseous space
Median n.
 Pronator of the antebrachium
Constant only in the carni-
quadratus
between radius and ulna
vores.
limb medially)
125
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
 Craniolateral muscles of the forearm (most are extensors arising on the lateral epicondyle of the humerus; turn to p. 22):
M. extensor digitalis
 Lateral epicondyle of 
 Distal phalanx of digits
Radial n.
Extensor of the digital and
communis
the humerus
-V
carpal joints 
M. extensor digitalis lat-
 Lateral epicondyle of
Distal phalanx of digits
Radial n.
Extensor of the digits
eralis
the humerus
III-V
Ⅲ-V
M. abductor pollicis
 Craniolateral surface of Proximal extremity of
Radial n.
Extensor and abductor of digit A sesamoid bone in the ten-
longus
radius and ulna
Mc I, superficial part of
I, extensor of carpus
don as it crosses over the
flexor retinaculum
caudomedial aspect of the
radial carpal bone.
M. extensor digiti
Middle third of cranial
Distal end of Mc I, joins
Radial n.
 Extensor of digits I and II
Constant only in carnivores.
I et II
 surface of ulna
common digital extensor
tendon to digit II
M. extensor carpi ulnaris
Lateral epicondyle of
Mc V and accessory carpal
 Radial n.
Extensor of carpal joints
Due to its attachment to the
(M. ulnaris lateralis)
humerus
bone
accessory carpal bone, the
muscle can function as a flex-
or and abductor of the carpal
joints.
M. supinator
Lateral collateral liga-
 Proximal craniolateral sur-
Radial n.
Supinator of antebrachium
Lies deep to mm. ext. carpi
 ment of elbow joint
face of radius
and manus (turns the cranial
radialis and ext. dig. com.
face of the forearm and distal
limb laterally)
M. brachioradialis
 Lateral supracondylar
 Distormedial radius
Radial n.
Flexor of the elbow joint and
Absent in about 50 per cent
crest
supinator of the antebrachium
of cases.
and manus
Muscles of the vertebral column
A. Dorsal vertebral muscles (turn to p. 28)
M. splenius
Spinous processes of
 Nuchal crest
 Dorsal branches of cervi- Extension and lateral flexion
 The form of this muscle
vT1-vT3
cal and thoracic nn.
of head and neck
resembles a spleen or strap.
M. iliocostalis,
lium (lurmbar part);
Transverse processes of lum-
Fixation of lumbar vertebrae
M. iliocostalis thoracis and
-lumborum,
several adjacent ribs
bar vertebrae and caudal
and ribs, erection and lateral
 m. iliocostalis lumborum 
thoracis
ribs (lumbar part); caudal
flexion of vertebral column
form a continuous muscle
margin of rib several seg-
(lumbar part); draws ribs cau-
insertion, and trans-.
 ments cranial to ribs of ori-
dally in expiration, attach-
verse process of vC7(6)
 gin, and transverse process
ments to transverse processes
(thoracic part)
of vC7(6) (thoracic part)
of vC7(6) draw corresponding
(thoracic part)
M. longissimus,
Spinous processes of
  
 Dorsal branches of
Fixation and extension of the
 Deep to the thoracolumbar
lumborum,
sacral, lurmbar and tho-
 processes of lumbar and
lumbar, thoracic, and
vertebral column; erection of
fascia, medial to the adjacent
—thoracis,
thoracic vertebrae, ribs at
cervical spinal nerves
the upper body, elevation of
m.iliocostalis the longest
-cervicis,
the angle (lumbar and tho-
head and neck; lateral flexion
muscle of the vertebrai col-
-capitis
racic parts); transverse
of trunk and neck when only
umn.
processes of thoracic ver- processes of the cervical ver-
one side is acting
tebrae, articular process- tebrae (cervical part), mas-
es of cervical vertebrae
toid processof temporal
{cervical and capita]
bone (capital part)
parts)
M. spinalis et semi-
Lumbar spinous and
Spinous processes of cranial
Dorsal branches of
Fixation of dorsum and neck,
spinalis thoracis et
marnillary processes
thoracic vertebrae (thoracic
lumbar, thoracic, and
bends the trunk and neck to
cervicis
(thoracic spinalis et
spinalis et semispinalis),
cervical spinal nn.
the side of the muscle acting
sermispinalis), cranial
spinous processes of cervical
thoracic spinous
vertebrae up to the axis (cer-
processes {cervical
vical spinalis)
spinalis)
M. semispinalis capitis,
Transverse processes of  Nuchal surface of squarmous Dorsal branches of cra-
Elevation and lateral flexion of M. biventer is dorsal and has
M. biventer cervicis,
cranial thoracic verte-
 occipital bone ventral to
nial thoracic and cervi-
 head and neck
transverse tendinous intersec
M. complexus
 brae, articular process-
nuchal crest
cal spinal nerves 
tions, m. complexus is ven-
es of cervical vertebrae
tral.
3-7
Mm. multifidi,
 Mamillary (lumbar and Spinous process of vertebra
 Dorsal branches of seg- Fixation and rotation of the
A series of individual muscles
multifid. cervicis,
thoracic multifidij and three segments cranial to
 mental spinal
vertebral column
extending rom the axis to the
multifid. thoracis,
articular (cervical mul-
vertebra of origin (lumbar
nerves
sacrum. The lumbar series is
multifid. lumb.
tifidi) processes from
and thoracic multifidi);
particularly strong and lies
sacrum to the axis
spine of axis{cervical multi-
next to the vertebral spines
fidi)
 medial to the m. longissimus
and m. sacrocaudalis dorsalis
lateralis.
 Mm. intertrans ver sari
Bundles passing bet ween transverse, mamillary, articu-
 Dorsal branches of seg-
Fixation of vertebrae, lateral 
In the neck and tail, the mus.
lar and accessory processes of adjacent vertebrae
mental spinal
flexion of the vertebral column cles are in dorsal and ventral
ferves
with unilateral action
series.
Mm. inter spinales
 Bundles passing between adjacent spinous processes
Dorsal branches of seg-
Fixation, dorsal and lateral
 of lumbar, thoracic and cervical vertebrae 
mental spinal
flexion of vertebral column
nerves
M. sacrocaudalis
 Mamilloarticular
Spinous processes of sacral
 Dorsal branches of seg-
 Elevation and lateral flexion of Caudal continuation of the 
{-coccygeus) dorsalis
and caudal vertebrae
rmental spinal nerves
tai]
mm. multifidi.
medialis
and, caudally, their
srmall vestigial ermi-
nences
M. sacrocaudalis
Mamillary processes of Mamillary processes of the
Dorsal branches of the  
 Elevation and lateral flexion of Caudomedial continuation of
(-coccygeus) dorsalis lat-
lumbar, sacral, and the
more caudal of the caudal
segmental spinal nerves the tail
the m. longissimus.
eralis
more cranial of the
(tail) vertebrae
caudal (tail) vertebrae
126
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Inmervation
Function
Comments
 Muscles of the vertebral column
B. Ventral vertebral muscles (turn to p. 28)
Mm. scaleni:
Transverse processes of Ribs 3 - 9 (scalenus dor-
Ventral branches of
Draw the ribs cranially in
M. scalenus dorsalis,
the last four cervical
salis), the middle of the cra-
cervical spinal mn.
inspiration, ventral flexion of
ventralis,
vertebrae
nial margin of rib 1 (scalenus
the neck
medius,
ventralis), the dorsal part of
rib 1 (scalenus medius)
M longus capitis
Transverse processes of
Muscular tubercle at the
Ventral branches of
Ventral flexion of the head and
cervical vertebrae
base of the skull
 cervical spinal mn.
neck, lateral flexion if only the
2 - 6; the separate bun-
muscles of one side are acting
ventral tubercle of the
atlas is designated rec-
tus capitis ventratis.
 M longus colli
 Transverse processes of Caudal prominence of the 
 Ventral branches of
Ventral flexion of the neck
cervical vertebrae
ventral median crest of the
 cervical spinal nn.
ments in a *herringbone”
2-6
vertebrae two segments
pattern on the ventral surface
cranially, the most cranial
of the neck. Surgical accessto
insertion is on the ventral
the cervical intervertebral
tubercle of the atlas.
muscle
bundles.
Muscles of the vertebral column
C. Dorsal muscles of the atlanto-occipital and atlanto-axial joints (turn to p. 28)
M. rectus capitis
Dorsal margin of the
Ventral to the nuchal crest
Dorsal branch of the
 Dorsal flexor of the atlanto-
A deep part of this muscle
dor salis maj or
spine of the axis
first cervical n.
occipital joint
can be separated off as a m.
rectus capitis dorsalis inter-
me dius.
M. rectus capitis
Dorsal tubercle of the
 Nuchal surface of the skull
Dorsal branch of the
Dorsal flexor of the atlanto-
Lies deep to the rm. rectus
dorsalis minor
atlas
(occipital bone)
first cervical n.
occipital joint 
capitis dorsalis major (pars
intermedia).
M obliquus capitis
Lateral surface of the
Dorsal surface of the wing
Dorsal branch of the
Rotates the atlas (and head)
caudalis
spine of the axis
of the atlas
second cervical n.
around the dens of the axis
M obliquus capitis
Lateral margin of the
 Nuchal surface of the skull
Dorsal branch of the
Acting together with its
Occupies much of the
cranialis
wing of the atlas
(occipital bone)
first cervical n.
fellow, dorsal flexion of the
 atlanto-occipital space.
the atlanto-occipital joint
Respiratory muscles (expiratory muscles) (All of the muscles listed below are expiratory, drawing the ribs caudally and
inward, reducing the transverse diameter of the thorax; turn to p. 30.)
M. serratus dorsalis
 Thoracolumbar fascia
Caudal margin of the last
 Intercostal mn.
Expiratory
 The costal attachment passes
caudalis
3 ribs
deep to the mm. intercostales
externi.
Mm. intercostales
 Caudal margin of the
 Passes caudodorsally to the
Intercostal n.
Expiratory
Lie deep to the mm. inter-
mterm
more cranial rib of an
 cranial margin of the more
costales externi.
intercostals space
caudal rib of the space
Mm. subcostales
These muscles are occasional small dorsal slips. They
 Intercostal nn.
Expiratory
Lie medial to the mm. inter-
are disposed like the mm. intercostales interni; except
costales interni.
that they extend over two or three intercostal spaces.
M. retractor costae
 Transverse process of
Caudal margin of the last
Costoabdominal n.
Expiratory
Lies deep to the m. transver
the first three or four
rib
sus abdominis.
Jumbar vertebrae
M transversus thoracis
 Body of the sternum
Medial surface of ribs 2 - 8  Intercostal nn.
Expiratory
Cranial continuation of the
at the genu
m. transversus abdorminis.
 racis and diaphragm, they draw the ribs cranially and outward, enlarging the transverse diameter of the thorax. The m. rec-
tus thoracis brings the sternum, and sternal ribs, cranially. This lowers the sternum and enlarges the dorsoventral diameter
 of the thorax. The diaphragm enlarges the craniocaudal dimension of the thoracic cavity.)
M. serratus dorsalis
 Supraspinous ligament
 Cranial margin of ribs
Intercostal mn.
Inspiratory
Has a broad aponeurosis of
cranialis
at the level of thoracic
3-10
origin.
vertebrae 1 - 8
M. rectus thoracis
1 rib
Ventral ends of ribs 2 - 4
 Intercostal nn.
Inspiratory
 Cranial continuation of the
and cranial part of body of
m. rectus abdominis.
the stern urm.
Mm. intercostales
From the caudal mar-
Extends caudoventrally to
 Intercostal nn.
Inspiratory
Fibers of this muscle cross the
externi
gin of the more cranial
the cranial margin of the
mm. intercostales interni at a
rib of the intercostal
more caudal rib of the space
right-angle.
space
Transverse processes of
 Cranial margin of the
 Intercostal mn.
 Inspiratory
This muscle is the vertebral
the thoracic vertebrae
following rib
 portion of the mm. inter-
costales externi.
Diaphr agma:
Stermum (sternal part),
 Tendinous center of the
Phrenic n.
 Inspiratory
Cranially arched septum
Pars sternalis,
ribs 9 - 13 {costa]
diaphragm
between the thoracic and
costalis,
part), cranial lumbar
abdominal cavities, with three
lumbalis
vertebrae (lumbar part)
openings: aortic hiatus,
esophageal hiatus, and
foramen venae cavae.
127
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
 Ventral abdominal muscles: These muscles have a broad origin and wide aponeuroses of insertion (turn to pp. 34 and 36)
M. obliquus externus
Ribs 4 - 13 (costal
Linea alba (abdominal ten-
Ventral branches of
Altogether, the ventral abdomi-
The abdominal and pelvic ten-
abdominis
part), thoracolurmbar
don); inguinal ligament,
intercostal, costoab-
 dons form the margins of the.
fascia (lumbar part)
from the tuber coxae to the
 dominal, and lurmbar
iliopubic eminence and
n.
with the diaphragm in recipro-
 pecten ossis pubis (pelvic
cal movements of abdominal
m. contributes throughout to the
tendon)
respiration: inspiration (dia-
external lamina of the rextus
phragm contracts, ventral
sheath.
Tuber coxae and neigh-
 Linea alba and costal arch.
abdominal mm. relax) and
M. obliquus internus
Ventral branches of
Forms the deep inguinal ring
expiration (ventral abdominal
abdominis
boring part of the
intercostal, costo-
with the inguinal ligament and
inguinal ligament 
abdominal, and 
mm.
contract, diaphragm reax
es).Withclosure ofthe rima
m. rectus abdominis The cre-
lumbar nn.
glottidis, the muscles contract
(lumbar part)
in the movements of the abdo-
aponeurosis splits, contributing
minal press as takes place in
 one layer to the external lami-
urination, defecation, and par-
na and one layer to the internal
turition. The aponeuroses of
lamina of the rectus sheath; in
the ventral abdominal mm.
the umbilical region and cau-
have a zone in which the fibres
of their aponeuroses interweave
dally, the aponeurosis is undi-
vided and contributes only to
the external lamina of the rec-
tus sheath.
M. transversus
Asternal ribs (costal
Linea alba
Ventral branches of
Rarely, splits off a cremaster m.
abdominis
part), lumbar trans-
intercostal, costoab-
Contributes to the internal
dominal, and lumbar
lamina of the rectus sheath
deep eaf of the
nn.
cranially and in the umbilical
thoracolumbar fascia
region.In the inguinal region, it
(lumbar part)
contributes only to the external
lamina of the rectus sheath
M. rectus abdominis
Sternum and first rib
Pecten ossis pubis
Ventral branches of
 Joinsthe thorax and pelvis
{including its costa]
intercostal, costoab-
ventrally divided into segments by
cartilage)
dominal, and lumbar
tendinous intersections.
nf.
 Sublumbar muscles (turn to page 60)
M. quadr atus
 Last three thoracic
Transverse processes of the
Ventral branches of
 Fixation and lateral flexion of
A strong muscle. It projects
lumborum
vertebrae and lumbar
cranial lumbar vertebrae,
lumbar spinal nerves
the lumbar vertebral column
cranially and laterally beyond
transverse processes
spina alaris of the ilium up
the m. iliopsoas.
to its auricular surface.
M. psoas major
Vertebral ends of ribs
With the m. iliacus
Ventral branches of
Flexor of the hip joint; with
Passes to the limb caudal to
12 and 13, transverse
(forming the m. iliopsoas),
lumbar spinal nerves
the hind limb extended, it
the inguinal ligament,
processes of cranial
the trochanter minor
draws the limb forward;
through the lacuna muscula-
lurmbar vertebrae
hrurm. With the m. iliacus,
forms the m. iliopsoas.
vertebral column
M. iliacus
 Sacropelvic surface of
With the m. psoas major,
Ventral branches of
[see m. psoas major)
(see m. psoas major)
the ilium
forms the m. iliopsoas, insert- lumbar spinal nerves
ing on the trochanter minor
M. psoas minor
Last three thoracic ver-
 Psoas minor tubercle of the
Ventral branches of
Ventral flexion of the lumbar
Its broad tendon of insertion
tebrae and first four
ilium
lumbar spinal nerves
vertebral column
is covered by the iliac fascia.
lumbar vertebrae,
(e.g.,the posture adopted in
tendons of the rm.
defecation)
quadratus lumborum
Pelvic diaphragm, coccygeus and levator ani muscles (turn to p. 72)
M. coccygeus
Ischiadic spine
Transverse processes of the
Ventral branch of the
Draws the tail to the side of
first four caudal (coccygeal)
third sacral spinal n.
the muscle acting (e.g., wag-
vertebrae
ging'the til) with bothmus
cles contracting, clamps the
tail down (ventroflexion)
M. levator ani
Pelvic surface of pubis
Hemal processes of caudal
Ventral branch of the
With bilateral contraction,
Its caudal border is attached
and ischium
vertebrae 4 - 7
third sacral spinal n.
draws the tail ventrally
by fascia to the external anal
sphincter; forms the rmuscular
basis of the pelvic diaphragm.
M. sphincter ani
With attachment dorsally to the proximal caudal ver-
Caudal rectal n. of the
Closes the anal opening
Voluntary muscle. The par-
tebrae, forms a strong muscular ring surrounding the
externus
 pudendal n.
anal opening
sphincter mm.
M. sphincter ani internus
 Strong sphincter m. of the last portion of the rectum
Autonomic nn.
Closes the anal opening
Smooth muscle
M. rectococcygeus
 External longitudinal
Ventromedian on the first
Autonomic nn.
 Stabilization of anal canal and  Smooth muscle 
smooth muscle of the
caudal vertebrae
rectum
rectum
Mm. perinei
 Join the external anal sphincter to genital mm.
 Deep perineal branches
Muscular closure between
Anchored in the tendinous
of the pudendal n.
anus and vulva/root of the
center of the perineum.
 penis
M. bulbospongiosus
Transverse fibers crossing the bulb of the penis and
 Deep perineal branches
 Evacuate the urethra (rm. bul-
The muscles of the bitch are
(M. constr vestibuli and
 attaching on either side to the tunica albuginea of the
of the pudendal n.
bospongiosus); compress the
chiefly functional in coitus.
M. constr. vulvae
a  sds 
vestibular bulb and narrow the
 of the female)
covering the vestibular bulb and ataching to the
Jumen of the vestibule, clamp-
ing the intromitted penis (m.
constrvestibuli),narrowhe
str. vulvae, —female)
vulvar orifice providing appo-
sition of clitoris and penis (m.
constr. vul vae)
M. ischioca vemosus
 Ischiadic arch
Crus of the penis (male),
 Deep perineal branches
Compress the root of the penis
crus of the clitoris (female)
of the pudendal n.
in erection {male), little appar-
ent function in the female
M. retractor penis s.
Sacrum and first
Anus, rectum, tunica albug-
Autonomic nn.
Retractor of the penis (clitoris)  Smooth muscle with pars rec-
clitoridis
caudal vertebrae
inea of the corpus caver
talis,—analis,
penina or
128
nosum penis (clitoris)
clitoridis.
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Inmervation
Function
Comments
Muscles of the hip joint (turn to p. 78)
M tensor fasciae latae
Tuber coxae
Patella and tibial tuberosity
Cranial gluteal n.
Flexor of the hip joint, exten-
by way of the fascia lata and
sor of the stifle joint, tensor of
patellar ligament (cranial,
the fascia lata, draws the limb
chief,part); lateral lipof the
forward in the cranial move-
 au jo riads s
ment of the stride
(caudal, accessory, part)
 Croup muscles
M gluteus superficialis
Gluteal fascia, lateral
Gluteal tuberosity
Caudal gluteal n.
Extensor of the hip joint,
An independent muscle only in
 part of the sacrum, first
draws the limb caudally
the carnivores; in other species,
caudal vertebra and the
sacrotuberous ligament
teobiceps, —ruminants, swine)
m tensor fasciae latae
(Equidae).
M gluteus medius
oeu nari um pe esj ren
Cranial gluteal n.
Extensor of the hip joint.
Largest of the gluteal mnuscles
draws the limb caudally and
of the dog.
outward
M piriformis
Ventral surface of the
Trochanter major
Cranial gluteal n. or
Extensor of the hip joint,
“Pear-shaped’ muscle be-
sacrum, sacrotuberous
 caudal gluteal n.
draws the limb caudally and
tween the m. gluteus medius
ligarment
outward
and m. gluteus profundus.
M gluteus profundus
Gluteal surface of the
Cranial part of the
Cranial gluteal n.
Supports the abducting action
Lies directly upon the hip
ilium
trochanter major
of m. gluteus medius, rotates
 joint, covered by m. gluteus
the femur, turning the cranial
face of the limb medially
 medius.
Caudal thigh 'Hamstring' muscles, M. abductor cruris caudalis
M. biceps femoris
Tuber ischiadicum,
 Patellar ligament and tibial 
Muscular branch of the  Extensor of the hip, stifle, and  Homologous to the long head
sacrotuberous ligament
tuberosity, cranial margin of
ischiadic n. {middle
tarsal joints in the weight-bear-
the tibia, crural fascia, tuber
and caudal parts), cau-
ing limb; its attachment to the
hominis.
calcanei as the lateral cal-
dal gluteal n.
cranial margin of the tibia flex-
canean tract
(cranial part)
es the stifle joint in the non-
weight bearing limb, abductor
of the limb.
M. abductor cruris
Sacrotuberous
Crural fascia distal to the
Common peroneal
Abductor of the limb, giving
Homologous to the caput
caudalis
ligament
biceps femoris
(fibular) n.
sloua sdaig u anaig
hominis.
M. semitendinosus
Tuber ischiadicum
Medial surface of the tibia;
Muscular branch of the  Extensor of the hip, stifle, and In human beings, the muscle
tuber calcanei with the
ischiadic n.
tarsal joints in the weight-
is semitendinous; proximally
tarsal tendon of the m. gra-
bearing limb; its attachment to
there is an oblique tendinous
dilis (medial calcanean tract)
the medial surface of the tibia
intersection.
flexes the stifle joint in the
non-weight bearing limb; in
draws the limb rmedially and
caudally and tends to rotate
the crus, turning its cranial
face medially
M. semimembr anosus
 Tuber ischiadicum
Medial condyle of the femur Muscular branch of the Extensor of the hip, stifle, and 
In human beings, the muscle
(cranial belly), medial
ischiadic n.
tarsal joints in the weight bear-
is semimembranous.
condyle of the tibia
(caudal helly)
medial surface of the tibia flex-
es the stifle joint in the non-
weight bearing limb; in the
non-weight bearing limb,
draws the limb medially and
caudally and tends to rotate
the crus, turning its cranial face
medially
cranial face laterally. They thus act as antagonists to the m. gluteus profundus.
M. obturator internus
 Dorsal (internal) sur-
Trochanteric fossa
Ischiadic n. (rotator n.)  Rotates the limb, turning its
Covers the obturator
face of the obturator
cranial face laterally ('outward’ foramen on the floor of the
membrane and the
rotator), assist in extending the pelvis.
neighboring rmargin of
hip joint 
the obturator foramen
Mm. gemelli
Lateral surface of the
Trochanteric fossa, their
Ischiadic n. (rotator m.)
Rotate the limb, turning its
In human beings, divided
ischiurm at the lesser
tendons joining the internal
cranial face laterally ('out-
forrming 'twin’ muscles; in the
ischiadic notch
obturator tendon
ward’ rotator), assist in
dog, the two bellies are
extending the hip joint
incompletely separated by the
 obturator internus tendon.
M. quadratus femoris
Ventromedial surface
Caudal surface of the fernur  Ischiadic n. (rotator n.)
Rotates the limb, turning its
Lies caudoventral to the cau-
of the ischiurn near the
distal to the trochanteric
cranial face laterally ('out-
dal part of the mm. gemelli.
tuber
fossa
ward’ rotator), assist in
extending the hip joint
M. obturator externus
Verntral (external) sur-
Trochanteric fossa ventral to Obturator n.
Rotates the limb, turning its 
 Lies between the m. adductor
face of the obturator 
 the obturator internus and
cranial face laterally (*outward’ and the ventral surface of the
membrane and the
gemelli tendons
rotator), adducts the limb
 ischium.
neighboring margin of
the obturator foramen
29
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
 Medial thigh muscles: Adductor muscles. All are innervated by the obturator nerve. (turn to p. 80)
M. gracilis
By aponeurosis with
Medial crural fascia, tuber
Obturator n.
Adductor; extensor of the
A thin muscle. In the racing
the symphysial tendon
 calcanei by the medial cal-
tarsal joint (possibly and exten- greyhound, subject to muscle
to the pelvic symphysis
 canean tract
sor of the stifle joint in the
rupture after a period of inac-
weight bearing limb by means
tivity.
of the fascia cruris)
M. adductor magnus
Fleshy attachment to
 Facies aspera of femur
Obturator n.
Adductor, tends to draw the
the lateral surface of
limb caudally
the symphysial tendon
and thus to the pelvic
bones
M. adductor brevis
Ventral pubic tubercle
 Proximally on the facies
Obturator n.
Adductor
 Situated at the bifurcation of
aspera
the obturator n.
M. pectineus
 Iliopubic eminence
Medial lip of the facies
Obturator n.
Adductor of the limb, flexor of Forrmed by the fusion of two 
aspera
the hip joint
muscles.
Femoral muscles: Extensors of the stifle joint (turn to page 80)
M. sartorius:
Tuber coxae, iliac crest 
 Crural fascia, cranial margin Femoral n.
Flexor of the hip joint, exten-
In the dog, this *tailor's mus-
Pars cranialis,
of tibia
sor of the stifle joint (cranial
 cle forms the cranial contour
Pars caudalis
part)flexorof the stiflejint
of the thigh.
(caudal part); acting together,
the two parts of the muscle
draw the limb forward and
adduct the limb
M. quadriceps femoris:
Craniolateral at the
Tibial tuberosity by means of Femoral n.
Main extensor of the stifle
Lies as the large muscle mass
M. vastus lateralis,
femur {m. vastus
the patellar ligament Tendo
joint; fixation of the limb, flex-
 of the cranial thigh, covered
medialis,
lateralis), craniomedial
m. quadricipitis); the patella
or of the hip joint {m. rectus
-interrmedius,
femur (m. vastus
is a sesamoid bone in the ten-
femoris)
ciae latae and the fascia lata;
M. rectus femoris
intermedius, m. vastus
don f the quadriceps, at its
medially, by the rm. sartorius.
(medialis, caudal
ventral iliac spine
(m. rectus femoris)
patellar bursa
Special flexor and rotator of the stifle joint (see p. 82)
 M. popliteus
Lateral condyle of the
 Proximal caudal surface of
Tibial n.
Flexor of the stifle joint;
A sesarmoid bone is within its
femur
the tibia
rotates the tibia on its long
tendon of origin at its junction
axis, turning the cranial face of with belly of the muscle. The
the limb medially (pronation)
tendon of origin passes be-
tween the lateral menicus and
the lateral collatera ligament.
 Craniolateral leg (crural) muscles: All are innervated by the common peroneal (fibular) n. (turn to p. 82)
M. tibialis cranialis
Proximal cranial surface
 Proximally on Mt I
Common peroneal
Flexor of the tarsal joint,
 Passes beneath the crural
of the tibia lateral to its
(fibular) n.
supinator (tendsto turn the
extensor retinaculurm.
tuberosity and cranial
cranial face of the pes laterally)
margin
M. extensor digitalis
 Dorsal surface distally
With the m. extens. digit.
Common peroneal
 Extensor of the digits
brevis
on the calcaneus
longus on digits II - IV
(fibular) n.
M. extensor
Extensor fossa of the
Dorsal aspect of distal pha-
 Common peroneal
 Extensor of the digits
Its belly is largely covered
digit. longus
fermur
lanx of digits II - V
(fibular) n.
cranially by the m. tibialis
cranialis; its tendon is held
 down by the crural and tarsal
extensor retinacula.
M. extensor digiti I
Cranial surface of the
 Dorsal fascia of digits
 Common peroneal
Extensor of digits I and II
The cranial tibial vessels pass
fibula
I and II
(fibular) n.
alongside this muscle, deep to
the m. tibialis cranialis.
M. peroneus (fibularis)
Lateral condyle of
 Plantar tubercles at proxi-
Common peroneal
 Turns the plantar surface of the Its insertion tendon passes in 
longus
the tibia, head of the
mal ends of Mt II - V
(fibular) n.
 pes laterally (pronation)
a distinct sulcus on the latero-
fibula
plantar side of the fourth
tarsal bone and branches on
the plantar pes.
M. extensor digitalis
Proximal cranial sur-
 Dorsal surface of distal
Common peroneal
 Extensor of digit V
Passes in a caudal sulcus of
lateralis
face of fibula, lateral
 phalanx of digit V
(fibular) n.
the lateral malleolus,
collateral ligarment of
crossing under the tendon of
the femorotibial jint
the m. peroneus longus.
M. peroneus (fibularis)
 Distal two-thirds of the  Lateral prominence at the
Common peroneal
 Flexor of the tarsal joint
Well-developed only in carni-
bre vis
lateral surface of the
 proximal end of Mt V
(fibular) n.
vores and hurman beings.
fibula
Caudal leg (crural) muscles: All are innervated by the tibial n. (turn to p. 82).
M. gastrocnemius
 Distal fermur, medial
Tuber calcanei
Tibial n.
Extensor of the tarsal joint,
 A sesamoid bone is in the ten-
and lateral supra-
flexor of the stifle joint
 don of origin of each head.
condylar tuberosities
M.flexor digitalis super-
 Lateral supracondylar
 Sides of the tuber calcanei,
Tibial n.
 Flexor of digits II - V, extensor The tendon caps over the
ficialis
tuberosity, deep to the
of the tarsaljoint, assists in
tuber calcanei, attaching to
Jateral head of the gas-
flexion of the stifle joint
either side. At metatarsopha-
trocnemius
Ⅱ-V
langeal joint level, it forrms
the rmanica flexoria.
M. flexor digitalis pro-
Caudal surface of the
 Plantar surface of distal
Tibial n.
Flexor of digits II - V, extensor
The tendons of the lateral and
fundus:
tibia, fibula, and the
phalanx of digits II-V
of the tarsal joint
M. flexor digitalis
interosseous ligament
join in the proximal metatar-
lateralis,
bet ween therm 
sus to form the deep digital
medialis
flexor tendon.
M. tibialis caudalis
 Proximal fibula 
 Medial tarsal fascia
Tibial n.
In ungulates,the tendon joins
the lateral digital flexorten-
130
don at the tarsus.
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Inmervation
Function
Comments
Muscles of facial expression: All are innervated by the facial n. (turn to p. 94).
M. sphincter colli
Transverse fibers in the superficial fascia of the
Cervical branch (R.
 Tenses and moves the ventral
Sparse muscle fibers
superficialis
ventral neck
colli) of the facial n.
and lateral skin
Matysma
Arises from the dorsal median raphe of the neck,
R. platysmatis of the
Tenses and moves the skin in
Two muscle layers in the
passing rostroventrally onto the face where, as the m.
caudal auricular n.,
the nuchal and masseteric
cervical region
cutaneus faciei, it radiates into the m. orbicularis oris
cervical branch (R.
regions, retracts the angle of
of the upper and lower lips.
colfi) of the facial n.
the mouth, tenses the skin in
the labial region
M. sphincter colli profundus
 Auricular muscles
M. cer vicoauricularis
 Dorsal median raphe of Dorsal (convex) surface of
Caudal auricular n.
Long elevator muscle of the ear Attheir origin,the cervico-
superficialis
the neck
the auricular cartilage
branch of the facial n.
auricularis supf. and cervico-
scutularis are fused
M. cer vicoscutularis
 Dorsal median raphe of
Caudomedial part of scuti-
Caudal auricular n.,
Elevates the ear and tenses the
See m. cervicoauricutaris
the neck
form cartilage
branch of the facial n.
scutiform cartilage
supf.
Mm. cervicoauricularis
 External sagittal crest
Lateral border of the auricu-
Caudal auricular n.,
Turns the opening (conchal
Covered by the m. cervico-
 profundus and -medius
Jar cartilage
branch of the facial n.
fissure) of the auricular
auricularis superficialis
M. occipitalis
External sagittal crest
Superficial fascia of the head Rostral auricular
Draws the scutiform
Curved, very delicate muscle
 branches of the
 cartilage caudomedially
fibers
auriculopalpebral n.
M interscutularis
Transverse fibers passing between the two scutiform
Rostral auricular
Draws the scutiforrm
cartilages
branches of the 
cartilages medially
a uriculopalpebral n.
M frontoscutularis
 Rostral continuation of the m. interscutularis
Rostral auricular
Draws the scutiform cartilages
branches of the 
rostromedially
a uriculopalpebral n.
M. scutuloauricularis
Scutiform cartilage
Rostral border of the
Rostral auricular
Turns the auricular cartilage
superficialis
auricular cartilage
branches of the 
so that its opening (conchal
auriculopalpebral n.
fissure) faces rostromedially,
erects the ear
M. parotidoauricularis
Parotid fascia and
Ventrolateral at the base of
Cervical branch
 Draws the ear down, lays the
superficial fascia of the
e  the auricular cartilage
{R. colli) of the facial n. ear *back"
cranial neck
M. mandibuloauricularis  Caudal margin of the
Ventral at the base of the
Caudal auricular n.,
Sometirmes
ramus of the mandible
auricular cartilage
branch of the facial n.
absent
ventral to the condyle
Muscles of the lips and cheeks 
M. orbicularis oris
Closed, sphincter-like muscle at the border of the
Dorsal and ventral
Closes the rima oris (opening
rima oris; there is no skeletal attachment
buccal branches of the 
of the mouth)
facial n.
M. buccinator
Crossing fibers that pass inthe cheek region between
Dorsal and ventral
 Forms the lateral boundary of
the maxilla and the body of the mandible; extends
buccal branches of the
the oral cavity; compresses the
from the angle of themouth to the level of the rostral
1 facial n.
vestibule of the oral cavity.
border of the masseter m.; interwoven rostrally with
pressingthe food into the oral
orbicularis oris fibers.
cavity proper; compresses the
buccal glands
M. zygomaticus
 Scutiform cartilage
 Radiates into the orbicularis Dorsal and ventral
 Draws the angle of the rmouth
oris at the angle of the
buccal branches of the
 caudally; draws the scutiforrm
mouth
facial n.
cartilage rostroventrally.
M. caninus
Maxilla, ventral to the
Upper lip
Dorsal and ventral
Draws the upper lip caudo-
infraorbital foramen
buccal branches of the 
 dorsally
facial n.
M levator labi superi-
Maxilla, rostral to the
Wing of the nostril; upper
 Dorsal and ventral
Elevates the upper lip and the
oris
infraorbital foramen
lip
buccal branches of the
nasal plane and draws thern
facial n.
caudally, widens the opening f
the nostril
Muscles of the eylids and nose
M. orbicularis oculi
A muscular ring passing within the eyelids. It arises
Auriculopalpebral n.,
 Narrowing and closure of the
dorsally and ventrally from the medial palpebral liga-
branch of the facial n.
palpebral fissure (the opening
ment and encircles the palpebral fissure
between the eyelids
M. retractor anguli oculi
i  Deep temporal fascia
Lateral angle of the eye
Auriculopalpebral n.,
Draws the lateral angle of the
lateralis
branch of the facial n.
eye caudally
M levator anguli oculi
Fascia upon the frontal
Medially into the upper
Auriculopalpebral n..
 Elevates the rmedial part of the
medialis
bone (frontal fascia)
eyelid
branch of the facial n.
hairs
M levator nasolabialis
Maxilla in the region
 Lateral nostril and upper
Auriculopalpebral n.,
Widens the opening of the nos-
lip
branch of the facial n.
tril and raisesthe upper lip
the eye; frontal fascia
M malaris
Deep fascia of the face
Lower eyelid
Auriculopalpebral n.,
Draws the lower eyelid
branch of the facial n.
ventrally
131
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Comments
Mandibular muscles (turn to pp. 94 and 96)
Superficial muscles of the throat
M. digastricus
Paracondylar process
Ventral margin of the
Ramus digastricus,
Lowers the mandible, opening
 Intermediate tendon between
(the jugular process
mandible
branch of the facial n.
the mouth
the two bellies.
forms its base)
(caudal belly); mylohy-
oid n.,branch of the
mandibular n. (rostral
belly)
M. mylohyoideus
Mylohyoid line on the
 Median raphe joining the
N. mylohyoideus,
Elevates the tongue, presses it
Like a hammock, supports
medial surface of the
muscles of the two sides
branch of the mandi-
against the palate
the floor of the oral cavity.
body of the mandible
ventral to the genio-
bular n.
hyoideus m.
External muscles of mastication 
M. temporalis
Termporal fossa
Coronoid process of the
Masticatory n., branch  Raises the mandible
Its accessory part extends
mandible
of the mandibular n.
dorsoparall to the zygo-
matic arch.
M. masseter
Zygomatic arch
Masseteric fossa of the
Masticatory n., branch
Raises the mandible
Divided into supericial and
mandible
of the mandibular n.
 deep parts.
Internal muscles of mastication
M. pterygoideus:
 Pterygopalatine fossa
Pterygoid fossa of the
 Pterygoid nn., branches Synergist of the masseter m., .
The mandibular n. passes
M. ptergoideus medialis,
mandible {medial ptery-
of the mandibular n.
raising the mandible; with uni-
between the two rmuscles.
M. pterygoideus lateralis
goid),pterygoid fovea of the
lateral contraction, draws the
noid (lateral pterygoid)
mandible (lateral pterygoid)
mandible toward the side of
the muscle acting
Muscles of the eye (turn to p. 98)
M. obliquus dorsalis
 Medial margin of the 
 Dorsally on the eyeball, its
Trochlear n. (IV)
Rotates the dorsal surface of
 Hook-shaped course around
optic canal
tendon passing ventral to
the eyeball, turning it rostro-
the trochlea.
the tendon of the m. rectus
medially
dorsalis
M. obliquus ventralis
Ventral to the lacrimal
 Laterally on the eyeball at
Oculomotor n. (II)
Rotates the lateral surface
fossa
the level of insertion of the
of the eyeball, turning it
m. rectus lateralis
ventrorostrally
M. rectus dorsalis
Common tendinous
 Rostrodorsal on the eyeball
Oculomotor n. (II)
Turns the eyeball dorsally
ring on the pterygoid
on its horizontal axis
crest and around the
optic canal
M. rectus medialis
Common tendinous 
Rostromedial on the eyeball
Oculomotor n. (III)
Turns the eyeball medially
ring on the pterygoid
on its perpendicular axis
crest and around the
optic canal
M. rectus ventralis
Common tendinous
 Rostroventral on the eyeball  Oculomotor n. (II)
Turns the eyeball ventrally
ring on the pterygoid
on its horizontal axis
crest and around the
optic canal
M. rectus lateralis
Common tendinous
Rostrolateral on the eyeball
Abducent n. (VI)
Turns the eyeball laterally
on its perpendicular axis
crest and around the
optic canal
M. retractor bulbi
 Between the optic canal  Surface of the eyeball,
Oculomotor n. (II);
Retracts the eyeball 
Surrounds the optic n. (II)
and orbital fissure
 posterior to the equator
lateral part by the
like a sleeve.
abducent n. (VI)
M. levator palpebrae
 Dorsal margin of the
By a wide tendon into the
Oculomotor n. (II)
Elevates the upper eyelid
Passes dorsal to t
superioris
optic canal
upper eyelid
dorsalis.
Internal smooth muscle of the eyeball (turn to p. 118)
M. ciliaris
Scleral ring (Anutus
Lens capsule by its zonular
Parasympathetic fibers
Composed of circular and
scterae)
fibers
in the short ciliary nn.
meridional fibers.
{from the oculomotor
lens
n., III)
M. sphincter pupillae
 Circular fibers encircling the free border of the pupil
 Parasympathetic fibers
 Constricts the pupil
 Srmooth muscle of ectodermal
passing in the oculo-
origin.
motor n. (III)
Radially out
Sympathetic fibers
Dilates the pupil
 Smooth muscle of ectodermal
origin.
Pharyngeal muscles: Attached by the dorsal median pharyngeal raphe to the pharyngeal tubercle of the occipital bone 
(turn to p. 102)
M. stylophar yngeus
Caudal contour of the
 Dorsolateral phary ngeal
Glossophary ngeal n.
Dilates the pharynx
It is the only dilator of the
caudalis
stylohyoid elerment
wall
(IX)
pharynx.
(stylohyoid bone) of
the hyoid apparatus
132
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Inmervation
Function
Comments
Muscles of the soft palate
M tensor veli palatini
 Muscular process of
Palatine aponeurosis
Mandibular n. (V3)
Tenses the palatine
Belly of the muscle is joined
the tympanic part of
{aponeurosis of the soft
aponeurosis
by connective tissue to the
the temporal bone
medial wall of the auditory
palate)
first stages of swallowing, it
dilates the lumen of the audi
tory tube, assting in the
equalization of air pressure
within the tympanic cavity.
M levator veli palatini
Muscular process of
Soft palate (palatine raphe)
 Pharyngeal plexus (IX
Elevates the soft palate
the tympanic part of
and X)
the temporal bone
 Rostral pharyngeal constrictors 
M pterygophar yngeus
Hamulus of the
 Pharyngeal raphe
Constricts the pharynx, draw-
 Passes Jlateral to the m. leva-
pterygoid bone
andX)
ing the roof of the pharynx
tor veli palatini.
rostrally
M. palatopharyngeus
 Palatine raphe, palatine Pharyngeal raphe and dor-
 Pharyngeal plexus (IX
Constricts the pharynx, draw-
Most of the rmuscle fibers
aponeurosis
 solateral pharyngeal wall
and X)
ing the roof of the pharynx
pass medial to the m. levator
rostrally; draws the soft palate
veli palatini.
caudally
 Middle pharyngeal constrictor
M. hyophar yngeus
 Thyrohyoid element
 Pharyngeal raphe
 Pharyngeal plexus (IX
Constricts the phary nx
Frequently in two parts.
(thyrohyoid bone)
and X)
 Caudal pharyngeal constrictors
M thyrophar yngeus
 Thyroid cartilage
 Pharyngeal raphe
 Pharyngeal plexus (IX
Constricts the pharynx
 Continuous rostrally with the
and X)
hyopharyngeus, caudally with
the cricopharyngeus.
M. cricopharyngeus
Cricoid cartilage
 Pharyngeal raphe
 Pharyngeal plexus (IX
Constricts the pharynx
Continuous rostrally with the
and X)
thyropharyngeus.
 Muscles of the tongue and hyoid apparatus (turn to p. 104)
 M lingualis proprius
 Intrinsic muscle of the tongue, having origin and 
Hypoglossal n. (XI)
 Intrinsic movement of the
Longitudinal, transverse, and
insertion within the tongue
tongue
 perpendicular fiber bundles.
Extrinsic muscles of the tongue
M. styloglossus
Stylohyoid elerment
Tongue; ts fibers are
Hypoglossal n. (XI)
Arches the base of the tongue
 Covers the lateral aspect of
(stylohyoid bone)
Jateral and extend toward
the stylohyoid and epihyoid
the apex
unilaterally, draws the tongue
 elements.
toward the side of the muscle
acting
M. hyoglossus
Basihyoid and thyro-
Tongue; its fibers pass be-
Hypoglossal n. (XI)
With the styloglossus, arches
The largest part of the muscle
hyoid elerments (basi-
tween the styloglossus and
the base of the tongue cau-
is at the root of the tongue.
hyoid and thyrohyoid
genioglossus mm. rostrodor-
bones)
sally toward the apex.
laterally, draws the tongue cau
doventrally toward the side of
the muscle acting
M. genioglossus
Medial aspect of the
Tongue; its fibers radiate fan- Hypoglossal n. (XI)
Depresses the central part of
body of the mandible
like in a paramedian line to
the tongue
 near the intermandibu-
the dorsurm of the tongue.
lar joint
Hyoid muscles
M. genichyoideus
Medial surface of the
 Basihyoid element (basihy-
Hypoglossal n. (XII)
 Draws the tongue and hyoid
Muscular basis of the floor of
body of the mandible
oid bone)
bone rostrally
the oral cavity.
near the intermandi-
bular joint, ventral to
the m. genioglossus
M thyrohycideus
Thyroid cartilage
Thyrohyoid element (thyro-
Branch from ansa cer-
 Draws the larynx rostrally to
Continues cranially from the
hyoid bone)
vicalis (XII and C1)
the base of the tongue, draws
attachment of the sternothy-
the hyoid apparatus caudally
roideus.
toward the larynx
Laryngeal muscles (intrinsic muscles of the larynx)
M. cricothyroideus
Ventrolateral arch of
 Caudal part of thyroid
Cranial laryngeal n.
Tenses the vocal ligaments,
the cricoid
lamina
branch of the vagus n.
narrows the ria glottidis
M. cricoar ytenoideus
Dorsal surface of the
Muscular process of the
Caudal laryngeal n.,
 Enlarges the rima glattidis
dorsalis
lamina of the cricoid
arytenoid cartilage
branch of the vagus n.
cartilage
M. cricoar ytenoideus
Rostral border of the
Muscular process of the
Caudal laryngeal n.,
 Narrows the rima glottidis
lateralis
cricoid arch dorsally
arytenoid cartilage
branch of the vagus n.
M. arytenoideus
Arcuate crest of the
Median tendon joining it to
Caudal laryngeal n.,
Narrows the ri
na glattidis
trans versus
arytenoid cartilage
the muscle of the opposite
branch of the vagus n.
side
M thyroarytenoideus:
 Cuneiform process of
Arytenoid cartilage rostral
Caudal laryngeal n.,
Enlarges the rima vestibuli
M. ventricularis,
the arytenoid cartilage
to the arytenoideus transver-
 branch of the vagus n.
(m. ventricularis); narrows
M. vocalis 
(rm. ventricularis), ven-
sus (m. ventricularis), vocal
the rima glottidis, tenses
tromedial internal
 process {m. vocalis)
the vocal fold {m. vocalis)
aspect of the thyroid
cartilage (m. vocalis)
3.3
Lymphology
Lymphocenter (lc.)
Location
Area/organs drained
Efferent
Comments
Page
or lymph node (ln.)
 by aff. lymphatics
lymphatics
 Parotid ln.
Beneath the rostral
Chiefly the superficial head region dorsal To medial retropharyn-
Palpable, especially when 92
1;
border of the parotid
to a line connecting the eye and ear.
geal In.
enlarged; deep nodes,
gland, ventral to the tem
when present, lie in the
poromandibular joint.
 parotid gland.
2)
Mandibular Inn.
Rostroventral to the
Superficial and deep parts of the face,
To medial retropharyn-
 Readily palpable
92
mandibular gl., dorsal
 tmuscles and glands ventral to the eye-
geal ln.
and ventraltothe facial v.
ear line
Retropharyngeal lymphocenter
Lateral retropharyngeal ln.
 Caudal to the parotid
p ay jo seare daap ue rradns 
To medial retropharyn-
3)
Inconstant
92
gland at the level of the
lymphatic pharyngeal ring, cranial
geal ln.
wing of the atlas
cervical muscles
4)
Medial retropharyngeal In.
 Deep to the sternocepha-
Afferent lymphatics from the parotid and To tracheal (jugular)
licus m., dorsolateral to
 mandibular Inn
ymphatic trunk
the pharynx
Superficial cervical lymphocenter
Superficial cervical lInn.
Cranial to the shoulder,
Superficial parts of the head, of the neck,
 To the venous angle
Readily palpable
14
deep to the omotransver-
 of the abdominal wall, and of the proxi-
{junction of internal and
sarius m.
mal (shoulder) extrermity of the thoracic
 external jugular vv.) or
limb
to the large lymphatic
trunks at the angle
Deep cervical lymphocenter
6
Cranial deep cervical In.
Craniodorsal to the
Deep parts of the neck, larynx, thyroid
To the next following
 Inconstant; danger of
14
thyroid gland
gl.,trachea, esophagus
deep cervical 1n. or to
confusion with the
the rmediastinal 1c.
 parathyroid gl.
Middle deep cervical In.
In the middle third 
Visceral structures of the neck
To the next following
Inconstant
14
of the neck
deep cervical 1n. or to
the rmediastinal lc.
Caudal deep cervical n.
 On the trachea cranial to Shoulder and arm (brachial) region
To the thoracic duct,
Inconstant
14
the first rib
right lymphatic duct,
tracheal lymphatic
trunk, or to the media-
stinal 1c.
Mediastinal lymphocenter
Cranial mediastinal lnn.
 Precardial mediastinum
Deep structures of the thorax; in part,
To terminal part of tra-
Middle and caudal
40
also neck, shoulder, pleura, thoracic
cheal (jugular) lymphatic mediastinal lymph nodes
viscera, afferents from 7), 8), 10),
are lacking.
12) - 14)
Ventral thoracic lymphocenter
10)
Cranial sternal 1n.
Cranial border of the m.
Thoracic wall, shoulder girdle, dia-
To cranial mediastinal
Caudal sternal Inn. and
40
transversus thoracis
 phragm, mediastinum, cranial mammary
nn.
cranial epigastric Inn. are
lacking.
Dorsal thoracic lymphocenter
11)
Intercostal In.
In the proximal 5h or 6*
Deep parts of the dorsum, of the shoulder; To cranial mediastinal
Often absent
40
intercostal space
abdominal muscles, aorta
Inn.
Bronchial lymphocenter
12)
Right tracheobronchial In.
Cranial to the right
Lung and other thoracic viscera
To cranial mediastinal
Cranial tracheo-
40
primary bronchus
Inn.
bronchial Inn. are lacking.
13)
Middle
 Dorsal at the bifurcation  Lung and other thoracic viscera
To cranial mediastinal
Pulmonary lInn. lie at the
40
tracheobronchial In.
of the trachea
Inn.
hilus of the lung.
14)
Left tracheobronchial 1n.
 Dorsal to the left
Lung and other thoracic viscera
To cranial mediastinal
Pulmonary lnn. lie at the
40
primary bronchus
Inn.
hilus of the lung.
Legend:
 Tracheal jugular lymphatic trunk
Vw  Venous angle
古
 Thoracic duct
Cc
 Cisterna chili
Tv
Visceral lymphatic trunk
 Lumbar lymphatic trunk 
- deeply placed
－ inconstant 
 SUperficial
134
Lymphocenter (lc.)
Location
 Area/organs drained
Efferent
Comments
Page
 or lymph node (ln.)
 by aff. lymphatics
lymphatics
Axillary lymphocenter
Axillary In.
Caudal to the shoulder
 Superficial parts of the thoracic wall and
Venous angle or terminal Cubital lInn. and axillary
15)
18 and
joint along the lateral
thoracic vein
22
abdominal mammary gland complexes
trunk or thoracic duct
mae costae) are lacking
in the dog.
16)
Accessory axillary In.
(2 crm caudal to the axil- As for 15)
As for 15)
 Palpable, inconstant 
18 and
jary In.)
22
Celiac lymphocenter 
17)
Hepatic (portal) Inn.
 Beside the portal vein
Lymph vessels from all areas supplied by
Tothe visceral lymphatic Lymph nodes of the liver
52 and
the celiac a.
trunk
58
18)
Gastric In.
On the lesser curvature
Stomach
To hepatic Inn. or
Inconstant
of the stomach near the
splenic Inn.
pylorus
19)
 Splenic Inn.
At the branching of the
 Spleen and afferents from the gastric In.
To the visceral lymphatic Group of small lymph
52
splenic a. and v.
trunk
nodes
20)
 Pancreaticoduodenal ln.
Between the cranial part
Duodenum, pancreas, greater omentum,
To hepatic lnn.
Inconstant
53
of the duodenum and
and stomach
the pancreas
 Cranial mesenteric lymphocenter
21)
Jejunal lnn.
Proximal mesojejunum
 Organs supplied by the cranial mes-
52
enteric a.
nodes
22)
Colic Inn.
Mesocolon of ascending
Ascending and transverse colon
Visceral lymphatic trunk Ileocolic and cecal Inn.
52
colon and transverse
are lacking in the dog.
colon
 Caudal mesenteric lymphocenter
23)
Caudal mesenteric Inn.
 Mesocolon of descending Organs supplied by the caudal
Visceral lymphatic trunk A vesical ln. is lacking in
52
colon
mesenteric a.
the dog.
Lumbar lymphocenter
24)
 Lurmbar aortic Inn.
 Dorsal, ventral and lateral Deep portions of the dorsal abdominal
 Tothe lumbar lymphatic Proper lumbar, renal,
62 and
to the abdominal aorta
walf, of the abdominal and pelvic cavi
trunk or directly to the
 ovarian and testicular
68
and the caudal vena cava
ties; urinary and genital organs; adrenal
cisterna chyli
Inn. are absent in the
-  o se rsa
8op
center
liosacral lymphocenter
25)
Medial iliac lnn.
At the origin of the deep
Pevic wall,pelvic organs, possibly testis;
To lumbar lymphatic
 Lateral iliac, anorectal
62 and
circumflex iliac a. and v.
trunk or lumbar aortic
and uterine lnn. are lack-
68
Jymphnodesfthe pelvic imb
Inn.
ing.
26)
Sacral lnn.
 Between right and left
 Rectum, genital organs and neighboring
To medial iliac Inn.
Obturator In. is lacking
62 and
iliac arteries at their
areas
 in the dog.
68
origin
Supf. inguinal lymphocenter
27
Supf. inguinal lnn.
At the division of the
Skin and cutaneous structures of the ven-
To the medial iliac Inn.
Palpable. Epigastric,
32 and
external pudendal a. and tral abdomen, scrotum, pelvic outlet, tail,
subiliac, and accessory
68
v. into caudal supf. epi-
 pelvic limb, caudal mammary gland com
 coxal In. and lymph
plexes and parts of the external genital
 nodes of the paralumbar
organs.
fossa are absent in the
Jevel of the inguinal
Bop
mamma
Popliteal lymphocenter
28)
 Popliteal lnn.
 Upon the lateral saphe-
Pelvic limb distal to the stifle joint
To medial iliac lnn.
Palpable
83 and
nous vein as it ermerges
84
caudally between the m.
biceps femoris and m.
semitendinosus
28
2.6
25
2424
CC
Dt
JOTASUL
Minuten
135
Cranial Nerves
Nerve
 Figure
Name (Fiber Type)
Innervation
Comments
Olfactory n. (special sense: olfaction)
 Olfactory region in nasal cavity
Orgin: olfactory bulb; leaves skull by cribri-
form plate
(1)
Vomeronasal n. (special sense:
Vomeronasal organ
olfaction)
119.26
 Optic n. (special sense: sight)
Optic part of retina
 Developmentally an evagination of the
diencephalon; leaves skull by optic foramen 
IⅢI
Oculomotor n. (s, m, psy)*
 Origin: mesencephalon; leaves skull by
 orbital fissure
(2) 99.11
 Dorsal branch (m)
Dorsal rectus, levator palp. sup., retractor
bulbi muscles
(3)99.12
Ventral branch (m, psy)
 Medial and ventral recti, ventral oblique
muscles
IV
99.6
Trochlear n. (m)
 Dorsal oblique muscle
 Origin: mesencephalon; leaves skull by
orbital fissure
Trigeminal n.
Origin: rhombencephalon; nerve of 1st 
 pharyngeal arch
V1
Ophthalmic n. (s)
Skin surrounding eyes, ethmoid bone,
Leaves skull by orbital fissure 
lacrimal gl., upper eyelid
(4) 99.10
Nasociliary n. (s)
(5) 99.8
Ethmoidal n. (s)
 Olfactory area of nasal cavity
Enters the skull through ethmoidal foramen,
 then passes through lamina cribrosa reaching
nasal ca vity
(6) 99.22
Infratrochlear n. (s)
Conjunctiva, 3rd eyelid, lacrimal caruncle
 Supplies lacrimal caruncle and third eyelid
 and skin near medial angle of eye
(7]) 99.9
Long cilicary nn. (s, psy)
Iris, cornea, ciliary m.
 Receive psy.* fibers from ciliary gangl.
(8) 99.5
Lacrimal n (s, psy, sy)
 Lacrimal gl., skin and conjunctiva near lat.
 Usually double; receives psy. fibers from
angle of eye
 pterygopalatine gangl. and sy. fibers from int.
carotid plexus
(9)  99.4
Frontal n. (s)
 Skin of forehead and upper eyelid
 Perforates periorbita and continues as
supraorbital n.
V2
97.16
Maxillary n. (s)
 Leaves skull by round foramen
{10)  97.14
Zygomatic n.
(11) 97.12
 Zygomaticotemporal br. (s, psy)
 Skin of temporal region, lacrimal gl.
 Receives psy. fibers from pterygopalatine
gangl.
{12)97.13
Zygomaticofacial br. (s)
Lower eyelid, tarsal gll.
Leave orbit near lat. angle of eye
(13) 97.17
 Pterygopalatine n. (s, psy)
 Receives psy. fibers from pterygopalatine
103.k
gangl.
(14) 97.20
Greater palatine n. (s, psy)
 Mucosa and gll. of hard palate
Passes through gr palatine canal
(15) 97.19
Lesser palatine n. (s, psy)
 Mucosa and gll. of soft palate 
{16)
97.21
 Caudal nasal n. (s)
 Mucosa of nasal cavity and gums 
 Passes through sphenopalatine for.
(17)
97.15
Infraorbital n. (s)
103.m
brr. upper teeth
V3
97.5
 Mandibular n. (s, m)
Leaves skull by oval for.
(18) 97.4
Masticatory n. (m)
(19)  97.2
Deep temporal nn. (m)
Temporalis muscle
(20)97.3
Masseteric n. (m)
Masseter muscle
Passes laterally through mandibular notch
(21)
Medial pterygoid n. (m)
Med. pterygoid muscle
At its origin lies the small otic gangl.
(22)
Tensor tympani n. (m)
 Tensor tympani muscle
(23)
Tensor veli palatini n. (m)
 Tensor veli palatini
(24)
Lateral pterygoid n. (m)
Lat. pterygoid muscle
(25)  97.7
Auriculotemporal n. (s, sy, psy)
Receives psy fibers from otic gangl.
(26)
Transverse facial br. (s)
 Detaches brr. to temporomandibular joint 
roma ndibular joint
(27)
Communicating br. (s)
Carries sensory fibers to dorsal and ventral
The sensory fibers are thus distributed to the
 buccal brr. of facial n (VII)
side of the face
(28)
Parotid brr.(s, psy)
Parotid gl.
 Bring psy. fibers to the parotid gl.
(29)  97.1
Buccal n. (s, psy)
 Buccal gll. and mucosa of buccal part of
 Receives psy. fibers from otic gangl.
oral cavity
(30)  97.10
Mucosa of apex and body of tongue
 Receives psy. and gustatory fibers via chorda
tympani (VII)
(31) 97.11
Sublingual n. (s)
Mucosa of prefrenular part of oral cavity
(32) 97.6
Inferior alveolar n. (s)
 Lower teeth and gums
 Enters mandible by mandibular for.
(33)
Mental n. (s)
 Skin of lower lip and chin
 Leaves mandi ble by mental for.
(34)  97.9
Mylohyoid n. (m)
Mylohoideus muscle
(35)
Rostral digastric br. (m)
Rostral belly of digastricus
(36)
Submental brr. (s)
 Skin of rostral part of intermandibular space
136
 aueduaseied = Asd toaqieduas = As tonou = u tAiosuas =
Cranial Nerves
Nerves No. I, VIll (1)-(3), (27), (28), (37),
(38), (49), (54)-(57) are not pictured.
(Nerves No. VI-Vll, IX-Xll and (37)-(53) see p. 138)
Legend:
A Cribriform plate
K Hypoglossal canal 
a  Olfactory region
j   Vallate and foliate papillae 
r'  Spiral ganglion 
B Optic canal
L Lacrimal gland
b Retina
k Geniculate ganglion
S
Sympathetic trunk
C Maxillary foramen
M Nasal glands 
C  Fungiform papillae 
1  Proximal ganglia 
s' Sympathetic ganglion
 C' Infraorbital foramen
 N Palatine glands in soft 
d   Ciliary ganglion 
m Distal (petrosal ganglion
Vagosympathetik trunk
D Ethmoidal foramen
palate
d' Short ciliary nerves
m' Tympanic nerve
u
 Spinal root of accessory nerve 
E Orbital fissure
 N' Palatine glands in hard 
e
 Pterygopalatine ganglion
n Distal (nodose) ganglion
v  Ansa cervicalis
F Round foramen
palate
e' Orbital branches
0 Carotid body
G Oval foramen
 O Buccal glands
e'" Nerve of pterygoid canal
p Carotid sinus
● Neuron of special senses 
G' Jugular foramen 
P Sublingual gland
f  Sublingual ganglion
q  Vestibular nerve 
Sensory neuron
H Stylomastoid foramen 
Q Mandibular gland
 g  Mandibular ganglion
q' Superior vestibular ganglion 
● Parasympathetic neuron 
 I  Internal acoustic meatus 
R Parotid gland
h  Trigeminal ganglion 
q" Inferior vestibular ganglion
 Sympathetic neuron 
JForamenmagnum
 Otic ganglion
rCochlear nerve
i
● Motor neuron 
1  Minor petrosal nerve 
137
Cranial Nerves
Nerve
Figure
 Name (Fiber Type)
Innervation
Comments
VI
L'66
Abducent n. (m)
Lateral rectus, lateral portion of retractor
 Origin: rhombencephalon; leaves skull by
bulbi
orbital fissure
VII
93.26
 Facial n. (m, s, psy, gustatory)
Origin: medulla oblongata; enters int.
acoustic meatus, bears geniculate gangl. in
facial canal; leaves skull by stylomastoid for.;
n. of 2nd pharyngeal arch
(37)
Greater petrosal n. (psy)
Gll. of nasal cavity and palate
 Runs in petrosal canal; joins deep petrosal
n.(sy.) to form n. of petrosal canal which goes 
to pterygopalatine gangl.
(38)
Stapedial n. (m)
Stapedius muscle
(39)
Chorda tympani (gustatory, psy)
Salivary gll.
 Lea ves petrous temporal bone by petrotym-
 panic fissure and joins lingual n. (V3)
(40)  93.d
 Internal auricular br. (s)
 Skin on int. surtace of external ear
 Is joined by auricular br. of vagus
below
{41)  93.23
Caudal auricular n. (m)
 Muscles of external ear
 Is joined by dorsal brr. of first two cervical
nn.
(42) 93.22
Auriculopalpebral n. (m)
 Orbicularis oculi, interscutularis, zygoma-
 Joins brr.of auriculotemporal n. (V3)
ticus, levator nasolabialis, mm. of external
ear
(43) 93.25
 Dorsal buccal br. (m)
 Muscles of upper lip and nose
 Receives communic. br. from auriculotempo-
ral n. (V3); n. injured in facial paralysis 
(44) 93.28
Ventral buccal br. (m)
Muscles of cheek and lower lip
(45) 93.27
Cervical br. (m)
Parotidoauricularis, cut. mm. of head and
 Unites with ventral brr. of cervical nn.
(Ramus colli)
neck
(46)
Digastric br. (m)
 Caudal belly of digastricus
(47)
Stylohyoideus brr. (m)
Stylohyoideus
VII
121.a
Vestibulocochlear n. (Special sense:
 Macula of utriculus and sacculus,
 Origin: rhombencephalon; into petrous tem-
balance and hearingy
 ampullary crests, spiral gangl. of cochlea
 poral bone through int. acoustic meatus
IX
103.9
Glossopharyngeal n. (m, s, psy,
 Origin: medulla oblongata; leaves skull by
gustatory)
jugular for.; n. of 3rd pharyngeal arch
(48) 103.10
Pharyngeal br. (s, m)
 Pharyngeal mucosa, stylopharyngeus
Takes part in torming pharyngeal plexus 
(49)
Carotid sinus br. (s)
 Baroreceptors in wall of carotid sinus,
chemoreceptors in carotid body
(50) 103.13
 Lingual brr (s, gustatory)
Mucosa of root of tongue and pharynx 
Communicates with lingual n. (V3)
X
103.8
Vagus (s, m, psy)
 Origin: medulla oblongata; leaves skull by
jugular for; n. of 4th pharyngeal arch
(51)
Auricular br. (s)
 Skin of external acoustic meatus
Communicates with int. auricular br. (VII)
(52) 103.10
 Pharyngeal br. (s, m)
 Pharyngeal mm. except stylopharyngeus;
 Takes part in forming pharyngeal plexus
mucosa of pharynx
(53)103.15
Cranial laryngeal n. (s, m)
Arises from distal gangl.
(54)
Internal br (s)
Laryngeal mucosa rostral to glottis
 Passes into larynx through thyroid tor.
(55)
External br. (m)
Cricothyroideus
Cardiac brr. (psy)
Heart
49.1
 Recurrent (caudal) laryngeal n.
 Brr. to trachea and esophagus; laryngeal
Yoau aul dn sassed txeuout ui snsea saaa7
103.20
(m, s, psy)
mm. except cricothyroideus; laryngeal
mucosa caudal to glottis
XI
13.13
Accessory n. (m)
 Origin of cranial root: medulla oblongata,
103.11
 Cranial root
spinal root: cervical spinal cord; leaves skull
Spinal root
by jugular for.
(56)
Internal br. (m)
Connects with vagus
(57)
External br. (m)
Dorsal br. (m)
Trapezius, cleidocervicalis,
Ventral br. (m)
sternocleidomastoideius
XII
103.e
Hypoglossal n. (m)
 Intrinsic tongue musculature; genio- stylo-,
 Origin: medulla oblongata; leaves skull by
and hyoglossi
hypoglossal canal; forms ansa cervicalis with
ventral br. of C1
138
 aueduaseied = Asd toaqieduas = As tonou = u taosuas = 1
Cranial Nerves
Brain:
 Telencephalon
ODiencephalon
 Mesencephalon
 Metencephalon
Myelencephalon
$
X
W1
V3
Legend:
A Cribriform plate
K Hypoglossal canal 
a  Olfactory region
1  Minor petrosal nerve 
r  Cochlear nerve
B Optic canal
L Lacrimal gland
b Retina
 Vallate and foliate papillae
r
 Spiral ganglion 
C Maxillary foramen
M Nasal glands 
C  Fungiform papillae 
 k  Geniculate ganglion
S Sympathetic trunk 
C' Infraorbital foramen
 N Palatine glands in soft 
d   Ciliary ganglion 
1   Proximal ganglia
t
Vagosympathetik trunk
D Ethmoidal foramen
palate
d' Short ciliary nerves
m Distal (petrosal ganglion
u
 Spinal root of accessory nerve
 E Orbital fissure
 N' Palatine glands in hard 
é  Pterygopalatine ganglion 
m' Tympanic nerve 
 Ansa cervicalis
F Round foramen
palate
e' Orbital branches
n Distal (nodose) ganglion
G Oval foramen
 O Buccal glands
e'" Nerve of pterygoid canal
o Carotid body
● Neuron of special senses 
G' Jugular foramen 
P Sublingual gland 
 f  Sublingual ganglion 
p Carotid sinus
 Sensory neuron
H Stylomastoid foramen
 Q Mandibular gland
 g  Mandibular ganglion
q  Vestibular nerve 
● Parasympathetic neuron 
 I  Internal acoustic meatus 
R Parotid gland
h
 Trigeminal ganglion
q' Superior vestibular ganglion 
lSympathetic neuron
 JForamen magnum
i  Otic ganglion
q"Inferior vestibular ganglion
●Motor neuron
品
中
139
General Anatomy
1. Osteology: Membranous and Chondral Ossification; Growth of Bones in Length and Diameter
a) MEMBRANOus OssIFICATION is direct Ossification. It takes place chiefly in
form a sleeve of trabecular bone (Anulus osseus perichondralis, —3)
the formation of the flat bones of the skull. In this process the mesenchy-
around the cartilaginous diaphysis. This provides mechanical stabilization.
 mal cells of the embryonic mesenchyme differentiate into bone forming
The endochondral ossification that follows takes place within the cartilagi-
cells, osteoblasts (A), which give rise to the primary trabeculae of woven
 nous diaphysis as a primary or diaphysial ossification center (see clinical-
bone (B). The osteoblast synthesizes the organic osseous matrix or osteoid,
functional anatomy). It begins with the sprouting of perforating blood ves-
that is, the fundamental osseous substance with its associated collagen
 sels (21) into the primordial cartilaginous skeleton in which the perichon-
fibers. The osteoblast becomes enveloped by the osteoid and, with pro-
dral sleeve is perforated at the place that willater become the nutrient
 gressive mineralization of the osteoid, is sequestered in a small chamber, a
 canal (22). The perforating blood vessels with surrounding connective tis-
lacuna. At this stage, the osteoblast has matured to become an osteocyte
sue form the primary bone marrow, which is located in the primary
(C). The osteoid is mineralized by an orderly deposition of calcium phos-
medullary cavity (7). The latter arises by the activity of chondroclasts (2)
2
 after destruction of the hypertrophied cartilaginous cells and mineralized
 cartilaginous matrix in the zona resorbens (16). Osteoblasts (5) adhere to
of primary trabecular bone into secondary compact bone is accomplished
the remnants of cartilaginous matrix (19) and, with the formation of
by the layer of osteoblasts that remains apposed to the surface of the tra-
 osseous matrix (20), differentiate into osteocytes (8) that lie within the pri-
becular bone. The flat bones increase in circumference (girth) by the depo-
mary osseous trabeculae (18). Owing to their mineral content, the ossifi-
sition of bone tissue at their margins. They increase in thickness by the
cation centers of the developing long bones are readily observed in radio-
deposition of bone upon the external and internal surfaces. Remodeling is
 graphs. The mineralized matrix is only a litle permea ble to x-rays. On the
 accomplished by osteoclasts (D), specialized multinucleated cells that are
 other hand, the cartilage that surrounds the ossification centers is much
capable of resorbing bone. The apposed margins of most of the flat bones
 more permea ble to x-rays. Later, blood vessels penetrate into the cartilagi-
of the skull have not formed a bony union at birth and remain joined by
 nous epiphysis and an ossification center is formed by mineralization. In
fibrous tissue. At birth, the larger of these spaces occupied by the connect-
general, this ossification center appears later and is designated a secondary
 s ns imu s aassaq eu ansi sn 
 or epiphysial ossification centre (12). From the epiphysial ossification cen-
irregular circumscribed areas designated fontanelles. The lack of bony
ter, ossification extends peripherally, especially toward the diaphysis. Inthe
fusion allows for some compression of the skullas the head passes through
region between the diaphysial and epiphysial ossification centers, thus
the birth canal at parturition.
between the diaphysis and epiphysis, cartilage persists for a time as the
physial cartilage (13, —growth cartilage). This cartilage is at first unmin-
eralized and therefore easily recognized in radiographs. From its reserve
zone (14), it furnishes hypertrophied, vesicular, carilage cells (chondro-
 cytes) that are arranged in short columns (15) and compressed in the direc-
tion of the zona resorbens. Here they are destroyed by chondroclasts and
replaced by osseous tissue. The ossification zone of the primary ossification
 center progresses from the diaphysis in the direction of the epiphysis and
the secondary ossifiction center of the epiphysis advances toward the dia-
physis. The result is that the physial cartilage becomes thinner with increas-
ing age. The primary osseous trabeculae of primitive cancellous bone with
their central remnants of carilaginous ground matrix are transformed by
beculae (see p. 140). In the region of compact bone, they are formed
 according to the structural principle of lamellar bone and contain regular-
ly arranged osteocytes, collagenous fibers and mineralized osseous ground
substance but, different from the primary osseous trabeculae, contain no 
 cartilaginous ground substance.
 The metaphysis (17) is the region of diaphysial transformation of the pri-
mary into secondary osseous trabeculae. It is located at the epiphysial ends
 of the diaphysis where the bone begins to expand and there is an intensive
mineralization process.
Apophyses (10) are processes of bone that are the insertion of many mus-
cles (other definitions are used). Apophyses first appear as a cartilaginous 
 process of the original carilage model of bone, and a center of ossification
develops within the apophysis in the same manner as in the epiphysis. As
long as bone growth continues, part of the cartilage remains as an apo-
 physial cartilage (11) between the ossification center and the main body of
5
the forming bone.
c) GRowTH IN LENGTH oF LoNG BoNEs is assured as long as the zone of pro-
 liferating chondrocytes remains active. When the degeneration of hyper-
6
 trophic chondrocytes and their replacement with trabecular and compact
A Osteoblast
C Osteocyte
 B Trabecula of woven bone
 bone is no longer compensated by chondrocyte proliferation, the zones of
D Osteoclast
(Textus osseous reticulofibrosus)
 r ra jo aissd au a pe as s au a
length of the long bone. This osseous tissue that replaces the radiolucent
1  b) CHONDRAL OssIFICATION is indirect Ossification. It is characterized by the
formation of a cartilaginous primordial skeleton that is then replaced by
 growth plate cartilage appears on a radiograph as a radiopaque epiphyseal
bone. The bones that form the base of the skull, the vertebrae, ribs, and
line.
 Sternum, and the bones of the limbs are formed by chondral ossification,
 d) GRowTH IN CiRcuMFERENcE of the bone results primarily from the appo-
appearing first as a cartilage model of the future bone and then being
sition of bony lamellae produced on the inner aspect of the thin osteogenic
replaced by bone. Chondral ossification takes place in two stages in which
a perichondral ossification precedes endochondral ossification. In the case
 pled with an internal resorption of osseous tissue at the margin of the
of the long bones of the limbs, which have an epiphysis (1) at each end and
 medullary cavity results in an enlargement of the cavity while increasing
a bone-shaft or diaphysis (4) between them, perichondral ossification is
the circumference of the cortical bone. At the metaphysis, growth in thick-
seen only in the diaphyseal region. The cells of the perichondrium of the 
 ness is completed in a different manner Here, new bone tissue is laid down
diaphysis of the cartilage model differentiate into osteoblasts,transforming
internally on the perichondral bone sleeve; whereas, on the external,
the perichondrium into a periosteum (6). Perichondral osification pro-
 periosteal surface a resorption of bone takes place. (Fracture repair, see
ceeds in the manner of membranous ossification in that the osteoblasts
clinical-functional anatomy.)
8
140
Chondral Ossification
12 Secondary ossification centre
[epiphysial]
Joint capsule
Epiphysis
13 Physial cartilage:
14 Reserve zone
Proliferative zone
15
 Columns of chondrocytes
Hypertrophic zone 
Perichondral osseous ring
16 Zona resorbens
17 Metaphysis
4 Diaphysis
[Ossification zone]
 18 Primary osseous trabecula
Osteoblast
19 Cartilaginous matrix 
Periosteum-
Primary
 20 Osseous matrix
center of 
Fibrous layer
Dssification
[diaphysiale]
Osteogenic layer
Primary medullary cavity
 21 Perforating blood vessel
 22 Nutrient canal
Osteocyte
Vasa periostalia
Osteoclast
Femur (juvenile dog)
(Greater trochanter)
(Head)
piphy
10 Apophysis
Physial cartilage
11
Apophysial cartilage
Diaphysis
Compact bone
Spongy bone
Medullary cavity
141
2. Osteology: Structure and Form of Bone and Cartilage
Bone tissue consists of osteocytes and mineralized osseous ground sub-
lage. The free surface of articular cartilage is not covered by perichondri-
stance (osseous matrix) with systems of collagenous fibers. The dry matter
um.
of a fully differentiated bone is made up of one-third organic and two-
II. The vessels of bone run as fine periosteal arteries (22) in the depth of
thirds inorganic constituents. After demineralization the bone retains its
the periosteum. Perforating branches (24) enter the surface of the bone
external form, but its rigidity is lost and it becomes flexible. In contrast,
eun seue aq auoq aui iaua sassa aui 'isone auos aq paindsip sisi
 uaoq asea pe aa si so so si jo pa a
lead to the central canal (7) of the osteon, where they are named HAVER-
lamellar bone that has arisen secondarily is found particularly in the com-
 SIAN vessels. The transverse canals connecting the osteons are VOLK-
q  ai l in ass soq i a jo ans iod
MANN's canals (17, —Canales perforantes), which contain VOLK-
remains for a long time after birth as the sutures of the skull.
MANN'S vessels. Blood passes by slender branches from the capillaries to
a) The HARo PoRTIONs OF THE BoNE are the compact substance that forms
the periosteal veins (23). Long bones are supplied by diaphysial, meta-
the wall of the medullary cavity of long bones, the cortical substance of the
physial, epiphysial (notillustrated) and periosteal vessels (see clinical-func-
epiphysial surface and the surface of the short bones, and the trabecular
tional anatomy). In young individuals the blood supply of the epiphysis is
meshwork of spongy substance in the interior of the bone.
totally separated from that of the diaphysis by the physial cartilage. Fol-
lowing closure ofthe physial line and completion of growth inlength, anas-
I. The compact substance (27) consists of lamellar osseous tissue. Osteons
tomoses form between the diaphysial and metaphysial vessels. Periosteal
(14) are the predominant structural units of the lamellar bone tissue. They
 nerves (23) accompany the larger vessels.
 xa a e (   xa  q 
face of the compact substance and the intermal circumferential lamellae
 IV. Bone marrow is located in the medullary cavity (13) and in the
 medullary spaces (9) of the spongy bone. In the fetus and juvenile organ-
(28) at the boundary to the medullary cavity and the spongy bone tissue.
The osteons are up to 2 cm long and, in the vicinity of their central canal,
With increasing age, the red bone marrow is present preferentially in short
consist of osteonal lamellae (16) that are adapted to one another. Osteo-
 and flat bones. In long bones, yellow bone marrow predominates. In cases
Cytes lie between these lamellae. The lamellae ofthe osteon contain collage-
 of severe blood loss, the yellow marrow can differentiate into red blood cell
nous fibers in their mineralized osseous ground substance. (A comparable
forming red marrow. With very old or emaciated animals, the yellow mar-
structural principle is found in reinforced concrete where rigidity, the con-
 crete or mineral salts within the bone, and flexibility, the steel rods or col-
row is transformed irreversibly into a grayish, glassy, gelatinous marrow.
lagenous fibers, complement each other to make the structure functionally
c) With respect to the SHAPE oF BoNEs, we distinguish long bones (most of
5
 complete.) The collagenous fibers (15) alter their course of direction from
the limb bones), short bones (tarsal and carpal bones), irregular bones (ver-
one osteon-lamella to another osteon-lamella in the manner of a flat and
tebrae) and flat bones (certain cranial and facial bones). In the short and
steeply winding right-hand and left-hand screw (like the structural princi-
flat bones, a thin layer of cortical (compact) substance surrounds the
ple of plywood with differently directed wood grain in each of the individ-
 spongy bone. A marrow cavity is not present. In the long bones, the mar-
ual glued layers). Between the osteons are interstitial lamellae (8), which
row cavity enlarges with increasing age. The manner of ossification is dif-
 are the morphological result of the constant and regular restructure of
 ferent in the different bones. Long bones ossify predominantly by endo-
bone. Remodelling of bone takes place lifelong. In the growth phase, bone
 chondral ossification (epiphysis and diaphysis) and in the diaphysis also
formation predominates. With age, loss of bone predominates and is
aud rsauia on rus aiss suoq s pud
responsible for an increasing fragility of bone.
endochondrally. Flat bones develop by desmal (membranous) ossification
 or by perichondral ossification. The vertebrae ossfy with three ossification
I1. Corical (or compact) bone substance (12) occurs as a superficial layer
centers inthe body of the vertebra (two epiphyses with a center for the dia-
in short bones and epiphyses.
 physis in between), which is formally comparable to long bones.
IIL. The spongy substance (6) lies internal to the compact substance and
d) SesAMoip BoNEs are special skeletal components on the basis of their 
6
consists only in places of atypical lamellar osseous tissue. A trajectorial
 development within tendons (sometimes in association with the joint cap-
structure can be recognized in that the trabeculae, lamellae, or tubules of
sule), their function in protecting the tendon, and the absence of a cambi-
the spongy bone are arranged according to lines of pressure and tension
um (osteogenic) layer of the periosteum. They are located in the region of
(11), leaving free medullary spaces (Cellulae medullares) that contain bone
joints, usually in a tendon (e.g., the patella), or as a gliding surface deep to
marrow. ( This structural principle permits reduction in weight. For exam-
a tendon (e.g., plantar at the distal interphalangeal joint) and thus are con-
ple, in the structure of high-voltage towers, there is a reduction of struc-
 nected to the underlying bone by ligaments. Some are present as sesamoid
tural materials while retaining great strength. This is comparable to the
 cartilages and for that reason are designated sesamoides.
structure of spongy bone.) In some cranial ones the spongy bone (diploe) is 
 e) ViscERAL BoNEs are present, for example, as the os penis of the male dog
considerably reduced or it is absent as in the pneumatic bones of the
 and the os cordis of the ox.
paranasal sinuses. Some bones, for example, the petrous temporal bone, or
the mandible of the elephant, consist chiefly of compact bone with com-
f) CARTILAGE TissuE is an avascular supporting tissue that consists ofchon-
7
 plete or nearly complete absence of spongy substance.
 drocytes and an intercellular matrix. The matrix contains connective tissue
fibers and a more or less firm cartilaginous ground substance (in particu-
 b) The SorT Tissues oF BoNE are the periosteum,the articular cartilage,the
lar, chondroitin sulphate). On its surface, the cartilage is covered by a vas-
vessels and the bone marrow.
cular perichondrium, which is lacking on articular cartilage. Cartilage tis-
2  1. The periosteum (18) consists of a superficial fbrous layer (20), from
anss aaoddns reisaa jo adouud au oi suioe painns si ans
which perforating fibers (19) radiate into the compact substance, and of an
(turgor tissue) in that, the turgor properties of the cells with the surround-
osteogenic layer (21, —Cambium) rich in cells and bearing numerous ves-
ing ground substance and on the other hand the tension-resistance of the
collagenous fibers provides a functionally complete mechanism. Fibers of
sels and nerves. In the region of a joint, the periosteum is continuous with
the fibrous layer of the joint capsule. Endosteum (10) lines the walls of the
cartilage are collagenous and elastic, which characteristically differ in mor-
 phology, amount and direction in the different regions of the body and in
medullary cavity and the medullary spaces. It is much thinner than the
 the three different types of cartilage. Collagenous fibers are predominant-
periosteum and contains precursor cells capable of forming osteoblasts, as
ly trajectorially arranged, following lines of pressure and tension. In hya-
well as osteoblasts and osteoclasts.
line cartilage (magnified inset on the left side of the figure on the opposite
 II. The articular cartilage (1) consists of a non-mineralized superficial zone
(2) from which collagenous fibers run tangential to the surface and then,
 from the under-lying bone toward the articular surface and returning again
by change of their course, penetrate deeply into the intermediate zone (3)
to the bone. In the meshes between the collagenous fiber-bundles, the car-
and into the even more deeply located mineralized deep zone (4). The bor-
tilage cells lie in groups or territories within a lacuna surrounded by a cap-
der between the mineralized deep layer of the articular cartilage and the
sule of cartilage-matrix. Collagenous fibers occur in all three types of car-
osseous tisue (5) is irregular and aids in preventing slippage of the carti-
tilage (hyaline, elastic, and fibro-cartilage).
142
Femur (Homo sapiens)
(Head)
11  Lines of tension
12 Cortical substance
1  Articular cartilage
 2 Superficial zone
 3 Intermediate zone
4Deepzone
5 Osseous tissue
13 Medullary cavity
Lamellar osseous tissue
(after Benninghoff)
14 Osteon
15
Collagenous fiber
6Spongysubsta
16
 Osteonal lamella
17 Perforating canal
18 Periosteum
9Medullary sp
19  Perforating fibers
10Endosteun
20Fibrous layer
21
Osteogenic layer
[Cambium] 
22 Periosteal a.
23 Periosteal v.
 24   Perforating branch
25 Periosteal n.
 26 Extermal circumferential
lamella
28
Internal circumferential
lamella
143
3. Arthrology: The Connections of Bones and the Form of Joints
1
 a) The CoNNEcTION oF THE BoNEs comprise the synarthroses: fibrous and
located, gelatinous mucleus pulposus. The latter is a remnant of the chorda
cartilaginous joints and synostoses, which lack a joint space; and the true
 dorsalis (notochord) of the embryo.
joints, synovial joints or diarthroses.
d) Corresponding to their CoMPosTioN of two or several bones, the joints
I. Fibrous joints are: 1. Syndesmoses (e.g., crural interosseous membrane);
are classified as a simple joint (two bones make up the joint) or composite
2. sutures (sutures between the flat bones of the skull); and 3. gomphoses
(complex) joint (more than two bones make up the joint).
(the union of the cementum of the tooth to the bone of the alveolus by the 
e) JoINT FoRM (see also the text-illustrations.)
 periodontium (periodontal ligament).
 II. Cartilaginous joints are: 1. The synchondrosis {union by hyaline carti-
I. A plane joint is present between the articular processes of the vertebrae,
 whose articular surfaces are flat and glide on each other. The tight sacroil.
lage; e.g., between the late osifying parts of the sternum, for example, the
iac joint is a special form as the irregularjoint surfaces, which are fitted to
manubriosternal synchondrosis); and 2. the symphysis (joint formed by
fibrocartilage, e.g., the pelvic symphysis).
aui ui Aed ieui yons siuawel uio! jous Aiaa kq Piay are dauoue auo
 joint is hardly possible (amphiarthrosis).
Il. The synostosis is formed by fusion of two or more individual bones in
which the union is made by bone (e.g., sacrum).
 II. A spheroid or ball-and-socket joint has a spherical articular depression,
which is less than a hemisphere (e.g., the shoulder joint).
 IV. The synovial or true joint has an articular space. This space is bounded
by the ends of two bones (simple joint; e.g., shoulder joint) or of three or
 Ill. An enarthrosis is a special form of spheroid joint in which the articular
more bones (composite or compound joint; e.g., stifle joint; see also p. 87).
 socket encroaches upon the corresponding articular head beyond its equa-
The articular cavity (1) containing the synovia is surrounded by an articu-
tor (e.g., coxal joint of human beings). According to Henschel, E. (Berlin),
the coxal joint of the dog is not an enarthrosis but a simple spheroid joint.
2
3
is provided by the joint ligaments (4, 6). The ends of the articulating bones 
 IV. In a trochoid joint, a hollow *cylinder', the atlas, rotates around a fixed
 are covered by articular cartilage (3). The fibrous, layer of the periosteum
4
articular projection, the dens of the axis, forming, in this example, the
is continuous with the external, fbrous, layer of the joint capsule. The
atla nto-a xial joint.
internal, synovial, layer of the joint capsule lines the fibrous capsule and
extends to the margins of the articular cartilages. It has two types of loose-
V. An ellipsoid joint has an ellipsoid articular elevation (Condylus occipi-
ly arranged synovial cells: 1. The secretory synovial cells determine the
talis) and a correspondingly formed articular socket (articular cavity ofthe
composition of the joint fluid, synovia, which leaves the blood capillaries
 atlas), forming thus the atlanto-occipital articulation.
as an ultrafiltrate and enters the joint cavity through the synovial layer. The
Vl. In the sellar (saddle) joint, the articular elevation in lateral view appears
synovia has a nutritive function with respect to the avascular articular car-
 saddle-shaped and projects into a congruent, concave articular socket.
tilage. 2. Phagocytic synovial cells take up substances that are foreign to the
 Example: distal interphalangeal joint.
normal synovia, e.g., blood cells following intra-articular hemorrhage
(hemarthrosis) or the smallest of shed particles of cartilage in cases of
Vll. The condylar joint has either two separate condyles or a uniform,
arthroses and other degenerative articular changes. The joint capsule cov-
 transversely situated, articular condyle that fits into a more or less congru-
ers more or less smoothly the vertex of the joint (highest point on the exten-
fo s s  u-od ra ussp n 
sor aspect) and is in folds and villi in the depth ofthe flexor aspect. This
the condylar joint are the ginglymus, cochlear joint, spiral joint, and glid-
is particularly distinct in joints with great mobility. Outpouchings of the
ing joint (VII — XI).
joint capsule may surround the tendons of origin of muscles as capsular
VlI. The ginglymus has a perpendicularly located guiding ridge on the
vaginal sheaths. An example is the capsular sheath surrounding the tendon
 condyle, which limits movement to extension and flexion, e.g., the elbow
of origin of the long digital extensor muscle at the level of the stifle joint.
joint, which has a certain 'snapping' action.
5
 b) The structure of the wall of SYNOvIAL BuRSAE AND SYNOvIAL SHEATHS is 
IX. The cochlear joint has obliquely arranged ridges on the trochlea that
the same as that of the joint capsule. Synovial bursae lie between bone and
 permit only extension and flexion, e.g., the hock joint.
an overlying, gliding tendon, eg., the distal infrapatelar subtendinous bur-
-us 'sas ienied oi poalqns are ieu uys aui yeauaq seae u no ()es
 X. In the spiral joint, the external contour of the articular condyle is an
ovial sheaths help to guide the tendons and keep them in place where they
incomplete spiral. This can be observed in lateral view. The collateral liga-
pass for a long distance over bone (details, see p. 146).
 ments are attached eccentrically and are made taut in extension or flexion,
e.g., femorotibial joint with *braking' action.
 c) FiBRocARTILAGINous Discs Occur in a few joints in three variations of
form. In part, these discs function as a shock absorber:
XI. In the gliding joint,the patella glides in an articular depression between
 two ridges: femoropatellar joint.
 I. Two articular menisci (5) project from medially and laterally into the
joint cavity as semilunar discs and thus, except for the central area that is
f) JoINT FuNctIoN depends on the form of the joint and the laxity (ample.
left free, subdivide the cavity. They are held in place by meniscal ligaments.
 ness) of the joint capsule as well as the length and firmness of the joint lig-
Example: femorotibial joint.
very short ligaments and tight joint capsule. Uniaxial, biaxial, and multi-
 II. An articular disc completely subdivides the joint cavity into two parts
 axial joints are differentiated according to the degree of their freedom of
that lie one above the other. Example: temporomandibular joint.
movement. The uniaxial joint is a hinge joint, permitting extension and
IIl. Intervertebral discs fill completely the space between two vertebral bod-
flexion. The angle of flexion is usually less than 1 80 degrees (only in the
6
jo suot anii uo! an, e paapisus iou si suol sun uosu su og sat
case of dorsal flexion or overextension' is it exceptionally larger). In flex-
the vertebrae are present between their articular processes, and between the 
ion,the flexion angle is decreased In extension, it becomes larger The mul-
atlas and axis. In these joints, no intervertebral disc is present. Interverte-
tiaxial joint is functionally a free joint as it permits several possible move-
bral discs consist of a fibrous ring, the aruus fibrosus, and a centrally
ments.
Classification of joints
..
 Plane joint
Ball - and -
Enarthrosis
Pivot or
Ellipsoidal joint 
Saddle joint
Condylar joint
Hinge joint
Cochlear joint:
 socket joint 
trochoid joint
144
Synovial joints
Stifle joint
(medial view)
 X. Spiral joint 
(craniolateral view)
Femur
(- femorotibial)
Joint capsule
Patellar ligament 
(Quadriceps tendon)
XI. Gliding joint 
(- femoropatellar)
Patella
 Lat. femoropatellar ligament 
Sesamoid bone 
of gastrocnemius m.
1  Joint cavity
2 Joint capsule (section)
3  Joint cartilage
 Popliteus m. (section)
4 Cruciate ligaments
Transverse ligament 
 5 Articular meniscus 
Head of fibula
6 Collateral ligaments 
 7 Distal subtendinous
infrapatellar bursa
Extensor digitalis
longus m. (section)
Patellar ligament 
Infrapatellar
fat body
IV. Pivot or trochoid joint 
(Atlantoaxial joint - dorsal view)
Vll. Condylar joint 
(Temporomandibular joint - ventral view)
1. Plane joint 
(- lateral view)
I. Ball - and - socked joint 
V. Ellipsoidal joint
VIll. Hinge joint
(Sholder joint - mecial view)
(Atlantooccipital joint - dorsal view)
(Elbow joint - cranial view)
Ill. Enarthrosis
Vl. Saddle joint
IX. Cochlear joint 
(Hip joint - craniolateral view)
(Distal interphalangeal join - dorsolateral view)
Tarsocrural joint - caudal view)
Tibia
(see pp. 27, 87)
Calcane
145
4. Myology: General Myology
The structural elements of muscle are the muscle cells, which are enveloped by connective tissue in an ideal manner. Muscle cells are able to contract, the
result of the sliding of the muscle-filament bundles which they contain in such a way as to overlap one another. Three kinds of muscle tissue are distin-
 guished on the basis of their fine structure and their physiological characteristics.
Muscle Type
Color
Cell Length
 Cell Diameter
 Innervation
 Form of the Muscle
A. Cross-striated
reddish
up to 15 cm
ca. 0.1 mm
 somatic nervous system
 individual muscles
 (striated or skeletal) muscle
variably shaped
 B. Smooth (visceral), muscle 
yellow-gray
ca. 0.1 mm
ca. 0.1 mm
 autonomic nervous system
layers
C. Cardiac (heart) muscle
red-brown
ca. 0.1 mm
ca. 0.5 mm
autonomous rhythm
layers
 regulated by the autonomic
nervous system
a) TYPES OF MuSCLE TIsSUE:
ondary bundle (3). Finally, all secondary bundles, the entire muscle, are
The cross-striation of skeletal and cardiac musculature is based on the
invested by a loose layer of collagenous fibers, the epimysium (7). The
 alignment of the contractile elements of the muscle cells,the myofilaments,
epimysium is followed by a fascia (6) that is a latticework of collagenous
 and their different refraction of light. Cross-striation is lacking in the
fibers chiefly and is only partially reinforced with elastic fibers.
smooth muscle cells of the viscera.
I. The functions of the connective-tissue sheaths are multiple:
I. Striated, skeletal, musculature (A) is not limited to the skeleton. A vari-
1. They serve to maintain the form of the muscle, providing a supporting
ant of cross-striated muscle of the visceral type is also present in portions
function. 2. They function to permit parts of the muscle to contract while
of the viscera, the pharynx and esophagus. The striated cutaneous muscu-
 other parts remain uncontracted or less active. The muscle seldom acts
lature also has no direct connection to the skeleton but is invested by the
with all of its contractile parts at the same time. Rather, utilizing the prin-
superficial fascia of the body and terminates in the skin where it functions
 ciple of conserving energy, only as many primary bundles are employed as
to move and to tense the skin. The smooth, visceral, musculature (B) can
 are necessary to provide the required strength of contraction. The subdivi-
also have connection to the skeleton, e.g., the smooth rectococcygeus mus-
sion of the muscle by connective tissue sheaths makes possible the con-
cle passes from the rectum to the caudal vertebral column (see also p. 73).
 traction of individual primary bundles in an optimal expediture of energy.
The cardiac, heart, musculature (C) is present as the working musculature
 3. The connective tissue coverings also provide a path for the vessels and
 of the heart and as the impulse conducting system for cardiac contraction
 nerves that supply the muscle. 4. Because the fascia is partially fused with
(see p. 47). The cardiac muscle also extends onto the first part of the pul-
the skeleton, it guides the direction of muscle action. 5. The connective-tis-
 monary and caval veins, where they pass to the atria of the heart.
 sue coverings oppose a maximal contraction (thickening) of the muscle and
 II. The color of striated skeletal musculature is more or less distinctly red.
an excessive use of strength, thus protecting the muscle from rupture. 6.
1
That of smooth muscle is yellowish gray and gives a typical color to the
-said aui Aq passauduo aie eosey aui ui siassaa seydul pue suaa au
intestinal wall. The working muscle of the heart is continuously active and
sure of muscle contraction. By this,in cooperation with the valves, a prox-
is of red-brown color.
 imal flow of blood and lymph is fostered.
II. The length of muscle cells in the three kinds of muscle is quite different.
 IL. The myotendinous junction (14) is discontinuous (not all in one plane).
 Striated skeletal muscle cells may reach a considerable length, up to 15 cm
 The slightly undulating tendinous fibrils interweave with the sheath of
 and an individual cell may possess several hundred nuclei. For this reason
reticular fibers. The attachment of the tendon-fibrils on the muscle cells
2
 and because of other structural peculiarities it is also called a syncytium
takes place especially in the region of the finger-shaped muscle processes,
(genesis by cell fusion) and a muscle fiber. The length of smooth muscle
which are the ends of muscle fiber bundles. This attachment is brought
cells can vary considerably with change in physiological parameters; e.g.,
 about by the fibrils anchoring across the endomysium and the basal lami-
in the gravid uterus, the length of cells can increase tenfold and more. The
na. The insertion of the tendon on bone (1) is dependent on the form of the
length of cardiac muscle cels is limited by the intercalated discs. The car-
tendon. In the case of attachment over a large area, the collagenous tendon
diac musculature can be regarded as a syncytium only in the functional
fibers radiate into the network of collagenous fibers of the periosteum. The
view, but not mor phologically.
fibrous layer of the periosteum is anchored in the bone by Sharpey's fi bers
(Fibrae perforantes). Strong, round tendons (2) may perforate the perios-
IV. The innervation of skeletal musculature is by fast conducting myelinat-
 teum with their collagenous fibers and terminate directly in the osseous tis-
3
 ed nerves across the motor end-plate (neuromuscular terminations). This
sue. In this case, strong forces are exerted on a relatively small area of the
takes place voluntarily (the striated esophageal musculature is an exception
bone. In these places, avulsion fractures can occur in which a piece of bone
 and is supplied involuntarily by the vagus nerve; see p. 48). The smooth vis-
with the tendon-attachment is torn out of the bone. The discontinuous
ceral musculature contracts slowly (maintenance muscle) and is supplied
 muscle-tendon junction and the micro-undulation also serve to protect the
involuntarily by slow-conducting unmyelinated nerve fibers of the auto-
 muscle from rupture. They make possible a soft elastic pull.
nomic nervous system. The smooth muscle of the uterus also contracts
under the influence of the hormone oxytocin that is released by the neural
 Ill. The gross anatomical structure of a muscle, especially the mode of
lobe of the hypophysis. (Stimulation and innervation of the heart, see p.
insertion of its fibers on the tendon, permit concl usions as to its develop-
 46.) Spontaneous contractions of visceral smooth muscle can be triggered
 ment of strength and its range of contraction. If the muscle has only simply
by stretch-stimuli, for example, in the wall of lymph vessels. Every striated
formed tendons of origin and insertion that are connected by relatively few
skeletal muscle cell receives its innervation at a motor end-plate. In contrast
but long muscle fibers running diagonally from one tendon to another, then
to this, smooth muscle and heart muscle cells are directly stimulated only
 it is designated a umipennate muscle (D). In a bipennate (E) or multipennate
 in isolation. Stimulation is conducted from these to neighboring cells across 
muscle, the tendons of origin and insertion are branched and more com-
electrical synapses (nexus).
 plex and connected by relatively many, but short, muscle fibers. The sim-
 ple, unipennate muscle can carry out a large range of external, contraction;
V. The form of muscles varies greatly and is dependent on topography and
 whereas, the bipennate and multipennate muscle can develop only a slight
function. Cross-striated skeletal muscle is represented in the body with
range of contraction. This is because the extent of shortening increases pro-
about 250 individual muscles. Smooth muscle cels and heart muscle cells
 are chiefly found as layers.
 portional to the length of the muscle fibers, which can shorten up to about
half their length. It is the reverse situation with respect to the development
 b) CROss-STRIATED SKELETAL MuscULATURE is discussed in the following
 of strength. Since the strength of a muscle is proportional to the number of
its muscle fibers, the strength of a multipennate muscle is greater than a
bounded by a plasmalemma (sarcolemma), external to which is a basal
unipennate muscle. This is determined objectively by a comparison of the
lamina and fine collagen fbrils (12) and reticular fbers (13). The latter
 anatomical diameter (4) with the physiological diameter (5) of a muscle.
radiate into the surrounding tissue, between neighboring muscle cel, as
endomysium (11). Several neighboring muscle fibers form a primary mus-
 pendicular to the muscle's longitudinal axis. The physiological diameter
cle fiber bundle (10). A muscle fiber bundle is the *meat fiber' that is visi-
dun e u sxe reupu ai ot enudiad sqy asnu i sins
ble to the naked eye and is invested by the internal perimysium (9). Sever-
 nate muscle, the two diameters coincide. In a multipennate muscle, the
al primary bundles are united by the external perimysium (8) to form a sec-
 physiological diameter is greater than the anatomical diameter.
146
Muscle tissue
Legend :
a Neuromuscular complex
c Striated muscle cell
e Cardiac muscle cell
d Smooth muscle cell
f   Intercalated disc 
1 Insertion of 
tendon on bone 
2 Tendon
muscle tissue
muscle
6Fascia
7 Epimysium
8External perimysium
10 Primary muscle fiber
bundle
3 Secondary bun
11 Endomysium
4  Anatomical diameter
 5 Physiological diameter-
12 Collagen fibers
13 Reticular fibers
14 Myotendinous junction
D Unipennate m.
E Bipennate m.
147
5. Myology: Skeletal Musculature and its Accessory Structures
a) In the consideration of SKELETAL MUscULATURE muscle and tendons are
cles and separates the individual muscles with a layer of fascia (e.g., the
discussed together since the two complement one another in structure and
thoracolumbar fascia, which with its fascial layers insinuates between the
function.
muscles of the vertebral column). On the limbs, the antebrachial and crur-
al fasciae form reinforcements, the retinacula (8), for passing tendons,
I. In its typical spindle-shaped (fusiform) form, the muscle in respect of its
suu sninosnu, wn aui pue asnou lews e on aqeduoo si adeus
which in this way are held fixed in position. The fasciae are relatively
impermeable to fluids as, for example, extravasates or pus that migrate
'small mouse.' Like the small mouse, the muscle has a head (origin,
—1), a
belly (2) and a tail (insertion or termination, -4). The tendon of origin is
 along the fascia and may break through the surface of the body far from
attached at a more fixed point on the skeleton (usually proximal on the
the focus of the disease.
body). The tendon of insertion ends at a more moveable point that is usu-
 IV. The blood vessels and nerve of the muscle enter together at the hilus (7).
 ally distal on the body. With some muscles, for example, on the vertebral
The vessel branches run mostly in the longitudinal axis of a muscle, pre-
column, origin and insertion are interchangeable. The origin and insertion
 dominantly in the internal and external perimysium. Blood capillaries are
 of a muscle can be *read’ from the dissection specimen. With attention to
chiefly observed in the endomysium. Four to eight capillaries surround a
aq ueo aosnu e jo uououny aul asuas uowuoo, pue suauoduoo qiog
 single muscle cell. The blood supply varies according to the muscle type
 determined in most cases. The function of different muscles may comple-
ment each other as synergistic muscles, e.g., the powerful biceps brachii
 intensive in the muscle belly than in the sparsely vascularized tendon. The
muscle is the synergist of the weaker brachialis muscle. Antagonistic mus-
 intensive vascularization provides the drainage of metabolic end-products
 cles have opposing function. In a harmonious movement both synergists
 and temperature regulation; since the veins, utilizing the principle of a
and antagonists act together. ( Ventral flexion ofthe trunk is initiated by the
tubular water-cooling system (the automobile water-cooling system),take
 abdominal muscles and slowed down' by the dorsal muscles to prevent a
up the heat produced and give it off at the surface of the body by way of
"collapse.')
the cutaneous veins.
 The form of muscles, regarded phylogenetically, is quite variable (progres-
V. The innervation of most muscles is provided by a single nerve. Only the
sive). It may go to the extent that a certain muscle in different species can
long muscles of the trunk (e.g., the longissimus dorsi muscle), which
 appear very different so that in its form the muscle can no longer be iden-
 embryologically develop from several myotomes, are supplied by multiple
tified with certainty.
 nerves. Also such muscles that were formed by fusion of two individual
Functionally the muscles are chiefly responsible for movement. In addition,
muscles during phylogenesis have a double innervation (e.g., in the dog, the
auxiliary functions are present and serve for the maintenance of body
 adductor longus and pectineus muscles are fused but the muscles are com-
 processes such as respiration, defecation and urination. Beyond that, the
 pletely separate in the cat). The nerve of a muscle ramifies in the same man-
muscles enable the animal to stand by stabilization and fixation of joints.
ner as the blood vessels in the peri- and endomysium. It consists of mye-
In the case of shivering due to cold, the muscles produce heat for ther-
linated, thick (alpha) and thin (gamma) motoneurons, unmyelinated auto-
moregulation.
 nomic fibers and myelinated sensory fibers. A thick motoneuron (large
multipolar nerve cell with dendrites within the ventral column of the spinal
 II. The tendon (3) is usually adapted to the form of the muscle belly.
Aq paeaiauui siaq alosnu au pue quoxe = ssanod jeauduad st pue pios
Fusiform muscles have round tendons; whereas, on the other hand, broad,
it form together a motor unit. In muscles with finely adjusted movements 
parallel-fibered muscle bellies pass over into broad, parallel-fibered ten-
(e.g., the muscles that move the eye) only a few small muscle fibers belong
dons, and the latter are called aponeuroses (5). (That term should not be
to a motor unit. In contrast to this, in the larger muscles of the limb sever-
 confused with fascia, which is formed as a lattice-like fibrous structure.) In
al hundred (perhaps in some cases a thousand or more) muscle fibers form
addition to the tendon of origin and tendon of insertion, the term central
 a single motor unit. The thin gamma motoneurons innervate the modified
tendon (see p. 145) is mentioned here. This tendon can be seen on the mul-
 muscle cells of the neuromuscular spindle. The unmyelinated nerve fibers
tipennate muscle. Central tendons are within the muscle, therefore in the 
innervate the blood vessels within the muscles. The sensory fibers have
flesh. They diminish the quality of the meat as food. The surface of a ten-
 their origin in pain receptors and in the neuromuscular and neurotendinous
 don glistens and has a silvery appearance. Muscle bellies that lie one behind
spindle receptors that provide information on the tonus of the muscle.
the other are connected by a tendinous intersection (6). Muscles having an
 Muscle and nerve form a unit. Each muscle is stimulated to contract by a
extended area of origin or insertion without the obvious interposition of a
 motor nerve by way of the motor end-plate. If the muscle is frequently stim-
well-defined tendon can in macroscopic appearance begin or end by a
ulated to contract, then its fibers become physiologically thicker. The result
"fleshy' attachment. Microscopically, however, one can ascertain that there
is muscle hypertrophy. The opposite is the atrophy of inactivity. The func-
 are many very fine tendons. The form of muscles and tendons as well as
their function is in many cases reflected in the name of the muscle (e.g., M.
that it is scarcely changed in the ascending development that takes place in
serratus, —B, the serrate muscle; M. digastricus, —C, the two-bellied mus-
 phylogenesis (conservative behavior). Regarded from the point of view of
cle; M. bi- or quadriceps, —-D, the two- or four-headed muscle; M. exten-
 comparative anatomy, it is clear that a certain muscle even in a different
sor, —-A, the extensor muscle; M. orbicularis, ——E, the ring-shaped muscle;
species has its special nerve. For this reason, the nerve is utilized as an
functional name: M. sphincter).
important criterion in determining the homology of muscles as only in rare
The cutaneous muscles are usually pale variants of skeletal muscle having
 case does it give up an already formed unity.
little myoglobin and no direct attachment to the skeleton. They are chiefly
b) The AuXILIARY STRucTUREs oF MuscLEs including their tendons are the
located between layers of the superficial fascia. They end by short tendons
 synovial bursae and the synovial sheaths of tendons, which like joint cap-
in the cutis, thus moving and tensing the skin when they contract.
sules are lined internally by synovial membrane (10) and contain synovia.
II. The fasciae invest individual muscles as a lattice-like structured cover-
 This synovia is modified in comparison to that of the joint. The outer lay-
ing (dense connective tissue covering, see p. 145). With the swelling of the
er is the fbrous layer (11). Like the sesamoid bones, synovial bursae and
belly of the muscle in contraction, the crossing fibers can be seen and a
 synovial sheaths have the function of protecting the tendon, which because
change in their rhombus-like configuration can be observed. The more
 of pressure or rubbing as it passes upon hard and pointed underlying bone
extensive fasciae invest groups of muscles and separate them from neigh-
can be crushed or splayed. If the mechanical insults come only from one
boring groups. Insofar as the fascia has connection to underlying bones,
 direction, a synovial bursa is interposed. For the protection ofthe total sur-
2
there are formed osteofibrous compartments that establish the position and
face of the tendon synovial sheaths are formed that are chiefly present at
direction of individual muscles and muscle groups. Muscles may also arise
the carpus and tarsus. If the synovial bursae are subcutaneusly located
or end in fascia, bringing about reinforcement of the fascial fibers in the
-qns j! paunbse Aensn ane Aau uaun (e esmq lenouis snoauenqns)
direction of muscle pull. The large fasciae of the body form the external 
tendinous (subtendinous synovial bursa, —15) or submuscular, then they
and internal fasciae that lie external or, respectively, internal to the outer
are usually inherited. The synovial sheath improves the gliding of a tendon
and inner muscle layers of the trunk that have attachment to bone and
upon a bony prominence. The wall of a synovial sheath consists of a pari-
oi ppians s yunn ul jo esy laixa ai 'sa aoq aui isa
 etal part (12), which passes over into a tendinous part (13), by way of the
the superficial and deep fascia of the trunk. The superficial fascia of the
 mesotendineum (14), a mesentery-like intermediate part that conveys
trunk corresponds to the subcutis and is in relation to the cutaneous mus-
 blood and lymph vessels and nerves. The fibrous layer of the tendinous part
cles where they are developed (trunk, neck, head). The deep fascia of the
is thin and identical to the connective tissue cover of the tendon. Common
trunk lies in the body wall directly upon the thoracic and abdominal mus-
 tendon-sheaths form a gliding cover for several tendons.
148
Myology, synovial bursae and sheaths
7 Hilus
Origin
5 Aponeurosis
2Belly
 B Serratus dorsalis cranialis m.
6 Tendinous
E Orbicularis oculi m.
intersection
4  Termination
C Digastricus m.
 D Quadriceps femoris m.
 A Extensor carpi radlialis m.
Synovial sheath of tendon
Synovial bursae
Tendon of flexor dig. supf. m
of calcaneus
10
11-
Tendon of gastrocnemius m.
Flexor retinaculum
(Longitudinal section)
(section)
(Transverse section)
(Transverse section)
 9 Subcutaneous synovial bursa
10 Synovial layer
11  Fibrous layer
12 Parietal part
-13 Tendinous part
endon
15 Subtendinous synovial bursa
149
6. Nervous System
Nervous tissue consists of nerve cells with their processes; nerve cells are
 neurium, loose connective tissue with adipose tissue, radiates into the sur-
 also called neurons and are surrounded by neuroglial cells. Neurons are
rounding tissue and attaches the nerve to neighboring structures. In the
excitable and are able to receive impulses, to conduct and modify them as
case of an ummyelinated nerve fiber (24), several axons are enclosed with-
well as to discharge impulses in a modified form. In this way the nervous
 in invaginations of the plasmalemma of a peripheral glial cell (SCHWANN
system regulates the coordination of internal body functions, especially of
 cell), but without forming a myelin sheath. A nerve may be composed of
the internal organs, and facilitates the interaction of the organism with the
 myelinated or unmyelinated or both types of fibers.
environment (uptake and conduction of stimuli from the skin and sensory
 b) FuNCTIONAL SUBDIVISION OF THE NeRvOUS SYSTEM
Organs to the central nervous system) by way of the afferent part of the
reflex arc as well as the response to stimuli by way of the efferent part of
I. Insofar as the spinal nerves are concerned, the somatic nervous system
the central nervous system to the effectors of the body, muscle and gland.
 has its nerve cell bodies (motoneurons) in the ventral column of the gray
(butterfly) substance of the spinal cord and, insofar as the cranial nerves 
The division of the nervous system can be according to topographical as
 are concerned, ventrally in the brain stem. The conduction of impulses is
well as functional criteria. According to topographical criteria it is subdi-
 from the central nervous system by way of efferent nerve fibers to the ven-
vided into the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous
tralroot (13) ofthe spinal nerve and to the motor end-plate of skeletal mus-
 system (PNS). Using functional criteria it is subdivided into the somatic
 cle fibers (neuromuscular terminations).
nervous system and the autonomic (vegetative) nervous system. In both
classifications, the nervous system belongs partially to the CNS and par-
 Afferent (sensory) nerve fibers conduct impulses from receptors in the body
tially to the PNS.
over usually long dendrites to their nerve cell bodies. These are located in
The autonomic (involuntary) nervous system is classified according to the
the spinal ganglia (18) near the spinal cord and the intervertebral foramen.
 From the spinal ganglion,the stimulus reaches the spinal cord by way of an
neurotransmitter, and according to its origin and its topography into sym-
pathetic and parasympathetic systems, which often have opposite effects
axon in the dorsal root (14) of the spinal nerve. It reaches the dorsal col-
 umn of the gray (butterfly) substance, and some axons continue cranially
 on the effector organ (heart muscle, smooth muscle, and gland). Both sys-
tothe brain stem. The sensory fibers of most cranial nerves have their nerve
tems are efferent, conducting the outflow from the CNS (central nervous
system) to heart muscle, smooth muscle and the glands of the body Some
 cell bodies in ganglia near the foramina where the nerves leave the cranial
consider the autonomic system to include afferent (sensory) nerves of the
cavity.
viscera (see p. 49); but in general the autonomic nervous system is regarded
 The spinal nerves can be subdivided into segmental and plexus nerves.
today as a strictly efferent system.
 The segmental nerves (9) of the somatic nervous system (e.g., cranial ilio-
The somatic (voluntary) nervous system makes possible interaction with
hypogastric nerve) form together with neighboring nerves no plexus-like
the environment, both external (outside the body) and internal (within the
structures, but run as isolated nerves approximately parallel to each other.
body). The activities are at least partially conscious (the organism is aware
The segmental nerves can be classified into dorsal (d) and ventral (v)
 of the stimulus). Insofar as they are unconscious (the organism is unaware
 branches, and further into dorsomedial (dm) and dorsolateral (dl) branch-
 of the stimulus), they can nevertheless be influenced by voluntary action.
 es or, respectively, ventromedial (vm) and ventrolateral (vl) branches.
a) ToPOGRAPHICAL SUBDIVSION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
The plexus nerves originate from nerve plexuses (2, —see also brachial
I. The central nervous system is composed of the brain and the spinal cord.
plexus, p. 19, and lumbosacral plexus, p. 71). The nerve plexuses are
In both parts there is a gray substance (15) and a white substance (16).
formed by the communication (joining) of the ventral branches of several
Within the gray substance are the cell bodies (perikarya) of the nerve cells,
 spinal nerves. The exchange of fibers between the individual ventral nerves
which are surrounded by the neuropil (the complex of glial cells and nerve
forms the plexus from which the individual plexus nerves (e.g., genito-
fibers). The white substance is characterized mainly of tracts or fasciculi
 femoral nerve, —1) are formed. These are composed of nerve fibers from
 composed of myelinated fibers, the phospholipid of which is strikingly
several spinal nerves (e.g., the genitofemoral nerve originates from nL 3
2
white. In the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum, the gray substance is
and 4). Corresponding to this, the individual spinal cord segment gives off
located in the main peripherally as cerebral or, respectively, cerebellar cor-
 nerve fibers to several plexus nerves (nL 3 to the lateral cutaneous femoral
tex; whereas, the white substance is chiefly central. It is the reverse in the
nerve and genitofe-moral nerve, see p. 60). The dorsal branches of these
spinal cord. The gray substance of the cord forms the typical central but-
 spinal nerves take their course as typical segmental nerves.
terfly-figure and is surrounded by the peripheral white substance in which
IL. The autonomic nervous system (see also p. 49) innervates with efferent
the tracts and fasciculi that pass to or from the brain. Oligodendrocytes
 neurons the heart, smooth musculature, and glands of the organs and ves-
(glial cells) form the myelin sheaths that, with their enclosed axons, com-
sels and guides and coordinates (regulates) the function of the internal
pose the white substance of the central nervous system. A single oligoden-
 organs. These activities are for the most part carried out without conscious
droglial cell regularly invests axons of several nerve cells (see clinical-func-
 control (the organism is not generally aware of them). The autonomic ner-
tional anatomy).
vous system tends to form plexuses especially formed by sympathetic
 II. The peripheral nervous system is composed of all neural parts that lie
fibers. The autonomic plexuses are preferentially arranged around large
outside the superficial glial limiting membrane of the central nervous sys-
 arterial trunks and consist mainly of myelinated sensory and unmyelinated
tem (12 cranial, 8 cervical, 13 thoracic, 7 lumbar, 3 sacral and about 5 cau-
 sympathetic and parasympathetic nerve fibers. In contrast to the spinal
dal nerves). The peripheral nervous system integrates chiefly parts of the
nerve plexuses, the autonomic plexuses also contain ganglia. For example,
somatic nervous system but contain also autonomic fibers.
the celiacomesenteric (solar) plexus at the origin of the celiac and cranial
 The peripheral nerves are composed of bundles of nerve fibers. The nerve
 mesenteric arteries also contains ganglia (celiac ganglion, cranial mesen-
3
fiber (7) consists of an axon and its investment. The nerve cell body with
teric ganglion) of the same name as the arteries. See p. 109. The efferent
its processes is called a neuron (3). The nerve cell body (4) commonly gives
 autonomic nervous system consists of a chain of two neurons that extend
 offseveral dendrites (5), but always a single axon (6) or neurite. The single
from the CNS to the peripheral effector. The nerve cell bodies of the prox-
axon usually branches, its branches being designated collaterals. The single
imal neurons are in the central nervous system. Their preganglionic, mye-
linated fibers pass in white communicating rami (12) to peripherally locat-
 dendrite of an afferent (sensory) neuron proceeds from a receptor and con-
ducts stimuli always in one direction, toward the cell body. The impulse is 
ed autonomic ganglia (e.g., ganglia of the sympathetic nerve trunk, -17).
then conveyed by way of the axon to the spinal cord. The axon of motor
Here, or more distal at the prevertebral ganglion (e.g., cranial mesenteric
 ganglion, —10), the synapse with the second neuron takes place. Nerve cel
neurons originates at an expanded part of the perikaryon, the axon hillock,
which is free of tigroid substance (chromatophil substance). From the cell 
bodies in the abovementioned autonomic ganglia give rise to postganglion-
 ic, unmyelinated fibers. The postganglionic, unmyelinated fibers pass to
body, the axon conducts the impulse to the effector organ (muscle or
si pue yaual ui u I oi dn aq ues uoxe au siaqy aaiau auu u ipue
(11) to the spinal nerves of the somatic nervous system with which they
 au    e aa 
25). Between RAN-
VIER's nodes (8) of the nerve fiber, the myelin sheath is formed by a single
are distributed to the smooth muscle and glands of the skin and to the
peripheral SCHWANN (neurolemmal) cell (23). External to the axon,
smooth muscle of peripheral vessels. The afferent (visceral sensory) neu-
there is the endoneural sheath (cytoplasm of the SCHWANN cell, basal
rons (regarded by some authors as a part ofthe autonomic nervous system)
amina and concentrically arranged fine reticular fibrils) and the
 'uasas snoaiau luo au on Araudd au w sasndun ponpu
endoneurium (20, loosely arranged fine-fibered connective tissue that lies 
 example, impulses having their origin in pain receptors of the viscera. Their
4
 cell bodies are also located in a spinal ganglion (ganglion of a spinal nerve)
between the individual nerve fibers). At the proximal and distal end of the
SCHWANN cell,the myelin sheath ends and leaves the axon exposed in the
 or a cranial ganglion (ganglion of a cranial nerve).
region of the RANVIER node that is located there. The nodes are a pre-
There is also the intramural nervous system, which is a constituent of the
condition for the saltatory conduction of stimuli (the stimulus jumps from
autonomic nervous system. It is in the wall of hollow organs (e.g., in the 
node to node). The nerve fibers form bundles that are surrounded by peri-
intestine, see p. 109; for details, see histology). Its nerve cell bodies belong
 neurium (a continuation of the spinal arachnoid, see p. 109) with an exter-
 predominantly to the parasympathetic nervous system. The intramural
4
nal fibrous part (21) and an internal lining of neurothelium (22). Several
ss sueaan-jas e se suao ou an ui suouny wasas snaiu
nerve bundles form a peripheral nerve, which is covered superficially by
 for the movements of the intestine, movements which can take place even
4
 epineurium (19, — a continuation of the dura mater). From here a para-
 after isolation of the intestine.
150
Nervous system
 Spinal cord (Lumbar part)
(Ventral view)
9 Segmental nerve
(cran. liohypogastric n.)
-10 Cran. mesenteric a.
and ggl.
Genitofemoral r
-Meningeal br.
11 Gray communicating br.
- 12 White communicating br.
- 13 Ventral root
14 Dorsal root
2 Spinal nerve plexus
- 15 Gray substance
16 White substance
17 Autonomic ggl.
(sympathetic trunk)
vm
-18 Spinal ggl.
Efferent neuron
dm
luscle
(sensory)
Autonomic neuron
(sympath.) preganglionic
Autonomic neuron
 (sympath.) postganglionic
19
19 Epineurium
3 Neuron
 20 Endoneurium
4 Nerve cell body
 and axon hilock
5 Dendrite 
Perineurium:
6 Axon [Neurite] 
21 Fibrous part
 22  Epithelioid part 
7 Nerve fibe
8 Ranvier's node
23 Schwann (neurolemmal)
cell
Unmyelinated nerve fiber
25Myelinatednervefiber
(see pp. 71, 109)
151
7. Endocrine System
The endocrine system comprises the endocrine glands (hormonal glands)
transported by the axons of the paraventriculo-hypophysial and supraopti-
and the endocrine secreting organs, which release hormones in addition to
co-hypophysial tract (text-illustration, a and b) to the neurohypophysis.
their proper function (e.g., the gastrointestinal tract with its intestinal
 Here the blood-brain barrier is absent and the hormones are taken up by
 endocrine cells). The hormones belong to different chemical groups of
fenestrated blood capillaries and further transported by the blood vascular
compounds (e.g., steroids, peptides, amines) and act even in very low con-
 system. Vasopressin (= antidiuretic hormone) fosters the reabsorption of
centration. In comparison to their effect, the endocrine glands appear
water from the renal tubules andincreases the blood pressure. Oxytocin acts
remarkably small. Contrary to former opinion, a single celltype can form
 on the myoepithelial cells at the periphery of the end pieces of the sweat and
several hormones. The secreted hormones are messengers which infuence
mammary glands and also on the smooth musculature of the uterus, where
the development of certain organs and coordinate different functions of the
 it trigers its contractions at the termination of pregnancy.
body in cooperation with the autonomic nervous system. The endocrine
The venous portal system (text-illustration, e - g) of the hypothalamo-
gland cells secrete their hormones usually into the intercellular space of
 hypophysial system facilitates the transport of the releasing hormones from
their immediate surroundings. Here the hormone can act directly on the
the median eminence to the adenohypophysis. In association with this, the
neighboring cells and tissues (e.g., the hormones of the testicular intersti-
rostral hypophysial artery (d) in the median eminence (j) breaks up into a
tial cells, androgens, act directly on the neighboring seminiferous tubules)
(first) capillary net (Rete capillare I, —e), which takes up the hypothalam-
Or, after their being taken up by the blood vascular and lymph vascular sys-
 ic releasing hormones and transports them by way of the hypophysial por-
tems, the hormones are transported to distant receptor-bearing target cells
tal vein (f) to the adenohypophysis, where they are released in a (second)
(e.g., the prostatic cells). To facilitate the uptake of hormones, the blood
capillary net (Rete capillare II, —g). Here, the regulating and effector hor-
capillaries have a special structure of their endothelial wall, fenestrations.
 mones are also taken up into the bloodstream.
In this regard, the gonads are an exception in that they have a closed
2
 endothelial lining of their blood capillaries that assures the function of a
c) In dependence upon TSH (thyroid stimulating hormone) of the adeno-
blood-testis (gonad) barrier.
hypophysis, the THYRoiD GLAND (2, a), with its hormones thyroxin (T4) and
tri-iodothyronine (T3), in addition to others, stimulates cellular metabo-
The hypothalamo-hypophysial system (1) is the central, superior endocrine
regulating system that acts on peripheral endocrine glands by means of
thyroglobulins and are stored inthe thyroid follicles (= store gland, suitable
adenotropic hormones (e.g., on the adrenal cortex, but not the adrenal
for storing hormones). In this condition the follicular epithelial cells are
medulla). Thus, the hypothalamo-hypophysial system with its regulating
fattened. With increasing release of the secretion the epithelial cells
hormones acts by way of the peripheral endocrine secreting cells (e.g., tes-
 become cuboidal or columnar. The parafollicular C-cells act on calcium
metabolism and are antagonists of the PARATHYRoID GLAND (2, b).
organ (e.g., the prostate gland). In addition, hypophysial effector-hor-
mones are formed that act directly on peripheral cells or organs as, for
d) The ADRENAL GLAND (3) is subdivided into an adrenal cortex (a) and an
example, prolactin hormone on the mammary gland.
 adrenal medulla (b). The three zones of the adrenal cortex synthesize
a) The HypoTHALAMus (1 g) is a center superior to the hypophysis and inti-
steroid hormones. In the subcapsular zone, zona glomerulosa (arcuata),
mineralocorticoids (aldosterone) are produced that act on the salt and
water metabolism of the body. In the zona fasciculata (layer of cords and
functionally.
columns), which is central to the zona glomerulosa, glucocorticoids are
b) The HypopHYsis (Hypophysis cerebri) develops with its anterior lobe,
the adenohypophysis, from the ectoderm of the roof of the primitive sto-
this group of hormones are cortisone and hydrocortisone, which also have
modeum and migrates to the sphenoid bone where it attaches to the poste-
 an anti-inflammatory action and are of paramount medical importance.
rior lobe of the hypophysis, the neurohypophysis, which develops from the
 The internal layer of the cortex is the zona reticularis, which produces
 diencephalon of the brain.
androgens.
I. Releasing hormones and release-inhibiting hormones are formed in the
e) The GoNADs (TesTIs, —4A and OvARY, —4B) with their testicular inter-
hypothalamus and act on the adenohypophysis (1, a - c), controlling the
stitial cells (4A, b), also called Leydig's interstitial cells, and the ovarian
release of the adenohypophysial hormones (tropins). These hypothalamic
interstitial cells (4B, b, also called theca interna cells) and the corpus
hormones are formed by nerve cells of the tuberal hypothalamic region,
luteum (4B, c) are the target cells of the adenohypophysial luteinizing hor-
and transported to the median eminence within their axons. The axons
 mone (LH). They synthesize androgens with testosterone and hydrotestos-
terone as their most important representatives. In the ovary the androgens
nence is a median, crescent-shaped prominence of the tuber cinereum that
in the follicular epithelial cells of the ovarian follicles are aromaticized to
 projects into the infundibulum of the third ventricle.
 estrogens. Luteinizing hormone fosters the genesis of the corpus luteum.
II. The neurohypophysis (1, d - e) receives its effector hormones (oxytocin
 Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) of the adenohypophysis stimulates the
and vasopressin = antidiuretic hormone) from the hypothalamus, where
-oa a u nu nuied pue uns ai u py ae a
-s h sn a u suu pue suaosa jo sisus a (u
thalamus, the activity of the blood-brain barrier prevents the uptake of the
lates the Sertoli cells among others to produce androgen-binding proteins.
 Furthermore, it promotes the formation of LH-receptors on the Leydig
interstitial cells.
a Paraventriculo-
f) In the second half of pregnancy, the PLAcENTA (4C) takes over the for-
hypophysial tract
 mation of progesterone and estrogen, which previously were produced by
b Supraoptico-
the corpus luteum ofthe ovary. The change takes place about the middle of
 hypophysial tract
c Tubero-
 pregnancy. Because the production of progesterone by the corpus luteum
 cea ses, only the placenta functions to protect pregnancy.
 infundibular tract
d Rostral hypo-
 g) The EPIPHYSIs CEREBRI (PINEAL GLAND) (S) synthesizes melatonin and
 antigonadotropin (see clinical-functional anatomy).
 physial a.
é Rete capillare l 
h) In the Kipneys the modified cells of the tunica media (6, a) of the affer-
f Hypophysial
ent glomerular arteriole, which form part of the juxtaglomerular complex
portal v.
(6), produce renin and thus control renal vascularization, and the blood
g Rete capillare Il
 pressure of the entire body.
h Hypophysial v.
i) The PANcREATic IsLETs (7, a) of human beings are 1 - 2 million in num-
i Caudal hypo-
ber. Their B-cells promote the formation of glycogen by synthesis of insulin
 physial a.
and, in this way lower the blood pressure. The A-cells synthesize glucagon,
j  Median eminence 
 which raises the blood pressure. In addition, the D-cells produce hormones
hormones into the blood. They are transported from the location of synthe-
 j) The GASTROINTESTINAL ENDOcRINE CELLS (8, a) are Scattered between the
sis, the hypothalamus, and according to the principle of neurosecretion are
 epithelial cells of the mucous membrane of the gastrointestinal tract.
152
Endocrine system
1  Hypothalamo - hypophyseal system
Adenohypophysis: a Pars tuberalis; b Pars intermedia: c Pars distalis
Neurohypophysis: d Infundibulum; e Lobus nervosus; f Hypophyseal cavity
 g Hypothalamus;: h Mamillary body
 5 Pineal gland
a Pineal recess;
2  Thyroid gland (a) and parathyroid gland (b)
b Suprapineal recess;
C Third ventricle
STH
Prolactin
Glucocorticoids
SH
ICSH
LH
ACTH
Androgen
FSH
4C Placenta
a Fetal placenta;
b Maternal placenta 
Estrogen
3 Adrenal gland
4A Testis
4B Ovary
a Cortex; b Medulla 
 a Epithelial sustentacular cell;
a Ovarian follicle;
 Aldosterone
b Endocrine interstitial cell;
b Endocrine interstitial cell;
Renin
 C Convoluted seminiferous tubule
c Corpus luteum
EIeY
 6 Juxtaglomerular complex
7 Pancreas and pancreatic islets (a)
 8 Proper gastric gl.
a Myoid endocrine cell:
a Gastrointestinal endocrine cell;
b Glomerulum;
b Principal exocrine cell;
c Macula densa
c Parietal exocrine cell
153
8. The Cardiovascular System
In the cardiovascular system the blood reaches all regions of the body by
 venous anastomoses play an important role for thermoregulation - forma-
the pumping action of the heart. In this way, the body is supplied with
tion of short direct arteriovenous anastomoses has been reported within
resorbable nutrients, oxygen, water and hormones; and waste products are
hours. Chronic congestive alterations within the circulation of organ sys-
removed and heat is transferred.
tems may also lead to the development of additional arteriovenous shunts.
a) The CARDIOvAscULAR SysTEM is divided into a systemic circulation, a
 II. Arterioles (9) are smaller than 0.1 mm in diameter and contain in their
pulmonary circulation, and several portal circulations. The large systemic
tunica media only a few layers of spirally arranged smooth muscle cells.
circulation begins in the left ventricle of the heart and passes by means of
o a s jo r au a so aa ad a
the systemic arteries to the entire body, returning by systemic veins to the
 and may contain sphincter-like myoid cushions for regulation ofthe micro-
right heart. The smaller pulmonary circulation begins in the right ventricle
 circulation within the adjacent capillary bed.
of the heart and transports (deoxygenated) blood by the pulmonary trunk
 and arteries to the alveolar capillaries of the lung for gaseous exchange.
 An arterialrete mirabile is a specialty insofar as it is located within the arte-
 Oxygen-enriched blood passes from the alveolar capillaries to the left atri-
 rial branch of the cardiovascular system and is predirected to the proper 
 arterial capillary bed (e.g., rete mirabile of the feline maxillary artery).
- od sedaq aui 'suaa aeuoind au jo sueau Aq ueau aul jo un
 culation assures the functional blood supply of the liver (see also p. 58).
Ill. In the capillaries (10) the layers of the wall are reduced to the internal
Organs like the heart, liver, and lungs have a dual blood supply: a nutritive
layer. This consists of the endothelial lining, a basal lamina and a discon-
-dns poo leuoun e pue sanssu sueaio a sddns u addns po
tinuous layer of pericytes. The capillaries are up to 1 mm long and have a
 ply by which the organ carries out its essential body functions.
diameter of 3 - 10 microns. According to their endothelial lining the cap-
illaries are classified into three types, which are adapted to corresponding
b) The BLoop VesseLs are classified according to the structure of their
functional requirements. Unfenestrated endothelial cells (13) form a con-
walls, which, in turn, depends on the blood pressure. Veins with a weaker
tinuous lining ofthe lumen of the capillary. This type of capillary is found
wall (e.g., veins of the limbs) will, after transplantation into the arterial sys-
 in the musculature, skin and connective tissue. Fenestrated endothelial cells
tem, (e.g., the coronary arterial system), develop bit by bit a typical arteri-
(12) abut neighboring endothelial cells without spaces between them, but
al wall. The vessel wall consists of three layers. There are the intermaltunic
 have intracellular fenestrae or pores. Fenestrated capilaries occur in organs
 or tumica intima (2), which consists of an endothelial lining, a collagen-
 with intense metabolism such as the gastrointestinal tract, endocrine glands
fibered subendothelial layer and, in the case of arteries, an internal elastic
 and the kidneys. A discontinuous endothelium with openings between the
membrane. The second layer is the middle tunic, tunica media (3), which is
endothelial cells (intercellular aperrures, —14) and having a discontinuous
 composed of smooth muscle cells and a network of elastic fibers and bor-
 or absent basal lamina is found in the sinusoids ofthe liver, where the pres-
 ders on the external elastic membrane with a chiefly collagen-fibered exter-
 ence of the fenestrae improves the passage of metabolites.
nal tunic, tunica externa or adventitia (4). In the blood capillaries, these 
three layers are lacking. Capillaries consist exclusively of an endothelium
 IV. Venules (16) are located at the beginning of the venous branch of the
with an incomplete investment by pericytes.
cardiovascular system and have a diameter up to about 50 microns. The
tunica media has no myocytes but pericytes. In the collagen-fibered exter-
I. The arteries carry blood from the heart and, except for the pulmonary
 nal tunic, white blood cells and macrophages are often found. The post-
trunk and arteries, contain blood rich in oxygen. According to the compo-
capillary venules (17) of some lymphatic organs are characterized by a
sition of the tunica media, arteries are distinguished as elastic arteries (1),
 cuboidal or columnar endothelium, which facilitates the penetration of
muscular arteries (11), and arteries of mixed type. The elastic arteries (aor-
 lymphocytes from the vessel lumen into the perivascular lymphoreticular
ta, brachiocephalic trunk) are near the heart and contain in their media less
tissue.
smooth muscle cells, but mainly fenestrated elastic membranes, which are
responsible for the yellowish appearance of this type of artery. The coro-
V. Veins are more loosely structured in comparison to the arteries and their
nary arteries and arteries distant to the heart are muscular arteries. Their
layers are less distinct. In the middle-sized veins, spirally arranged muscle
media is composed predominantly of smooth muscle cels, and there are
fiber bundles with intermediate collagen-fibered connective tissue are
fewer elastic fibers. End (terminal) arteries (e.g., cerebral arteries) are of
located in the tunica media. In the large veins (for example, the caudal vena
considera ble medical importance because they have no collateral arteries
cava) the external tunic is especially distinct. It contains a lot of smooth
(7) and no anastomoses or insufficient anastomoses with adjacent arteries.
 muscle in longitudinal arrangement. In contrast to this, only a few muscle
It is for that reason that they are called end or terminal arteries (e.g., the
 cell bundles are present in the tunica media.
cerebral arteries) or functional terminal arteries (e.g., the coronary arter-
 The venous valves (18) project as semilunar endothelial duplications into
ies). In case of occlusion of these terminal arteries, the surrounding tissue
 the lumen. They cover a central layer of connective tissue. The valves reg-
becomes necrotic (infarction). Convoluted arteries are special arteries that
ulate the direction of blood flow. During the initial phase of blood stasis,
have a distinct tortuous, sometimes corkscrew-like course. They exist as
 the semilunar valves fill and their borders approach those of neighboring
helicine arteries in the penis and uncoil and stretch out at the time of erec-
valves. In this way, the lumen is occluded and a back flow of blood is pre-
tion. In the mesovarium, their occurrence does not depend on volume dif-
vented. The valves are particularly important for orthograde bloow flow
ferences. Certain portions of the helicine arteries of the penis are struc-
 within the peripheral areas of the vascular system of the body, such as the
tured according to the principle of blocking arteries. They have a blood-
limbs.
Aq paso alot aq u uwn au se ieosui uouny suenan wa
myoid intimal cushions (6) and are therefore also termed 'sphincteric*
 Occluding veins (e.g., those in the liver) are special veins in endocrine
 arteries. In that case, the entire blood stream passes through the capillary
 glands, uterus, uterine tube, cavernous bodies and the liver that, by the
bed (erection, see clinical-functional anatomy). Arteriovenous anastomoses
 development of intimal cushions, function as their name indicates.
regulate the blood flow. Only a few organs such as the kidney and brain
 Venous plexuses are venous networks and are found, for example, in the
jsou jo Aiddns pooq aui uououny yau oj Addns pooq uaaa ue paau
 testicular vein as a pampiniform plexus. This functions in thermoregula-
organs, e.g., the gastrointestinal tract, varies and its intensity is adapted to
actual functional need. This hemodynamic is maintained in the first line by
tion.
d lun iae ae ni un is) sasoise snonoie adis
Venous sinuses are wide-lumened outpouchings of the veins (e.g., at the
they are often structured like helicine arteries. The terminal venous part is
 mouth of the caval veins). The sinuses of the dura mater of the brain are
not specially differentiated. In case of their being closed off, all of the blood
 special veins with a wide lumen. They have no tunica media and outer lay-
flows through neighboring arterioles and the neighboring capillary area.
 er in their walls and lack valves.
When they are open, the blood bypasses the capillary bed and selects the
Vl. Vasa vasorum (15) are nutritive blood vessels in the walls of the large
more convenient” way of the wide-lumen anastomosis. Glomerular arte-
 arteries, veins and lymphatic trunks. On account of their size, these vessels
riovenous anastomoses (8) with very complicated structure occur in the
digits and skin. Also, the first part of the arterial side of the anastomosis
 cannot be nourished sufficiently by the blood within the vessel lumen.
contains epitheloid or myoid blocking mechanisms. The glomerular arte-
Smaller vessels have on the other hand a “self-supply' from the blood-
riovenous anastomoses are richly supplied by autonomic nerves. Their
stream.
function is still not completely clear. Arteriovenous anastomoses are not
Vll. The nerves of vessels (15) are for the most part unmyelinated and
permanent components of the vascular bed but may develop or regress,
belong to the autonomic nervous system. Vasoconstriction is under control
respectively, according to the prevailing circulatory conditions or related
 of the sympathetic nervous system. (For innervation and the action of hor-
body functions. For example, within the skin of extremities - whre arterio-
 mones on the vessels, see textbooks of physiology.)
154
Cardiovascular system
Arteries
Veins
1  Elastic artery
 2 Tunica interna [intima]
3 Tunica media
4  Tunica externa [adventitia]
 5 Arteriovenous anastomosis
16 Venules
6 Myoid intimal custions
17 Postcapillary venules
7Collater
8 Glomerular arteriovenous
9 Arterioles
10  Capillaries
11  Muscular artery
155
9. Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system is composed of a defense or immune system and a
 venous angle. The three-layered wall exhibits longitudinal muscle bundles,
transport system (lymph vessel system), which complement each other
 especially in the adventitia, and contains vasa and nervi vasorum (21).
functionally. The defense system includes the recognition and elimination
 The valves of the lymph vessels and their musculature are the morpholog-
of substances foreign to the body. It consists of the lymph nodes and the
 ymphatic organs.
ical basis for their proper peristalsis with proximally directed lymph flow.
This is supported also by other factors such as 'massage' by adjacent stri-
a) The LYMPH VAscULAR SYsTEM has a drainage function to remove fluid
 ated muscles and also by the pulsations of surrounding arteries, which is
from the tissues and a transport function to transport the lymph to the
 carried over to the lymph vessels by figure-of-eight connective tissue bun-
lymph nodes and finally to the venous side of the cardiovascular system. In
 dles (see text-illustration). In the body cavities, the motor activity of the
gastrointestinal tract and variations in respiratory pressure foster move-
closed circulation; as it begins peripherally by a network of blind capillar-
 ment of the lymph. After the surgical removal of a lymph node, the lymph
ies (Rete lymphocapillare, 1) and ends centrally at the thoracic inlet at the
flow is at first interrupted. Peripheral to the site of interruption, the body
so-called venous angle. The venous angle is the angle formed by the con-
region is devoid of its lymph drainage and by this flooded (edematous).
fluence of the internal and external jugular veins (see p. 15). With the
When palpated it feels cold and 'doughy.* Skin impressions are compensat-
absence of a central pump — lymph hearts are found only in the lower ver-
 ed only very slowly at those parts of the body which are somewhat mis-
tebrates and some avian species- the transport capacity is only 0.035 %
 shapen. Lymph flow is restored by the gradual growing together of the sep-
of that of the cardiovascular system. The lymph is generally a clear, yel-
 arated stumps.
lowish fluid, but milky in color in the intestinal region owing to its fat con-
tent (chylomicrons). Lymph originates from the blood and reaches the
interstitium by passing through the blood capillary wall. From here the tis-
sue fluid flows to the venous part of the capillary bed or into the lymph
 capillaries, where by fluid back-flow - therefore concentration - lymph
arises. A lymph drainage and therefore a lymphatic capilary network is
Vein
lacking in the central nervous system, in epithelial tissue, in cartilage, bone
marrow, thymus and in the cornea of the eye. With the ordinary light
microscope, lymph capillaries cannot be distinguished with certainty from
Artery
blood capillaries. However, this is clearly possible with the electron micro-
scope and the ultrastructure of lymph capillaries will be considered in
Lymph vessel
 detail here for a better understa nding of their function.
1. From the endothelial cells of the lymph capillaries (22), especially from
their overlapping processes, very fine fixation-fibers (24) radiate into the
[Effect of the arterial pulse on lymphatic and venous transport] 
interstitium and anchor to the plexus of collagenous fibers (25). In spite of
these fixation-filaments the lymph capillaries are often found collapsed. In
case of an increased interstitial pressure (increased amounts of fluid in the
tissue—-lymph edema) the fixation-filaments are stretched, thus fixing the
b) The LyMPH NoDes (8) are designated topographically (e.g., axillary
external layer of the overlapping endothelial cells. The internal layer of the
endothelial cells is pushed toward the lumen by the instreaming fluid and,
lymph node). Regional lymph nodes and lymph centers are distinguished.
 The primary lymph of a certain tributary area flows to the regional lymph
in this way, interendothelial openings (open junctions, —23) are temporar-
ily formed. These are very large by electron microscopic standards and con-
 node by afferent lymphatic vessels (9). Two to four efferent lymphatic ves-
siderable amounts of fluid and also macromolecules, dust, viruses, bacteria
 sels (17) leave the lymph node at its hilus and contain secondary or transi-
 and complete tumor cell are able to enter the lymph capillaries. Also meta-
tory lymph that contains about tenfold the number of lymphocytes. Lymph
nodes farther n in the series, which are arrangedlike a chain, filter the sec.
bolic products, hormones and, in the intestine, long-chain fatty acids in the
form of triacylglycerides as constituents of the chylomicrons are carried
 ondary lymph and can, in addition, take up primary lymph. Adjacent
lymph nodes with compara ble, overlapping tributary regions are designat-
away by the lymph vessels. Summarized, it can be said that such stuff can
ed a lymph center. Lymph nodes have a smooth and firm surface. Their
successfully enter through the “open junctions' of the lymph capillaries 
form is bean-like. They are usually embedded in fat tissue and surrounded
that, on account of their size, would be unable or scarcely able to pass
through the blood capillary walls. An earlier concept that the processes of
by a connective tissue capsule (10), which is penetrated at its hilus (14) by
the lymph capillary network have openings must on closer examination be
blood vessels and also (in the dog and most other species; cf. pig) efferent
 made precise insofar as such openings occur only if the intestitial pressure
lymph vessels and at its convexity by afferent vessels. From the capsule,
is increased, and that the openings are not permanently present. Quite
there radiate centrally directed trabeculae (11). Underneath the capsule, the
another situation is present in the diaphragmatic pleura and peritoneum,
 afferent lymph vessels open into the subcapsular sinus (12), which trans-
where real stomata are found that open and close in synchrony with the
 ports the lymph by intermediate sinuses (13) that pass beside the trabecu
lae and medullary sinuses (16) that pass beside the medullary cords to the
respiratory rhythm by passive 'snap'-movements and promote the trans-
efferent vessels.
port of the lymph.
IL. Postcapillary lymph vessels (Vasa lymphatica fibrotypica, —26) are also
The lymphatic sinuses (3) are cleft-like lymph passages that are bounded by
 kq mo udu au oa, kaui asnq sass suouoo p
 endothelial cells (4) and lumenally reinforced by a fish-trap-like′ system of
valves and lead’ it to the mouth of the myotypic lymphatic vessel that fol-
 reticular cells (6, —some authors consider these to be modified endothelial
lows. Apart from the valves, the structure of the wall corresponds to that
cells) as well as by intrasinusal reticular fibers (5). The fish-trap-like' sys-
of the lymph capillaries.
tem is able to trap particles of soot, viruses, bacteria, the body's own cells
I. The lymph vessels that follow the postcapillary lymph vessels have mus-
 or cell detritus and thus enables their incorporation by the intralumenal
macrophages (7).
usually accompany blood vessels and nerves and conduct the lymph to the
 The parenchyma of the lymph node produces B-lymphocytes and plasma
lymph node. The transport-vessels have a three-layered wall: the lumen-
cells that function in humeral immunity. It consists of lymphoreticular tis-
sided, endothelium-containing tunica interna or tunica intima (28), the
sue (31) with reticular cells (32) and reticular fibers (33), which are inter-
 muscle-containing tunica media (29) and the mainly fibrous tunica externa
spersed with lymphocytes (34). In the outer cortex, the parenchyma forms
 or tumica adventitia (30). Valve-bearing, indented segments without mus-
characteristic lymph nodules (19), rich in lymphocytes, which are a main
cle in their wall or poor in muscle, alternate periodically with valveless
site of the B-lymphocytes. Centrally, the cortex passes over into the diffuse
expansions with walls rich in muscle. When abundantly filled with lymph,
lymphoreticular tissue of the inner cortex (paracortex, —18), which is the
this gives rise to the typical pearl-chain appearance. The indentations at
 main site of T-lymphocytes. The T-lymphocytes ha ve their origin in the thy-
the segmental valves (36) bound a lymphangion (2). At the mouth of the
 mus, pass by way of special postcapillary venules into the bloodstream and
lymph vessels, where they discharge their lymph, conjunctional valves (35)
are carried by the blood to the lymph nodes. They function in cellular
are found.
immunity. Medulary cords (15) are in the medulla; they form a main site
 IV. The lymphatic vascular trunks (20) are the thoracic duct, the cisterna
 for B-lymphocytes and their further differentiation into plasma cells. Lym
chyli and the lumbar, intestinal and jugular trunks. They receive the trans-
-ads aut ot xipuadde 1enqel aut kuoieue ieoyde aodot as 'sueio oueud
port-vessels. Their final parts, the thoracic and jugular ducts, open at the
 cial anatomy, and clinical-functional anatomy.
156
Lymphatic system
22 Lymph capillary:
 23 Open junction
1 Rete ymphocapillare
24 Fixation fibers
 25 Collagenous
fibers
 2 Lymphangion
 26 Vas lymphaticum
 fibrotypicum 
 3 Lymphatic sinus:
4 Endothelial cell
 5 Intrasinusal reticular fbers
6 Reticular cell
 7 Intralumenal macrophage 
8 Lymph node
 27 Vas ymphaticum
myotypicum
9 Afferent lymphatic 
10 Capsule
11 Trabeculae
12 Subcapsular sinus
14 Hilus
 28 Tunica interna
15 Medullary cords
[intima]
 29 Tunica media 
16 Medullary sinus 
17 Efferent lymphatic
 30 Tunica externa
[adventitia] 
vessel
18 Paracortex
19 Lymph nodule 
 31  Lymphoreticular
tissue
32 Reticular cell
 33 Reticular fibers
34 Lymphocyte
 20 Lymphatic trunk
 35 Conjunctional valvula
 36 Segmental valvula
157
10. Glands, Mucous Membranes and Serous Membranes
a) The activity of GLANDs is called secretion. The secretions act external to
a large area ofcontact with the intestinal content. The increase in the surface
the gland cells (e.g., saliva, hormones). To produce the secretion, the gland
area is provided by transverse, circular folds (1), intestinal villi (E' a) and
cells take up basic materials, synthesize the secretions in the cell organelles
crypts (E* b) as well as by microvilli (8) on the lumenal surface of the resorp-
and give them off according to a particular manner of secretion (see below).
tive epithelial cells.
The secretion is regulated chiefly by hormones and the autonomic nervous
 IL. In the respiratory tract the function of the pseudostratifed ciliated
system.
 columnar epithelium (B, —trachea) with scattered goblet cells is the pro-
Glands are classified by different criteria.
 duction and transport of mucus by which the finest dust particles can be
Endocrine glands (hormonal glands) release their secretion into the inter-
 excreted. Respiratory mucous membrane is found in the air-conducting
cellular space from which it enters the blood or lymph capillaries. The hor-
 passages: nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, pharynx and auditory tube
mones are transported to the effector organs by the cardiovascular system.
 including the middle ear, larynx, trachea, and bronchi.
Exocrine glands release their secretion onto the internal or external surface
 Il. The mucous membrane of the genital tract, like the uterine tube and
of the body. They are discussed in the following (see also pp. 6 and 32).
 uterus (see clinical-functional anatomy), is lined by a simple columnar
According to the form of their secretory end-pieces, glands are classified as
 epithelium (C, uterine tube) with cilia and epithelial cells bearing microvil-
tubular, acinar and alveolar. The tubular end-pieces may be 1. simple tubu-
li. The lining of parts of the male genital tract, e.g., the deferent duct, is a
lar, 2. simple coiled, and 3. simple branched. The compound tubular gland
columnar pseudostratified epithelium (D, deferent duct) with long,
has branched excretory ducts.
branched, immobile cellular processes, the so-called stereocilia, which are
According to the mode of secretion, glands are subdivided into eccrine =
long microvilli.
merocrine (release of the secretion by exocytosis), apocrine (a part of the
 IV. The mucous membrane of the urinary tract of the dog is aglandular. The
 gland cell is shed together with the secretion) and holocrine (the gland cell
 mucosa lines the urinary passages with a transitional epithelium from the
in its entirety is transformed into the secretion).
renal pelvis to the ureter and urinary bladder up to the urethra. This tran-
 sitional epithelium (F, ureter) is a pseudostratified epithelium, whose cells
According to the character of the secretion, there are distinguished serous
allrestupnthebaseut dnot all reachtheurface someauthorslasi
(thin, watery secretion), mucous and mixed (serous and mucous con-
fythe epithelium here as stratified; that is, not pseudostratified) In the cells
stituents) glands.
that bound the lumen, the transitional epithelium has special mechanisms
According to their composition, we distinguish intraepithelial, unicellular
 for protection against the aggressive action of the urine.
glands (e.g, mucus producing goblet cells) and multielar glands. The
intraepithelial glands lead without excretory ducts directly into the adjacent
c) The SERous MEMBRANE (G) lines the serosal cavities and covers the exter-
lumen. The multicelular glands lie either within the wall of the organ con-
nal surface of many organs. It consists of a mesothelium (14), a simple
cerned and discharge into the lumen by way of a short excretory duct (wall
squamous epithelium that is developed from the mesoderm, with a con-
glands); or they are larger groups of glands that lie outside the wall and open
 nective tissue basis, the lamina propria (15).
into the lumen of the organ usually with a longer efferent duct (associated
 The function of the serous membrane consists mainly of the establishment
glands).
 of a smooth and moist surface by which the friction between the serosal
 b) The Mucous MEMBRANE (TuNICA MucosA) is the internal lining of hol-
membrane covered organs is reduced. It produces a serous fluid that is giv-
low organs that bounds the lumen and is in contact with the external envi-
en off into the serous cavities and lends a typical character (moist, smooth
ronment. These organs are the alimentary canal, the respiratory and uri-
 and glistening) to the surface. According to the principle of equilibrium it
 nary tracts and the passages of the genital organs that have a lumen. With
also regulates the resorption of fluid (uptake of fluid from the serosal cav-
the exception of the urinary passages, the lumen is covered by mucus that
ities). The serous fluid is normally kept constant by transudation and
originates from the glands of the mucous membrane (goblet cells, wall
resorption. The transudate is formed by its 'release' from the blood capil-
 glands or associated glands).
laries into the lamina propria serosae and its passage through the mesothe-
lium of the serosa.
The mucous membrane of the intestine consists of a lumen-sided columnar
(9 aeson eod e) eudord eue e pue (a  ') uma
 A subserosal layer (16) functions as a gliding layer and is a primary depot
-d i a n ajo se i u adoid iaianss aauo a
for fat storage as subserosal fat tissue. It is present throughout the abdom-
 pria contains a thin layer of smooth muscle (lamina muscularis mucosae,
eui sueaio asoui pue aauiy au oi uoeian ui renued ul pue Aae ieu
5). In many regions of the gut, there are layers additional to the mucous
 are subject to great variation in size as, for example, the stomach and intes-
membrane: A tela submucosa (4), a loose, gliding layer, is directly external
tine.
to the mucous membrane. Besides the submucosa there may be a muscular
 In the case of the serous cavities, we are dealing with spaces that contain
layer (Tunica muscularis, —2 and 3) as well as on the external surface, e.g.,
 Only a little serous fluid. The serous cavities are the pleural cavities, peri-
of the intestine, a tunica serosa (Pars visceralis, —13) or a connective tissue
 cardial cavity and the peritoneal cavity. The organs are external to the
layer, the tunica adventitia, connecting the gut to its surroundings. The
serous membrane, invaginating it and drawing with them a part of the
constituents of the mucous membrane of the different organ systems are
 serous membrane that is the mesentery, omentum, or ligaments of peri-
 structurally adapted to the functional needs of the individual organs.
toneum (e.g., the ligaments of the liver; the broad ligament that suspends
I. In the digestive apparatus, which begins at the mouth and ends at the
the ovary, uterine tube, and uterus, etc.). The serous membrane lining the
anus, functionally related differences become especially distinct. The tran-
 walls of the peritoneal cavity (parietal peritoneum, —11) is continuous
 sition to the integument is formed at both ends of the alimentary canal by
 with the serous membrane covering the surface of the organ (visceral peri-
a cutaneous mucous membrane with stratifed squamous epithelium (A;
 toneum, —13). The connecting peritoneum that extends from the parietal
Cavum oris; see also histology). In the oral cavity, at sites with maximal
 peritoneum of the body wall to the visceral peritoneum covering the organ
mechanical stress such as the hard palate and the mechanicallingual papil-
- uoad no runo Kasu rau ined e uaia seme s
lae, the stratified squamous epithelium is, in addition, cornified. The rapid
 ments (e.g., broad ligament of the uterus, triangular ligaments of the liver,
transport of the prehended food is brought about by the striated muscula-
- si ed asoo ai uo ay  ui us si auas aui t
ture of the muscular tunic, which continues onto the esophagus. The trans-
media, —12).
 port is facilitated by the mucous secretions of the salivary glands of the oral
-adisa s umad aui ot sueo au jo dsuer edeaodoi a
cavity and pharynx. The muscularis mucosae is present as a delicate mus-
 ly important for surgery. In the case of a surgical operation, this relation-
cle layer of the mucous membrane that starts in the esophagus and increas-
 ship determines whether or not the peritoneal cavity must be opened with
 es slightly in thickness in the caudal direction. Its smooth muscle facilitates
 a certain mobility ofthe mucous membrane independent of the contraction
 its greater risk of infection of the peritoneum (peritonitis; see p. 50).
of the predominant striated (esophagus) or smooth muscle (stomach, intes-
 The sensory innervation of the parietal layer of the peritoneum is by the
tine) of the muscular tunic from which it is separated by the tela submu-
 segmental spinal nerves (lumbar and thoracic nerves). The peritoneum cov-
cosa.
ering the abdominal aspect of the diaphragm receives its sensory innerva-
From the cardia of the stomach, a tall columnar epithelium (E) lines the
tion by the phrenic nerve. The sensory innervation of the mesenteries,
lumen. It has a less protective function and more secretory and resorptive
 omenta, and peritoneal ligaments proceeds from stretch and probably oth-
functions. This is reflected by the different epithelial cells. The secretion of
 er less well understood receptors, but not from ordinary pain, temperature,
mucus in the intestine is chiefly brought about by goblet cells (9) that lie scat-
and touch receptors. The viscera are relatively insensitive to the sensations
tered in the lumenal epithelium and increase in number from the duodenum
 associated with the skin and the parietal peritoneum. If excessive stretch
to the rectum. Digestive juices are secreted by glands of the stomach and
(tension) or pressure is avoided, the viscera can be incised and otherwise
intestinal wall and by associated glands (liver, pancreas). Resorption requires
surgically manipulated without pain to the animal.
158
Tunica mucosa and Tunica serosa
Small intestine
M
E' Villus (a) and Intestinal crypt (b)
 Circular fold 
Tunica muscularis:
2
 Longitudinal layer 
 Circular layer
4 Tela submucosa
Tunica mucosa:
5
 Lamina muscularis
mucosae
 6  Lamina propria
mucosae
Mucosal epithelium 
8 Microvilli
9 Goblet cells
A Oral cavity
B Trachea
C Uterine tube
DDeferentduct
Cisterna chyli
(cranial view)
(Transverse section)
Aorta
10 Retroperitoneal space 
Right kidney
Tunica serosa:
 Parietal part 
Intermediate part
12
(mesentery)
13  Visceral part
 Small interstine 
14 Mesothelium
15 Lamina propria
serosae
16 Subserosal layer
G Tunica serosa
Peritoneal cavity
159
An Introduction to the Physical-Technical Basics of X-Ray and
Ultrasound Diagnostics
Cordula Poulsen Nautrup
1
 Conventional and Direct Magnifying
 gus and digestive tract, there are many water soluble media, usu-
ally containing iodine, for the depiction of vessels (angiography
Radiography
-figs. 4, 5, 6; arteriography, phlebography, lymphography) and
nearly all of the body cavities (urography, bronchography,
1.1
1  X-rays
arthrography, rmyelography).
X-rays are electromagnetic waves with frequencies of approxi-
mately 1012 to 1014 MHz (megahertz).
1.4 Image formation and recording
X-rays pass through the body film (photographic effect) or en-
1.2  Generating x-rays
ergize the luminescent chemicals of an intensifying screen or
When accelerated electrons hit an anode or target, part of the
 image amplifier (luminescence effect).
kinetic energy is transformed into bremsstrahlung (a continuous
X-ray film images are negatives; highly-absorbent regions such
radiation spectrum of various wavelengths) and characteristic x-
as bone or calcifications appear white to light gray, whereas
rays (a line spectrum). Most of the energy, however, is lost in the
 radiolucent areas, such as air-filled and parenchymatous organs,
form of heat.
fat, muscle, cartilage, connective tissue, or fluids (blood, urine,
The emitted x-ray radiation, which is made up mainly of
liquid ingesta, etc.), appear dark (fig. 7). As a positive, the mon-
bremsstrahlung and, to an extent, of characteristic x-rays, is
itor image shows radiodense areas as black to dark gray, and
responsible for image formation. The voltage determines the
radiolucent areas as white to light gray (fig. 8).
most energetic radiation with the shortest wavelength. Potential
 The analogue pictures of x-ray-closed circuit TV systems or
differences useful for x-ray diagnostics and the resulting energies
radiographs can be digitalized and then reworked with a picture
lie between 18 and 120 kV and 1 and 120 kV, resp. Soft x-rays
 processor. Typically-used methods in medical diagnostics in-
 of long wavelengths (low kV values) are opposed by harder and
clude digital measurements, multiple image integration for im-
more energetic radiation of short wavelengths (high kV values).
proving contrast, edge enhancement to improve the depth of
field, and picture subtraction to bring out or isolate vessels
 The behavior of x-rays in material and the formation of
(DSA: digital subtraction angiography).
radiographs
Experimentally, color coding and pseudo-3D presentation after
Materials absorb and scatter x-rays. Differences in absorption in
object shifting have proved useful for evaluating areas of low
an x-rayed patient, body part, or object produce a new radiation
contrast (fig. 9). All methods of digital picture processing serve
 spectrum. All planes of a three-dimensional body are thereby
to increase the quality of x-ray film images with improved and
 presented on a single plane. A radiograph is thus a summative
more complete possibilities of evaluation, and at the same time
picture, in which areas lying one above or below another are
to reduce the dangerous levels of radiation or the amounts of
superimposed (fig. 1).
 contrast media necessary.
1.3.1 Absorption in relation to the irradiated material
Absorption depends on the density and valence number of the
irradiated material. Air or organs containing air with their low
densities and resultingly low absorptions can be easily differen-
tiated from other soft tissues with higher densities. Due to their
higher densities and higher effective valence numbers, calcified
 or bony areas absorb x-rays better than soft tissues and are clear-
 Source of radiation
ly contrasted from these.
(Focal spot)
1.3.2 Absorption in relation to the radiation quality
The quality of the x-rays further influences the level of absorp-
tion. Whereas with the use of soft x-rays absorption is predom-
inant, absorption decreases and scattering increases with
Primary x-ray beam
increasing radiation energy levels. In soft radiation exposures
the large differences in contrast allow the differentiation
(fig. 3). In human medicine this technique is employed in mam-
mography for radiological tumor diagnosis of the female breast.
Sideawa
Medium hard to hard radiation is suited for the depiction of suf-
ficiently calcified bone tissue (fig. 2).
Object
1.3.3 Contrast media
Contrast media are necessary for the differentiation of vessels in
soft tissues and bone (figs. 4, 5, 6) as well as for evaluating cer-
tain organ regions. Such media are classed as negative (less ab-
sorption than bone) or positive (higher absorption), according
to their ability to absorb x-rays. The first group includes easily
dgetowardsfiln
 absorbed gases such as air, carbon dioxide, and nitrous oxide.
These are primarily used for presenting the alimentary canal
and urinary bladder, often in the form of double contrast im-
 ages, in which a positive contrast medium is combined with a
Film plane
'Edge away from filr
 negative. Positive contrast media have a higher density and a
large valence number. In addition to barium sulfate, a water in-
soluble contrast medium for controlling passage in the esopha-
Fig. 1: Schematic drawing of the formation of a radiograph (summative picture).
160
 - men leipauaeel  oot anbuuoah Auon bop inpe e yo heu leueo hn z bi
Anatomic structures (figs. 2, 3)
H   Nasal bone
Maxilla
Cranium
K
 Premaxilla
 External lamina 
L
 Mandible 
2
Spongy bone (diploe)
15 Mandibular canal
3
Internal lamina 
16 Mandibular body
 Tentorial process
17 Mandibular ramus
Neurocranial bones 
18 Mandibular angle
A
Frontal bone
19  Condylar process
5
 Frontal sinus 
20 Coronoid process
B Parietal bone
Teeth
D
Temporal bone
C Canine tooth
6
 Squamous part
 P4 Fourth premolar
 Petrous part 
M1  First molar
B
Tympanic part/tympanic bulla
Ethmoid bone
21  Enamel
E
22Dentin
F
 Occipital bone
23 Dental cavity
9
 Squamous part
10 External occipital crown
Hyoid bone
11  Lateral part
24 Basihyoid
12 Occipital condyle 
25  Thyrohyoid 
 26  Ceratohyoid
Face
27Epihyoid
13 Orbits
 28 Stylo and tympanohyoid
Facial bones
M  Atlas
G  Zygomatic bone
Fig. 3: Left cranial half of a six-day-old puppy. Low-kV technique, 40 kv latero-
N Axis
14 Temporal process
medial view - LM.
1.5
 The laws of projection
mind the problem of geometric blurring, chapter 1.6.1, fig. 17).
 Picture formation with x-rays follows the laws of central pro-
The factor of magnification, V, is the quotient of FFD to FOD,
jection; rays emanating from a more or less expansive, ideally
i. e., FFD: FOD (fig. 10).
 point-formed focal spot diverge in straight lines.
1.5.2 Superpositioning
1.5.1 Geometric magnification
Two structures lying one above the other are projected into each
In describing projections it differentiated must be made between
other and can no longer be differentiated from each other.
the film-focal distance (FFD), focal-object distance (FOD), and
Cracks, fissures, or fractures, which run roughly perpendicular
the object-film distance (OFD). With a conventional image at a
to the path of the x-rays remain hidden, due to superpositioning
scale of 1 : 1 the FFD is nearly the same as the FOD, which
(figs. 11 A, 12). Only by rotating the object do the details run
means that with a large FFD the patient or area to be filmed is
 parallel to the path of the rays and then appear in radiographs
close to the film plane. Reductions in the FOD caused by raising
(figs. 11 B, 13). Disturbing superpositioning can be reduced
the patient or object result in direct x-ray magnification (keep in
when examining anatomical preparations by preparing thin sec-
161
Anatomic structures
(figs. 5, 6)
 Intrarenal vessels
1  Interlobar artery
2 Arcuate artery
3  Interlobular artery 
4  Afferent glomerular arteriole
5  Glomerular capillaries 
Anatomic structures 
Fig. 6: Radiograph of the glo-
Bone structures
meruli in the renal cortex illed 
1  Femur head (epiphysis)
with contrast medium. (Tissue 
2
 Femur neck
slice approximately 5 mm thick).
3
 Major trochanter
Trochanteric fossa
4
 Femur shaft 
6  Nutrient canal
7
 Compact substance
8
 Spongy substance
 9  Medullary cavity
Intraosseal vessels
10 Nutritive artery
11 Diaphyseal vessel 
 12 Metaphyseal vessel
13 Epiphyseal vessel
14 Apophyseal vessel
 Fig 4: Radiograph of the proximal itraosseal vessels of the left femur flled with 
contrast medium. Mediolateral view - ML.
Fig. 7: Radiograph of the left elbow = negative. Lateromedial view - LM
L
 Fig. 8: Monitor image of the left elbow 
 Fig. 9: Monitor image of the left 
= positive. Lateromedial view - LM.
elbow. Digital pseudo-3D-depiction
after object shifing. Lateromedial 
view - LM.
Anatomic structures (figs. 7, 8, 9)
A Humerus
8 Radial neck
1  Humerus shaft 
9  Radial tuberosity
2  Humeral condyle
C Una 
3 Epicondyles
10 Olecranon 
4  Olecranon fossa 
11 Olecranon tuberosity 
5 Radial fossa
12 Anconeal process
6 Supratrochlear foramen
13 Coronoid process
D Soft tissue
B Radius
7 Head
tions (0.1 - 1.0 mm). In vivo the superposition-free radiological
1.5.3 Geometric distortion
depiction of structures of one plane is possible with the help of
The higher magnification in radiographs of areas further from
tomography.
the film, in contrast to areas near the film, is known as geomet-
ric distortion (figs. 1, 14 A, 15). An increase in the geometric dis-
tortion can occur by placing the object in the outer area of the
x-ray beam (figs. 14 B, 16). Such an effect can also be obtained
162
diation(Focal spot)
FOD
Sourceofradiatior
FFD
Object
FOD
OFD
Obje
FFD
[Object
Image
 Image
Image
Image
1:1
1,33:1
2:1
2:1
 Fig. 10: Schematic crawing of a 1: 1 scale image and various geometric
magnifications.
Source of radiation
(Focal spot)
 Primary x-ray beam
Fig. 12: Left tarsal joint. Mediolateral view - ML.
Fig. 13: Left tarsal joint. Dorsoplantar view - DPl. The typical hinge joint form
of the tarsocrural joint and the intertarsal joints can be diferentiated, in contrast
Objectl
to fig. 12.
Gap
 Object I
Object Il
Object Il
Anatomic structures (figs. 12, 13)
A Tibia
7 Head
1
 Tibial cochlea
8 Calcaneus
 2  Medial malleolus
9  Calcaneal tuber 
10 Central tarsal bone
B Fibula
Film or
11 First tarsal bone
 3  Lateral malleolus
12 Second tarsal bone
image plane
C Tarsal bones
13 Third tarsal bone 
B
4Talus
14 Fourth tarsal bone
Fig. 11: Schematic drawing of superpositioning in the central projection; A: gap
5 Body of talus
15 Intertarsal joints 
 perpendicular, B. gap parallel to the beam.
6  Trochlea of talus
 D Metatarsal bones
by positioning the object at an angle to the central x-ray beam.
by stable positioning and using shorter exposure times (for
Geometric distortion can give an impression of three-dimension-
example, cardiographs under 1 ms).
ality and simplify the categorizing of details to specific planes,
Geometric blurring (GB) is determined by the diameter of the
especially with direct radiographic magnification. Exact meas-
focal spot and the relationship of the FFD to the FOD. Whereas
urements from radiographs, however, should only be made on
a larger focal spot leads to significant blurring of the outer edges
images free of geometric distortion; the points to be measured
when the patient is raised above the film/image plane, an ideal-
should be located within the central beam and with larger FFDs
should be close to the film plane.
ly point-formed radiation source gives sharp pictures without
blurred edges in every area between the focal spot and film
 The quality of radiographs
plane (figs. 18, 20). An object lying directly on the film plane is
1.6
always sharply projected, regardless of the size of the focal spot.
The ability to evaluate fine structures in radiographs or with an
Whereas direct magnifications of up to 2.5x are possible with
image amplifier and monitor presuppose sufficient picture
focal spots of 100 μm (mammography machines), direct magni-
quality. The following factors are responsible for the quality of
fications of up to 200x with satisfactory sharpness are possible
radiographs:
using microfocal spots of less than 10 μm (fig. 6).
sharpness or blurring.
Film-screen blurring depends on the type of screen used and the
contrast,
 contact betrween the screen and film. X-ray or intensifying
resolution of the image formation and recording system.
 screens contain fluorescent crystals, which convert incoming
 The functions sharpness and contrast are dependent on a num-
X-rays into visible light. The photographic coating of the film in
 ber of various parameters, which are given by the geometry of
contact with the screen is blackened by the light emitted by the
the radiation source, the radiation, the object to be depicted,
screen. Intensifying screens serve to reduce doses. The more
and the x-ray machine.
sensitive the screen, i. e., the larger the amplification, and the
 shorter the necessary exposure time needed for blackening the
1.6.1 Sharpness or blurring
film, the better the sharpness (fig. 23).
The recognition of details in radiographs can be limited or lost
The three blurring parameters described here all influence each
 n  a  on   
other at the same time. Due to the low dosage levels, reducing
 screen blurring.
geometric blurring by using a smaller focal spot results in long
 Blurring due to movement is the result of the patient's moving
exposure times and increases the danger of blurring due to
when insufficiently fixed, or the movement of organs (heart
movement. All three factors have to be tuned to each other and
contractions, breathing movements, etc.). This can be avoided
 adapted to the situation.
163
Source of rac
 Central beam
Outer
area
Centralbeam
Object B
Object A
Image
 plane 
Image B
A
Image A
 Fig. 14: Schematic drawing of geometric distortion. Geometric magnification of
an object in the central beam path (A) and in the outer beam path (B).
 Fig. 16: Radiograph of the left knee joint in the outer beam path. Craniocaudal
view, beam path 20° oblique to the craniocaudal beam path - Cr20L-CdMO.
 Anatomic structures (figs. 15, 16)
A Femur
 8  Tibial tuberosity
1  Femur shaft 
9  Cranial margin
2 Medial condyle
C Fibula
3  Lateral condyle
 4 Intercondyloid fossa
10 Head of fibula
 5  Femur trochlea
D Patella
B Tibia
 6 Intercondylar eminence
mius muscle
12 Sesamoid bone of the popliteal
7 Tibia shaft
muscle
Large focal spot
1Object
 Fig. 17: Schematic drawing of
geometric bluming (GB) caused by
Film plane 
raising the object from the flm
-6n-
Fig. 15: Radiograph of the left knee joint within the central beam path. Cranio-
 plane when a large focal spot is 
caudal view - CrCd = beam path.
used.
 Geometric burring 
1.6.2 Contrast
Contrast means the difference between two intensities of
Point-formed focal
spot
blackening on the film or berween two levels of brightness on
the image amplifier. The contrast on the image recording system
(x-ray film or monitor) corresponds to the differences in intensi-
. Object
ty after absorption of the primary beam by the patient or object.
The contrast level depends mainly on the beam quality, the body
region to be examined, and scatter radiation.
 Soft x-rays give clearer differences in contrast than hard x-rays,
Film plane
 Fig. 18: Schematic crawing of 
for which the blackening gradations are smaller (see chapter
1.3.2). An area exposed with overly-hard radiation appears
sharp direct magnification when an
 ideally point-formed focal spot is
dull; it lacks bright whites and deep blacks.
High geometric sharpness.
used.
164
 Source of radiation 
Source of radiation 
Source of radiation
Primary
Primary x-ray
x-ray beam
beam
.Body
：
. Image-ineff-
ective
scatter
 Fig. 19: Heavy geometric 
radiation
、Body
 burring in a 4x direct mag-
Scatter
nification made with a 400
：
Body
 radiation
μm focal spot (oniginal
11-1
Grid
 photographically reduced
Image-effective 
 Film plane
 Film plane 
 for technical reasons of
printing).
C
 Fig. 21: Schematic drawings of the effect (A) and reduction (B, C) of scatter
radiation (B - distance technique with large OFD, C - use of a grid).
R
10mm
 Fig. 20: High geometric sharpness in a 4x direct magnification made with a 5
μm microfocal spot. Middle and distal phalanges of the ight rear paw. Dorso-
printing).
 Anatomic structures
Fig. 22: Bones of the ight front 
 paw as seen with high resolution
 Digital bones
6  Unguicular crest 
7  Unguicular groove
nonscreen x-ray film (Structurix
1  Proximal phalanx
 2 Middle phalanx
8  Unguicular process
D7, Agfa-Gevaert). Exposure 
values: 2.5 mm Al fliter, FFD 80 cm,
 3 Distal phalanx
 Soft tissue
60 kV, 50 mAs.
4  Extensor process
 5 Flexor tuberosity
9  Metatarsal cushion
ped a01 0L 
 Clear differences in contrast are seen between bones and soft
1.6.3 Resolution of the image formation and recording system
tissues and between vessels or organs filled with contrast media
The resolving ability of the image formation or recording system
and the surroundings.
determines the size of details, which can just be recognized. Peri-
Scatter radiation, which originates in the irradiated material,
odical structures, such as the lead strips of a grid, which are
reaches the recording surface multidirectionally and causes a
smaller than the silver halide grains of the film or the illumina-
diffuse blackening of the x-ray film or diffuse energizing of the
tion crystals of a screen or imaging device, cannot be distin-
illumination crystals of an x-ray screen or image amplifier
 guished from one another. The local resolution of nonscreen film
(fig. 21 A). Fine differences in contrast, i. e., small differences in
is approximately 50 μm (fig. 22), for screen-film systems be-
absorption in tissues, are covered up. Scatter radiation increases
tween 80 - 200 μm (fig. 23), and using image amplifiers and
with increasing hardness of the primary beam. It is also depen-
closed-circuit TV systems, between 200 - 420 μm. In order to
dent on the properties and size of the irradiated object. To re-
recognize such small structures, the contrast between the struc-
duce the scatter radiation the primary beam can be restricted
 tures and the surroundings has to be sufficient. This is generally
with a diaphragm, a grid can he used (fig. 21 C), or the OFD can 
not the case for biological material.
be increased (fig. 21 B).
With conventional standard radiographs the screen-film system
 used generally limits the recognition of details to 100 μm.
Scatter radiation grids are made of lead strips, which are placed
parallel to the primary beam and only allow these to pass,
All of the factors mentioned, which influence the quality of the
whereas multidirectional scatter radiation is absorbed. The dis-
 picture, interact highly with each other. Small structures at the
advantage is the necessary increase in power, since in addition
limit of resolution, which are affected by geometric blurring or
to the scatter radiation, a part of the primary beam is lost in the
show unclear edges as a result of superpositioning, can only be
grid (fig. 21 C).
evaluated if the contrast is high enough. Reversely, with good
165
Anatomic structures figs. 21, 23)
Direction of propagation
A Carpal bones 
1  Radial carpal bone
 2 UInar carpal bone
3
 Accessory carpal bone
 First carpal bone
5
 Second carpal bone
 Third carpal bone
Compression
Rarefaction
6
7
 Fourth carpal bone
 B Metacarpal bones
8 Base
9 Shaft
10 Head
 Longitudinal wave (sound wave)
C Digital bones
 11 Proximal phalanx
 Fig. 24: Schematic drawing of the propagation of a longitudinal wave in tissue.
12 Middle phalanx
13 Distal phalanx
D Sesamoid bones
used in ultrasound diagnostics lie between 1-20 MHz (mega-
hertz = 10o0 kHz), and are considerably higher than the ultra-
 sonic frequencies perceivable by animals, such as cats, dogs, or
bats.
Fig. 23: Bones of the right front
2.2
 Behavior of sound waves in material
 paw taken with a highly sensitive
 screen-film combination (Trimax
2.2.1 Wave propagation velocity and acoustic impedance
T6 screen and XM flm, 3M).
 Compared with fig. 22, lower
The velocity with which ultrasound travels in tissue (wave pro-
resolution and increased screen
pagation velocity) depends on the ultrasound frequency and
blurring can be seen. Exposure 
 properties of the material. The speed averages 1540 m/s in soft
values: 2.5 mm Al filter, FFD
tissues and liquids, is considerably lower in air, and distinctly
80 cm, 60 kV, 1.5 mAs.
higher in bone. The acoustic resistance or impedance of a tissue
 is the product of the speed of the sound beam in a given tissue
 sharpness and sufficient detail size the contrast is of less impor-
and the density of the tissue.
tance.
2.2.2 Reflection, transmission, refraction, scattering, and
1.6.4 Labeling radiographs
 absorption
The quality of radiographs can be further improved by compre-
When sound waves pass interfaces between two tissues with dif-
hensive labeling, including exposure parameters, positioning,
ferent wave propagation velocities or with different acoustic im-
and patient identification.
pedances (see chapter 2.2.1), a part of the sound beam is reflect-
Lead letters placed on the cassette at the time of exposure can be
 ed (reflection - figs. 25, 26). The direction of reflection of a wave
used to mark cranial, caudal, medial, lateral, right, and left. The
hitting an interface perpendicularly is the same as that of the
terminology used for the views shown in radiographs generally
incident wave. The nonreflected wave continues in the second
follows guidelines set by the Nomenclature Committee of the
 medium without changing direction (transmission - fig. 25). 1f
American College of Veterinary Radiology.* ) The positioning of
 the interface is hit at an angle, the angle of reflection is the same
d  a n     pe d 
 as the incident angle. The transmitted wave is refracted (refrac-
beam penetrates the body part, from the point of entry to the
tion - fig. 26).
point of exit, are to be given using proper veterinary anatomic
 Irregular acoustic interfaces cause reflection of the sound waves
directional terms.
 in all directions (scattering).
 Radiation protection
 In addition, the sound beam is absorbed as it passes through tis-
sues (absorption). The degree of absorption depends on the
adsp xa sx s q i d
sound frequency and the quality of the insonated tissue. Higher
erally undesirable effects on biological tissues. Soft radiation is
frequencies are absorbed more strongly than low ones. When
more likely to be damaging (especially to the skin), due to its
considering body tissues, bone and calcifications have high rates
 greater absorption.
 of absorption.
The requirements set on equipment and operation by state agen-
cies are to be consciously followed. First and foremost is that the
required image quality be obtained with the lowest amount of
Tra
er
radiation possible.
 Fig. 25: Schematic drawing of the
Incident
Reflected 
reflection and transmission of an
 wave Interface
incident sound wave hitting the
wave
2
 Physical-technical Basics of Sonography
interface perpendicularly.
or Echography
Transmitted
2.1
 Ultrasound
wave
 Sound waves are longitudinal waves. The particles of a tissue are
Incident
 brought to vibrate by the sound. The direction of vibration cor-
wave
wave
 responds to the direction of sonic propagation, which results in
compression and rarefaction within the wave (fig. 24). Frequen-
cies above 20 kHz are known as ultrasound. The frequencies
Intel
 Fig. 26: Schematic drawing of the
*) Smallwood. J. E., M. J. Shively, VT. Rendano, and R. E. Habel: A stan-
reflection and refraction of an
 dardized notation for radiographic projections used in veterinary medi-
 incident sound wave hitting the
cine. Vet. Rad. 26, 2-9. (1985).
 interface at an angle.
Refracted wave
166
2.2.3 The effect of diagnostic ultrasound on biological tissues
The sound intensities used in the course of ultrasonic diagnostics
of only a few mW/cm?, as well as frequencies used, are consid-
ered safe, so that repeated pregnancy examinations are
 possible.
2.3
 Generation and reception of ultrasound waves 
The scanner head is both a transmitter and receiver. A piezo-
 electric crystal in the transducer or scanner is brought to vibrate
by high-frequency electric pulses and converts them to ultra
sound. At the same time reflected sound waves are transformed
into corresponding electrical impulses, which can be made visi-
ble on a monitor. With an impulse duration of 1 - 2 μs the rela-
cm
tionship between the times of transmission and reception is
approximately 1:5 00 to 1: 1000.
2.4Resolution
The axial resolution along the path of the ultrasound beam de-
pends primarily on the frequency used. With frequencies of 1
and 10 MHz, structures of at best 1.5 mm and 100 μm, respec-
tively, can be made out. High frequencies not only have a high-
er resolution, but also less penetration, since the rate of absorp-
tion is higher. 5.0 MHz has proven to be a universal frequency
for cardiac and abdominal examinations of dogs.
The lateral resolution is less than the axial and is determined
B
 primarily by the geometry of the transducer.
2.5
 Formation of two-dimensional ultrasonographs
1 cm
 2.5.1 Transducer-dependent form of the ultrasonographs
Fig. 28: Sector sonographs of the liver with the galbladder shown longitudinally
(A) and transversely sectioned (B).
For the presentation of anatomical or pathological structures,
the two-dimensional real-time technique is almost always used
Anatomic structures
today. Depending on the ultrasound field scanned, one can dif-
1 Liver, 2 Gallbladder, 3 Branch of the portal vene, 4 Diaphragm.
ferentiate between the sector scan and linear or parallel scan. A
S   i  on   
Whereas the sector scanner produces a triangular image (figs.
27, 28), the image produced by a linear or parallel transducer is
rectangular (figs. 29, 30). Only the sector scanner is suited for
examination of the heart, due to the narrow intercostal acoustic
Transducer/
"Interface"
 scanner
window in the area of the cardiac notch of the lung. Abdominal
examinations can also be made easily in dogs with sector trans-
 Sound wave
 Ps oe a sa xa no rau ( ) s
 canine abdominal sonography, especially for diagnosing preg-
 Parallel scan 
nancy, since they provide better resolution of structures close to
(Monitor image)
Interface
the transducer (fig. 30).
Object
Transducer/scanner
Ultrasound
Fig. 29: Schematic drawing of the formation of a two-dimensional sonograph
(section), using a linear transducer.
 Sector scan 
Sound wavi
Ultrasound
(Monitor image)
Interfac
2.5.2 Categorizing structures on the sonograph
In contrast to the radiograph (fig. 1), an ultrasonograph is a sec-
tion, which shows the acoustic interfaces between various soff
tissues (figs. 27, 29). Reflections of the ultrasound beam occur
Object
at each interface and appear on the monitor as echogenic
regions, i. e., as bright areas (figs. 28, 30).
 Fibrous wall structures of vessels and organs are seen as more or
less hyperechogenic (white) areas, when hit perpendicularly
with the ultrasound beam. Ultrasonographs of parenchymatous
 organs (liver, spleen, renal cortex) and muscle (including the
 Fig. 27: Schematic crawing of the formation of a two-dimensional sonograph
heart) are made up of numerous single echoes (white-spotted
(section), using a sector scanner. 
areas).
167
Nearly the entire beam intensity is reflected (strong white echo)
at interfaces between soft tissues and structures containing air
(lung), bone, or calcifications, as a result of the large difference
in acoustic impedance. Since the remaining beam intensity is ab-
 sorbed in penetrating bone or calcifications, tissues found be-
hind them cannot be shown; a black anechoic area, acoustic
 shadowing, is seen on the monitor (fig. 30). The same is true for
tissues covered by the lungs.
Homogenous tissue regions, such as renal parenchyma, or liq-
uids, such as blood, bile, or urine, appear hypoechoic (constant
dark gray) or anechoic (constant black).
cm
Position of the fetus
1 cm
right
cranial
caudal
Fig. 31: Diastolic four-chainber view of the heart without (A) and with (B) con-
 trast medium in the right atrium and ventricle.
left
(Tobias, R., Small Animal Clinic, Hannover Veterinary School.
1 cm
 Anatomic structures 
1   Right atrium 
 4  Interatrial septum
1a Contrast medium
 5 Interventricular septum
of a fetus, thorax, and intrathoracal abdomen with ribs and typical acoustic sha-
 in the right atrium
6 Left atrium
dows. (Grof, D., Wissdorf, H., Institute of Anatomy, Hannover Veterinary Schooll.
2  Right ventricle 
 7 Left ventricle
 2a Contrast medium in the ight 
 8 Opened mitral valve
Anatomic structures 
ventricle
 3 Opened tricuspid valve
1 Echos of the ribs
5  Diaphragm
2
 Acoustic shadows of the ribs
6 Liver
3 Heart
7 Caudal vena cava
4  Lung (collapsed)
8 Forelimb
yfo
2.5.3 Contrast media
Transducel
 Ultrasound contrast media are used to improve presentations of
vessels or heart chambers, or to evaluate heart defects, such as
Reflected wave (frequency f)
in the interventricular or interatrial septum (fig. 31). They con-
f=fo
I Macroscopic structure 
tain extremely finely distributed gas bubbles as the echogenic
A
(Aorta as example)
substance. In addition to CO, or various well-mixed solutions,
Incident wave (frequency f)
such as physiological saline, 5 % glucose solution, plasma ex-
pander, or patient blood, commercially prepared echocontrast
media will be available in the future. The latter contain gas bub-
bles, which are bound to saccharide microparticles. Following
ransduce
intravenous injection the contrast medium can be traced to the
pulmonary trunk. The presently available contrast media cannot
 pass the pulmonary capillaries.
Reflected wave (frequency f) 
Object moving towards 
f>fo
 transducer (blood as example)
 2.5.4 Orientation on the ultrasonograph
Incident wave (frequency f)
By turning, tilting, or sliding the transducer, every sectional
 ( ) ad u  aq u o  go a
Transducel
desired sonographic plane has to be correspondingly exactly se-
lected or reproduced for measurements or repeated examina-
tions. Regarding the localizations in ultrasonographs, areas near
Reflected wave (frequency f)
the transducer are seen in the upper part of the picture and areas
B
f<fo
 Object moving away from
distant to it in the lower part (figs. 27, 29). The right or left side
transducer (blood as example)
 of the picture corresponds to the left or right side, dorsal or ven-
 Fig. 32: Schematic representations of two-dimensional (A) and of doppier
tral, or cranial or caudal side of the body.
echography (B).
2.6  Doppler echography
is altered in accordance with the direction and spaced of the
The waves reflected from stationary interfaces have a lower in-
( a  -adud addop anu, do
tensity, but the same frequency as the incident ultrasound waves
 By definition, blood flowing towards the transducer is shown
(fig. 32 a). If, on the other hand, the waves strike a moving ob-
above the baseline (continuous or pulsed doppler) or in red (col-
ject, such as an erythrocyte, the frequency of the reflected wave
Or-coded doppler) - Reversely, i. e., blood shown below the base
168
line or in blue is flowing away from the transducer. This presen-
Systole
Diastole
Systole
tation of the direction of blood flow is completely voluntary and
has nothing to do with the type of vessel (artery or vein) or the
Oxygen content of the blood. Oxygen-rich blood in the ascend-
ing aorta, for example, is shown in blue (fig. 33 b) or below the
baseline (fig. 33 a), since it flows away from the transducer.
The speed of the blood flow can be read directly from the y-axis
with a conventional doppler and can be estimated from the col-
 or intensity with a color-coded doppler.
If the blood velocity exceeds the reception frequency of the
transducer, the so-called aliasing phenomenon occurs, which
A
dopplers this results in reversing of the colors and with conven-
tional dopplers in reversed presentation, relative to the x-axis.
2.7
 Preparing the dog for ultrasonic examination
 A prerequisite for quality ultrasonographs is sufficient contact
of the transducer with the surface of the skin. For cardiae exam-
 ination a wiping of the skin with alcohol and heavy application
of contact gel is sufficient for most dogs. The same procedure
can be used for abdominal sonography of dogs with little or me-
dium amounts of hair. Animals with thick long fur and much
underfur, however, have to be shaved in the area to be examined.
The positioning of the dog depends on the preference of the
 operator, the behavior of the animal, and the examination to be
1 cm
B
performed. Echocardiography in lateral recumbancy is pro-
posed as well as cardial examinations made on sitting or stand-
Fig. 33: Blood fow at the level of the aortic valve: pulsed doppler (A) and color-
ing dogs. Abdominal sonography is possible in lateral and dor-
coded doppler (B).
sal recumbancy, as well as on standing animals.
 Anatomic structures
 Arrow shows maximum speed of the
 2  Ascending ao
 blood at the level of the aortic valve.
3   Myocardium
1 Left ventricle (outflow path)
 4  Pericardium
Sonographic Anatomy
by Cordula Poulsen Nautrup
An Introduction to Sonographic Anatomy
As with radiographic anatomy, sonographic anatomy has direct
systems. The most important structures in the ultrasonographs
clinical references. Only a thorough knowledge of the normal
are depicted in sketches and labeled. The respective positions
ultrasonograph allows the successful clinical use of this method,
 for the ultrasonographic examination are shown in accompany-
which is relatively new to veterinary medicine. Several examples
ing schematic drawings.
of ultrasonographs follow, showing various organs and organ
HEART- COR
Right
ventricle
 Section
of the
 Opened 
 septomarginal
tricuspid
Mvo-
trabecula
wave
cardiurr
Left
 ventricle
Completely openec
mitral valve
Peri-
cardium
Left
atrium
Fig. 34: Inflow tract of the left ventricle; late-diastolic longaxis section of the left ventricle
169
Chordae
tendineae
/entriculu
Closed mitral
valve
Myocardi
Atrium
um
nary,trunk
sinistrum
Peri-..
. . .cardium
 Fig. 35: Inflow tract of the left ventricle; late-systolic bng-axis section of the left ventricle
Left
Septal cuspid
ventricle
-- of the mitral
Myocardium
valve
 Pericardium
Left
atrium
 Fig. 36: Inflow tract of the left ventricle; bng-axis section of the left ventricle
Right
会t
entricle
Myo
cardium
Fig. 37: Inflow tract of the left ventricle; diastolic short-axis section at the level of the mitral valve.
Interventricular
septum
Right
ventricle
Left
ventricle
Papillary
Myo-
muscles
cardium
 Pericardium
170
 Opened
tricuspid valve
 Brachiocephalic
Left
trunk
ventricle
Closed aortic
Aortic
valve
arch
pulmonalis
ronary
artery
Left
ventricle
Aorta
Myo-
Opened aortic valve
Pericardium
I Rhigt semilunar valve
I Left semilunar valve
Ill Septal semilunar valve
Right
Closed
Inicuspi
aorticvalve
valve
Right
atrium
Right
Left
rentricle
atriurr
Right
ralve
atrium
Interatrial
septum
Pericardium
171
STOMACH
inial
right
left
dorsal
Gastric Folds
Body of stomach
1cm
Fig. 43: Empty stomach, bngitudinal section.
Liver - HepaR
Hepaticve
bladde
Branchesof
theportalvein
Hepaticveins
Fig. 44: Liver, cross section.
Liver
Branch of portal vein
 Hepatic veins
ventral
Caudal vena
cranial-
caudal
cava
dorsal
Hepatic vein 
Branch of portal
1 cm
Fig. 45: Liver of 5-day-old puppy; color-coded doppler depiction of blood fow in hepatic veins and caudal vena cava during inspiration.
FEREER
Spleen
ventral
cranial -
caudal
dorsal
1 cm
Small intestine
Transverse view
Fig. 46: Spleen and hilus of spleen, longitudinal section; color-coded dopp
172
KIDNEY
lateral
 caudal
medial
Arcuate
arteries
Interlobar
arteries
Interlobar
veins
Renal medulla
1 cm
Fig. 47: Left kidney, paramedian longitudinal section; color-coded doppler depiction of blood fow in intrarenal blood vessels.
Renal cortex
Pelvicre
Renal pyramids
 Fig. 48: Left kidney sagittal bngitudinal section.
Renalco
Renal
pyramid
Fig. 49: Left kidney, cross section.
OVARY
Left ovary
Intraovarianartery
with a primary color
lertiary fo
lateral ventral
cranial
caudal
ventral
 dorsal
Aorta
medial dorsal
Fig. 50: Left ovary with tertiary follicles in a cycling bitch; color-code
of blood flow in aorta and intraovarian blood vessels.
173
URINARY BLADDER, UTERINE HoRNS
ight
leff
dorsa
Urinary bladder.
moderately filled
 Echo shadowing
 Uterine horns
(Artifact)
1 cm
Fig. 51: Moderately flled urinary bladder and uterine horns of a cycling bitch in cross section.
PROSTATE
Prostate
Blood
- Urethra
right 
vessels
left
dorsal
Rectum
1 cm
 Fig. 52: Prostate and urethra in cross-section; color-coded doppler depiction of the blood fow in intra- and periprostatic blood vessels.
TESTIS
Blood
vessels
 Mediastinum testis
Testis
Testicular artery
 and pampiniform plexus 
Fig. 53: Testis, longitudinal s
artery and the pampiniform plexus.
Address of the author:
Layout:
I would like to thank the FEINFOCUS Rontgen-Systeme Co. for allowing the use
PROF. DR. CORDULA POULSEN NAUTRUP SUSANNE FASSBENDER, med. techn.
of theirMicrofocus x-ray machines.For the support with various ultrasound
Institut fur Tieranatomie
assistant
Tierarztliche Fakultat
KAsTNER, Hannover, and the following companies and people: aTL Advanced
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat
Technical drawings:
Technology Laboratories, especially MR. R. FiscHER, DYNAMIC IMAGING, es-
Minchen
GERTRUD POULSEN NAUTRUP,
pecially MRs.S. WILSON and MR. T. GERHARDS, as well as DIASONICS SonoGer-
many
technician
tron, especially DR. H. SCHNEIDER.
174
 PeLvic LimB - MeMBRum PeLvINUM 
 Gluteal 
Joint capsule
nuscles
Periost
lleum
Femur
Pubis
1 cm
Fig. 54: Hip joint, bngitudinal section.
I (Head, ossified epiphysis)
(Kresken, J.-G., Kostlin, R.G., Clinic of Veterinary Surgery, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich)
II Neck
PREGNANCY
 Placental fluid
Yolk sac
Area of the
beating heart
Uterine wall
disposition 
Embryo
Fig.55: Early pregnancy, embryo, 20d after conception.
Jterin
Head
Neck
Jterin
Mouth
Umbilical
cord
 Placental fuid 
Fig. 56: Pregnancy fetus, 38d after conception.
Position of fetus:
dorsal
cranial
ventral
Vertebrae
 Urinary bladder
Umbilical artery
 Umbilical vein
1cm
 Fig. 57: Late stage of pregnancy fetus 52 days after ovulation, thoracic cavity and abdominal cavity, slightly oblique paramedian section; color-coded doppler depic-
tion of fetal circulation.
175
Introduction to Computed Tomography
Claudia Noller
The term computed tomography (CT) is derived from the Greek word
tomography (= image from slices). With this technique, a three-dimen-
 Image on Monitor
sional object is penetrated by x-rays from different directions. The mul.
titude of resulting two-dimensional images on the monitor must, how-
Voxel
ever first be calculated from the measured projections by the assistance
cian Johann Radon, for which reason the signal that arrives at the
detector is also designated a Radon transform of the screened object. In
this way, for the first time in 1972, measurements of tissue density were
possible. These measurements trace back to Godfrey N. Hounsfield
(measurement of tissue density) and Allan M. Cormack (concept of
projection and penetration) (HENNINGER, 2002). The first veteri-
nary medical publication appeared in 1980 in Kleintierpraxis' (Rohde
Pixe
et al., 1980).
To become acquainted with CT, its physical bases and examination
standards in small animals, as well as to become familiar with its man-
ner of function, a wide selection of references is available (HEN-
NINGER and PAVLICEK, 2001; HENNINGER, 2002; HOFER,
2000; SCHWARZ, 2002). In Figure 58, the principle of CT is pictori-
ally demonstrated. An x-ray tube (A) is arranged opposite numerous
detectors (B) and is connected with them. The tube rotates in a circle
around the patient and, during this rotation, continuously emits
x-radiation in the form of a radiating beam of previously adjusted
width (layer thickness). The patient, which is placed berween the x-ray
eue leus e jo Aydeioua pnduoo po uoeuasaidau seuauos 'as b
tube and the detectors, absorbs a part of the radiation, in which case
modified after HOFER (2000). The x-ray tube (A) is located opposite a row of
only a reduced portion of the radiation strikes the series of detectors
(saueg, do Auen i pelea-os aun yo buuedo aui ulg =saul 9l-l) sioioaiap
(= weakened profile). The arriving data are more or less rapidly evalu-
ated depending on the calculation-capacity of the computer and the
corresponding image is reconstructed on the monitor. In this way the
image reaches the monitor for pictorial reproduction (similar to the
- eq jo as, s ( ag a ss u e jo 
layer of a fixed thickness) will be demonstrated as a CT image at a reso-
lution of 512 x 512 pixels. However, it should be noted that one such
"disc" to be sure is represented in pixels, but behind them are hidden
averaged density values of volume elements (voxels), which must be
depicted two-dimensionally (fig. 58).
au on uoseduos ui Anistuap ui suon Kaans sunsn aui u
surroundings of a structure are indicated in the CTimage. Thus, a
yariation with less absorption than the surroundings is designated
hypodense; one with a similar absorption behavior is designated hyper-
transversal
 sagittal
dorsal
dense.
In the representation of CT-images, three spatial planes (fig. 59) are dis-
tinguished. Usually, a transverse data-set of images is taken up and
afterward the other two planes of section calculated or reformed from
the existing data-set (= multiplanar reformation, MPR).
 CT sectioning in small animals is predominantly transverse. In human
medicine it is designated an axial sectional plane. However, this term
 appears rather confusing in veterinary medicine, especially in section-
ing of the head.
axial/transversal
sagittal
coronal/frontal
 So-called sagital sectioning results if the patient is positioned parallel
to its long axis.
In veterinary medicine, the third spatial plane is designated dorsal sec-
Fig. 59. Comparison of the designation of sectional planes of the head of a per
 n n s re a n a   
 son in relation to an animal.
in comparison to human beings; as in human medicine this is designat-
ed a coronal (frontal) plane of section.
The computed tomographic examination takes place with the animal
 in general anesthesia, in which case clinical requirements determine the
region (head, cranial cervical region, thorax, abdomen, pelvis, long.
 Fig. 60. Laterolateral tomogram for the 
bones, vertebral column and joints) to be examined. The positioning of
 thoracic and abdominal regions with
the animal (except the vertebral column) is symmerrical in the chest-
 marked guide for the sections. (CT
abdomen position. The examination of the vertebral column is done
 image: VUw wien, Klinik fur Rontgen-
preferably in the dorsal position, because in the chest-abdomen posi-
ologie, Professor E. Mayrhofer, Head)
tion dorsoventral displacements of the vertebral bodies may appear
 owing to respiratory movements.
At the beginning of the CT-examination two tomograms (scout, pilot)
are produced (fig. 60), which correspond to a laterolateral or a
dorsoventral radiograph. With these, the proper scan is planned in
which the number of sections is defined, the inclination of the gantry
(see Fig. 58) determined, and the control of positioning resolved.
176
Section-thickness and table-feed depend on the region to be examined
and the size of the animal. Thus, for example, for the examination of
the head, and here especially for the nose and paranasal sinuses of a
 7 jo ss-s e p pri ue aa ai ui op a s
        
e o, ss ss =)  z on pin si q ax a
 ness) and the table (feed) moves forward 2 mm after a rotational cycle
place somewhat like the “stop and go" in traffic on the highway and
in the spiral-CT-technology there is a continuous forward movement of
the table (helix or spiral) with overlapping layers. The advantage of this
method is the speed with which the scan can be carried out. A further
advantage is that only a single set of volume data is acquired, which
makes possible a perhaps subsequent postcalculation without gaps.
Fig. 61 CT-scan in the pulmonary window (left, thoracic cavity) and in the soft 
The radiation, which hits the detectors after absorption by the tissue, is
 tissues with diferent densities. If for example the lung is evaluated, it should be
demonstrated as grey value in the resulting picture on the monitor Cur-
examined only in a lung window. However in doing this, all nonpulmonary soft 
tissue structures are withdrawn from the evaluation. In the sof tissue window,
different density values of the tissue in Hounsfield units (HU). The
on the other hand, the fine structure of the lung is lost to the observer (CT-scan:
calibration is done on the basis of the density values of water (0 HU)
 and air (- 1000 HU). Depending on lighting conditions, the human eye
VUw Vienna, Klinik fur Rontgenologie, Professor E. Mayrhofer, Head).
is able to distinguish only 20-50 different grey values; although up to
256 grey values can be demonstrated on the monitor.
HOUNSFIELD UNITS in small animals:
(after HENNINGER and KNEISSL, 2004)
Compact bone
+1600
 Spongy bone
+500 to 800
Intervertebral disc
+80 to 120
Musculature
+50 to 80
Parenchyma
+40 to 70
Blood
+40 to 55
Brain
+40 to 45
 Cerebrospinal fluid
+10 to 20
Water
0
Adipose tissue
-50 to -130
Lungs
-600 to -800
To be able to assess with the human eye (20-50 grey values discernible)
still the various tissue and structures in the CT (4096 grey values pos-
sible), one is assisted with the window technique (fig. 61). With this
Fig. 62 Reconstruction from a detailalgorithm (left into the performance algo-
technique it is possible to examine only a certain grey value part (a win-
 dow). Other areas are faded out. In doing this, one distinguishes on the
Berlin).
one hand the average window level (window level, WL) and on the
other hand the window width (WW). The window level is chosen there
where the dense region of the tissue to be investigated lies. Window
width has an impact on the contrast of the image. In the resulting eval-
uation of the image, the investigator should be aware that the image
should be studied in at least two different windows since otherwise
changes can be easily overlooked.
As a further aid with the CT-image findings, reconstruction algorithms
can be used. With this method, for example, edge-lifting effects can be
demonstration of bone. As a rule, the reconstruction is gained from
aduexa auo (panoid si eip au mou uo supuadap) eiep c raos,
For the bony structures in the nose a special demonstration of the bone
with emphasis of the edges has proven a success (NOLLER 2006).
CT-scans of the head at first take place in an average reconstruction
algorithm as for example “detail" (soft > standard > detail > bone >
edge > performance), in order to reconstruct softer (soft for the brain)
or even harder structures (performance for bone) if required (fig. 62).
For many CT-studies, contrast media series (fig. 63) are needed imme-
Fig. 63 Comparison of a native CT-image (left and a CT-image enriched with
diately after a native series. They permit the veterinarian to draw con-
contrast medium right) in the soft tissue window. The elimination of the contrast 
 clusions as to the nature of the pathological changes.
medium takes place via the kidneys. In the right picture, the left kidney has
 Three-dimensional volume models (3D models) can be reconstructed
accumulated physiological contrast medium. In this way the renal cortex can be 
 from CT data-sets. They have proven to be realistic representations,
very well differentiated from the renal medulla. Concentration of contrast medi-
which are eminently suitable to jog the often overstressed imagination.
um occurs in intensively vascularized tissues and for that reason is suitable for
In the future, 3D models will also play an even greater role in the clin-
 the diagnostic of well vascularized tumors. In the present case the night kidney
ical routine, since, owing to ever smaller adjusted slice thicknesses, the
is not uniformly soft-tissue-dense shadowed. On the left side, the vertebral body
abundance of data and information increases considerably. For this 
is penetrated by a soft-tissue-dense mass, which constricts the spinal cord con-
reason, attention has to be paid to error (distortion by gantry inclina-
siderably (CT-scan: VUw Vienna, Kinik fur Rontgenologie, Professor E.
tion, partial volume effect) arising from 3D reconstructions (NOLLER
Mayrhofer).
2006).
177
Anatomy of the CT Scan
Claudia Noller
With regard to the great clinical importance of computed tomography,
 for the demonstration of bony structures and pneumatic organs. Just
a fundamental knowledge of anatomy is absolutely necessary. First the
n n os to nira pe axad is e sisd pe a
radiologist needs a solid anatomical knowledge, which enables the
region is especially considered here. In contrast to the teeth and bones
radiologist to answer clinical questions on scan images with certainty.
(WL 480 WW2500) a modified bone window is suitable for demon-
 Because the procedure is based on x-radiation, it is especially suitable
stration of the conchae (WL -300 and WW 2500).
Figg. Nose
1
Alar fold
2
 Basal fold
3
 Straight fold
4
 Ventral erectile tissue of the nasal septum 
5
 Dorsal erectile tissue of the nasal septum
6
Incisive duct 
Incisive papilla
8
 Dorsal nasal meatus 
9
Ventral nasal concha (CNV)
131211
 Basal lamella of the CNV
 Caudal extension of the CNV
10 Vomeronasal organ
 11 Sulcus of the vomer (for the nasal septum) 
11' Wing of the vomer
12 Nasal bone
13 Maxilla
6L
13 Zygomatic process
14 Common nasal meatus
18
 15 Ventral nasal meatus
16
16 Infraorbital canal 
13
16' Maxillary foramen
10
17 Dorsal nasal concha, Endoturbinate l 
18 Middle nasal concha, Endoturbinate Il 
9"11'15
 Endoturbinate Ill
IV  Endoturbinate IV
19 Nasal septum 
15
 20 Zygomatic bone
 21  Lacrimal fossa 
22 Maxillary recess
23 Choana (caudal end)
24 Mandible, body 
24 Mandible, ramus
21
 24" Condylar process
20
25  Tongue
52
 26 Oral cavity
13
27Orbit 
28 Nasopharyngeal meatus 
29 Ectoturbinate 1
30 Ectoturbinate 2
23
30' Cavity enclosed by ectoturbinate 2
31 Ectoturbinate 3
32 Ectoturbinate 4
33 Ectoturbinate 5
25
34 Ectoturbinate 6
35 Sphenoidal sinus
36 Lateral frontal sinus
37 Medial frontal sinus 
38 External lamina of the frontal bone 
 39 Internal lamina of the frontal bone 
40 Soft palate
36
36
38
41  Sphenoid bone
 42  Os hyoideum (hyoid bone)
43Brain
 44 Temporomandibular joint
43
45 Temporal bone, mandibular fossa
20
45' Temporal bone, zygomatic process 
CT images: Dr. Ludewig and Dr. Kiefer, Klinik
fur Kleintiere, Vet.-med. Fakultat, Universitat
Leipzig (Director. Prof. Dr. G. Oechtering)
178
 On this page, by way of examples, following the figures on the ear there
WL -600 for the evaluation of the lungs and WW 350 and WL 40 for
 are presented some cross-sections of the thorax (WW 1500 and
 the evaluation of the soft tissue).
42' Tympanohyoid 
46 N. facialis in the Canalis facialis 
 47 Squamous part of the temporal bone 
46
 48 Bulla tympanica
49  ympanic membrane with the manubrium
mallei
 50 Internal carotid artery in the carotid canal
51
 Jugular foramer
 52 Occipital bone
28
53 Incus
 54 Internal acoustic meatus
55 Cochlea
56
 Extemal acoustic meatus 
Trachea
 58 Cranial lobe, night lung
59 Esophagus
60 M. longus colli
61  Stemebrae
62Rib
 63 Cranial part of the cranial lobe, left lung 
64  Aorta
 65 Cranial vena cava
66  Mediastinum 
60
67 Pulmonary trunk
67' Left pulmonary artery
67
67" Right pulmonary artery
68
63
62
68 Principal bronchus
69
H
67
69  Cranial lobar bronchus
65
64
69' Segmental bronchus of the cranial lobar
bronchus 
70
70 Left ventricle
71  Right azygos vein
72 Pulmonary veins
61
73 Lobar bronchus, middle lobe 
 74 Lobar bronchus, accessory lobe
75
 Caudal vena cava
76
 Caudal lobe (lef lung)
77 Accessory lobe (right lung)
Caudal lobe (right lung)
78
79 Middle lobe (right lung)
80 Spinous process
81
Arch of the vertebra
 82 Transverse process
83 Scapula
84
 Spine of the scapula
85  Costal tubercle
86 Body of the rib
87 Head of the rib 
88 M. supraspinatus
89 M.infraspinatus
 90 Body of the vertebra
91  M. subscapularis
92  Spinal cord
 93 Right and left subclavian veins 
 94  Left subclavian artery 
 95 Internal thoracic artery and vein 
 96 Right and left common carotid arteries 
97 Vertebral artery
 98  Caudal lobar bronchus
80
84
68
3
06
4
96
CT image: Dr Ludewig and Dr Kiefer, Kinik fur
Kleintiere, Vet. -Med. Fakultat, Universitat
 Leipzig (Director: Prof. Dr G. Oechtering)
179
Contributions to Clinical and Functional Anatomy
4.1 EpIDERMIs constricted off during the embryonic period and dis-
glands. In old male dogs they are disposed to hyperplasia eventually
placed into the dermis forms epidermoid cysts (true atheroma; see also
6.1) which can assume a diameter up to 5 cm. In addition dermoid cysts
ly soft swelling, recognized as a callus or a hairless area.
include in their walls constituents of epidermal organ complexes (hair
follicles, sebaceous and sweat glands).
4.2 The STRATUM CoRNEUM or simple keratin forms the essential semi-
permeable barrier of the epidermis. It consists of keratinized epidermal
cells which are united with one another by means of an intercellular
cement similar to bricks in a wall united by mortar. The intercellular 
cement is formed in the stratum spinosum during keratinization and is
secreted from so-called membrane coating vesicles in the intercellular
fissures. Essential components of the intercellular cement are lipids,
particularly ceramide, which are bound chemically by way of glyco-
phigus an autoimmune reaction against this glycoprotein leads to a
detachment of epidermal cells from one another. A widening of the
intercellular fissures and vesicle formation are a consequence of this.
The continuous proces of new growth and keratinization from epi-
dermal cells expends energy and nutrients. These cells ultimately corni
fy and are detached from their epidermal association by means of
6.5 Hyperplasia of the
 desquamation or exfoliation. The process is regulated by a feed-back
(dorsal) glands of the tail in
mechanism. An interruption of this dynamic balance, for example in
a male Hovawart.
vitamin A and zinc deficiencies, can lead to thickening of the stratum
corneum (hyperkeratosis). In congenital (for example steroidsul-
6.6 In the subcutaneous cushions of the PADs are the incompressible
fat cells - comparable to the inner sole of a running shoe - enclosed by
ty acid deficiency) derangement of lipid metabolism, inferior intercel-
septa of elastic connective tissue. In an elastic manner they absorb the
lular cement is formed, having visible seborrhea as a sequel.
accruing forces during foot contact with the ground and protect the
bones of the phalanges from compression. The strong mechanical load
4.3 In different body regions at times the collagen and elastic fibers of
 borne by the epidermis of the pad necessitates a high rate of epidermal
the CoRiuM (dermis) possess a definite orientation exhibited through
formation guaranteed due to a very good vascularization of the pad
sO-called cleavage or tension lines. Surgical incisions across the lines
s paq spd aui ni sn a 
result in dehiscent skin wounds of which the edges are wide apart. The
margins of incisions made along the cleavage lines are situated togeth-
6.7 CLAws undergoing insufficient attrition become too long, can curl,
er free of tension. In intradermal (i/d) injections, the strong connective
 and eventually become ingrown. Particularly is this so with the claw of
tissue of the stratum corneum permits the application of only small
the first digit which plays no part in ground contact. Therefore it
should be checked regularly and shortened if necessary. With clipping
quantities of liquid. Material injected intradermally comes into restrict-
ed contact with the defence mechanism of the skin so that this type of
 of the claws one should observe that the claw is not at a right angle to
injection is employed in allergy tests.
 the claw sheath; on the contrary, depending on the rate of natural wear
 and tear the claw should be shortened at a slightly acute angle.
 4.4 Likewise the loose SuBcutis (hypodermis) of dogs is well adapted
 8.1 The VERTEBRAL CoLUMN is an esential element of the parabolic
for subcutaneous injections which employ larger volumes of fluid.
construction of the arched tendinous bridge which distributes load
 Ordinary or regular pressure loads can result in the formation of sub-
 bearing to the trunk between the thoracic and pelvic limbs. Simultane-
 are found for example over the tuber of the olecranon in heavier dog
ously this construction possesses a high flexibility which depends on
 the summation of the small increments of movement between individ-
breeds.
4.5 OuTER HAIR of the coat and WooL HAIR of the undercoat pass
 tebral column permits, are demonstrated particularly in the stride of
through a regular cycle which determines hair growth in autumn and
 racing dogs. This is not possible in hoofed animals which have their
dpd s qsss
vertebral columns essentially extended.
ing on length of daylight and environmental temperature.
8.2 In anatomical colloquial usage the TERMINOLOGY RELATING To VER-
6.1 SEBACEOUs GLAND SECRETION is mixed with that of the sweat
TEBRAE is derived from the Latin vertebra’ and in clinical usage from
glands in the excretory duct of the hair follicle and forms a superficial
 the Greek ‘spondylos'.
lipid filmon skin and hair This provides astrong water repellant ffect
 8.3 HEMIvERTEBRAE have dissimilar shapes due to the fusion of verte-
particularly with a very thick hair coat. An obstruction of the follicu-
 bral bodies or of complete vertebrae based on an arrested development.
lar openings results in an accumulation of secretion and the formation
They occur particularly frequently in brachycephalic or short skulled
of small follicular retention cysts (false atheroma) see also 4.1). Acne
 dog breeds. Hemivertebrae can cause deformation and curvature of the
 Occurs due to an increased sebaceous secretion combined with a hyper-
vertebral column either laterally (scoliosis), ventrally (kyphosis) or dor-
sesnes e se ino pazaanbs aq ueo siu 'aiog reu aun ui sisoni
sally (lordosis). Due to constriction of the vertebral canal this can pro-
 shaped product from the follicle.
duce symptoms of paralysis.
6.2 The secretion of the CERUMINOUs GLANDs OF THE EAR is mixed with
desquamated epidermal cells as a yellow brownish ear wax (cerumen).
With obstruction of the external acoustic meatus due to excessive hair
growth, as occurs repeatedly in Poodles, ear wax accumulates and due
to bacterial decomposition can have otitis externa ceruminosa as a con-
sequence.
6.3 The CIRcUMANAL (PERIANAL) GLANDSs are hepatoid glands which do
not have excretory ducts. Under the influence of androgens they are
dogs than in bitches. With more marked distension they can abscess,
ulcerate or form fistulae under cover of m. sphincter ani externus and
are treated surgically. The more unusual adenocarcinomas of the apo-
crine perianal sweat glands produce autonomous parathormone
(pseudohyperparathyroidism). Hence in hypercalcemia of doubtful ge-
nesis, the perianal region must be examined for tumors.
6.4 PARANAL SINUS see 56.5
8.3 Shortened development of vT13 and vL2 producing hemivertebrae with 
resulting lordosis.
6.5 The DoRsAL GLANDs OF THE TAIL are situated dorsal to caudal ver-
tebrae 5-7. Regularly in feral canidae they are fully developed and
 8.4 The VERTEBRAL CANAL protects the sensitive spinal cord from
serve for mutual olfactory recognition. Their primordia in the dog are
external influences. A congenital partially patent spinal canal is
considered atavistic, no longer possessing an apparent function, and in
 accompanied as a rule by clinical symptoms such as paralysis, urinary
their histological synthesis, they correspond to hepatoid circumanal
 or fecal incontinence. This anomaly based on arrested development is
180
termed spina bifida (rachischisis). The vertebrae most concerned are
lumbar and sacral, more rarely those of the cervical and thoracic
regions. In spina bifida aperta the meninges lie exposed at the surface
while in spina bifida occulta the external skin is closed and intact and
covers the defect. Narrowing of the vertebral canal is a frequent cause
of functional derangements of the spinal cord. They can be based on
discopathies (see 10.3), deformations of vertebral joints, subluxations 
or luxations (see 10.1 and 10.2) vertebral defects (see 8.3) and more
rarely tumors and hematomas. A congenital instability of the caudal
cervical vertebrae (caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy or wobbler
10.1 Atlantoaxial subluxation with
syndrome) occurs particularly in large sized dogs, the Dobermann
constriction of the vertebral canal
showing a predisposition. Radiographically this instability leads to an
evident shorrening of the intervertebral spaces and a narrowing of the
(arrow).
vertebral canal. Chronic compression of the spinal cord with a typical
10.2 Alterations in the region of the LUMBOSACRAL ARTIcULATION cause
neurological deficit is a sequel.
compression of the cauda equina which can be associated with pain,
paralysis, ataxia and paresis of the pelvic limbs as well as urinary and
fecal incontinence. The most frequent causes are degenerative changes
at vL7 and vS1 (spondyloses see 8.6.), disc herniation (see 10.3.) and a
proliferation of the ligamenta flava leading to dorsoventral stenosis of
the vertebral canal.
C6
VC7
8.4 Myelographic demonstration of narrowing (r) of the vertebral canal at the
10.2 Narrowing of the vertebral canal and the intervertebral foramina between
level of vC6 and vC7 in a Dobermann with wobbler syndrome.
vL7 and vs1 in a dog with cauda equina compression syndrome (Computer
tomography: Animal Clinic Kruger, Hamburg).
8.5 A RESECTION Or PARTIAL RESECTION OF THE VERTEBRAL ARCH
(LAMINECTOMY, HEMILAMINECTOMY) is the most frequently applied method
for surgical relief of pressure on the spinal cord caused by constriction of
 construction which progress quickly in chondroplastic dog breeds by
 the vertebral canal in the thoracolumbar region.
 One year of age. The nucleus pulposus and the internal connective tis-
sue lamellae of the anulus fibrosus grow larger due to replacement
8.6 Chronic deforming bony outgrowths (osteophytes) of the VERTEBRAL
cartilaginous tissue (chondroid metaplasia). Deficient nutrition due to
BoDIEs AND JoINTs (spondylosis deformans) are a more frequent chance
diffusion from peripheral blood vessels, leads to degenerative alter-
finding radiographically in older dogs. Especially in Boxers, the out-
ations and dystrophic calcification both of which are evident on radi-
growths can atain considerable dimensions and the lumbar vertebrae
ographs. The reconstructed pulp nucleus is no longer in position, axi-
 unite completely with one another (spondylarthrosis ancylopoetica). In
al compression forces deranging and removing it. The resultant over
loading of the fibers of the anulus fibrosus produces overstretching
 a  a  e su s sd a 
and bulging dorsally. Or it can tear apart dorsally with herniation of
vertebral foramina.
the pulp nucleus in the vertebral canal as a result. A disc prolapse
leads to compression of the spinal cord and/or the roots of the spinal
nerves. This produces severe back pain as well as low to middle grade
ataxia and paresis as seen frequently in *Dachshund paralysis'. A disc
herniation causes a high degree of damage to the spinal cord with a
corresponding severe neurological deficit. The most frequent location
of discopathies is the thoracolumbar transition region between vT11
and vL3. This is followed by the cervical vertebral column between
vC2 and vC7. A disc prolapse is rare in the region of the thoracic ver-
tebrae between vT2 and vT10 due to the fully developed intercapital
ligaments. Generally the dorsal longitudinal ligament prevents a
direct dorsal rupture or a herniation of the intervertebral disc and
 deflects the pulp nucleus which is pushing forwards. In herniation of
the disc, associated with severe neurological symptoms a surgical
decompression of the spinal cord is essential. This entails opening the
vertebral canal and the removal of the prolapsed material. In the tho-
racolumbar region a hemilaminectomy (see 8.5) is preferred. In order
to relieve pressure on the cervical spinal cord, a cleavage or 'ventral
8.6 Pronounced spondylosis deformans from vL2 to vL5 with fusion of vL2
slot' is milled in the midline ventral to the vertebral bodies cranial and
 and vL3 (spondylarthrosis ancylopoetica).
caudal to the affected intervertebral disc. As the case may be, this
measures a third of the length or breadth of a vertebral body. The
8.7 Anomalies of the CAUDAL VERTEBRAL CoLUMN occur in various
forms, and from a breeder's viewpoint are desirable in individual
breeds such as the French Bull Dog, and Pug. The consequent breeding
 of taillessness combines with numerous other vertebral defects such as
 spina bifida. Hence from the viewpoint of animal protection this rejects
 quality breeding.
10.3 Disc hemia between vC2
and vC3.
10.1 An INSTABILITY OF THE ATLANTOAXIAL ARTICULATION brings abOut an
1 Vertebral canal;
excessive flexion of the articulation, leading to compression of the spinal
2 Prolapsing pulp nucleus:
cord and neurological deficit. The condition occurs congenitally in dwarf
3 Body of vC3;
'sixe au jo suap aui jo eisede 1o eisedodu e on anp s pue speanq op
4 Transverse process of vC2.
It is also caused due to trauma with fracture of the dens (breaking of the
(Computer tomography: Anirmal 
neck) or rupture of associated joint ligaments.
Clinic Kruger Hamburg).
181
removal of prolapsed material by way of a ventral fenestration of the
annular ligaments between racheal cartilages 2-5. Through this a T-
anulus fibrosus can attain, but not always, an adequate release of
 shaped tracheal tube is introduced.
pressure.
12.1 The DoRSAL THORACIC SERIES OF SUBCUTANEOUS NERVES form
the afferent limb of the panniculus reflex arc (cutaneous reflex). Skin
irritation along the dorsal line leads reflexly to stimulation of the later-
al thoracic nerve and with it to contraction of m. cutaneus trunci.
14.1 The ExTERNAL JuGULAR VEIN can be used for collecting larger
quantities of blood for blood transfusion and is also accessible when
peripheral veins are already collapsed. This vein is also the site of
choice for central venous catheterization.
14.2 The RECURRENT LARYNGEAL NERvE lies laterally On the trachea
and should be taken into consideration and preserved in absolute terms
in surgery of the neck particularly involving the ventral approach to the
cervical vertebral column. Damage to the nerve results in a unilateral
 paralysis or hemiplegia of the larynx.
14.3 The SUPERFICIAL CERVICAL LYMPH NoDEis easily palpable and should
be examined for changes during each general clinical examination.
14.4 The further transport of swallowed boluses in the EsoPHAGUs
occurs due to contractions of esophageal musculature which are undu-
lating, directed aborally, and are involuntary. Peristalsis takes place
automatically after the initiation of the swallowing reflex but is also
14.6 The THYRoID GLAND is an endocrine gland which, due to the con-
 promoted directly or even released by mechanical stimuli. Thus a more
trolled output of its hormones tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine) and tri-
complete transport of small components such as tablets exerting no
iodothyronine into the bloodstream, regulates the intensity of metabo-
stretch excitation is unguaranteed. Interruption of motility can involve
lism. In addition its parafollicular or C-cells produce the hormone cal-
the transitional region between pharynx and esophagus locally or the
citonin, the distribution of which causes a reduction in calcium level.
total esophageal musculature. Interuption of pharyngoesophageal
The thyroid develops, with its main portion dorsally, from the endo-
derm of the root of the tongue. (The C-cells originate from the ultimo-
paralysis of m. cricopharyngeus (cricopharyngeal achalasia see 102.1)
 branchial bodies and initially from the neural crest). The ductus thyre.
but can also result from distemper or rabies for example. Disturbance
oglossus descends from the tongue to the ventral laryngeal-tracheal
to motility of esophageal musculature results in insufficient transport
boundary. The distal end of the ductus thyreoglossus develops into the
of food and a dilation of the esophagus (megaesophagus). The origin
right and left lobes of the thyroid gland as well as the isthmus glandu-
can be a congenital derangement of innervation, a condition to which
 laris which in dogs is fully developed only occasionally. Normally the
German Shepherds are predisposed, as well as secondary neurogenic
 remaining portions of the ductus regress completely. Individually main-
sequelae, or myogenic diseases such as polyneuritis and myasthenia
gravis. In rarer cases a dilation of the caudal section of the esophagus
occur on all organs, which, during embryological development, have
is due to an insufficient relaxation of m. sphincter cardiae.
contact with the primordium of the thyroid gland namely tongue, lar-
 ynx, trachea, and base of heart. Occasionally cysts of the ductus thyre-
Foreign bodies such as swallowed bones stuck in the esophagus, block
oglosus can develop generally at the base of the tongue. The size of the
 m (  ro d  
thyroid gland is dependent on a multitude of factors such as body
o ade i  a are o oi pssd s
weight, age, sex, and season of the year, and can be determined sono-
inlet, that at the base of the heart and the esophageal hiatus of the
diaphragm. The continuous stretch excitation due to the presence of
has many origins. A classical example is a goiter caused by chronic
foreign bodies can lead to spasm of the esophageal musculature which
iodine deficiency present in populations in iodine deficient regions such
in turn can result in a reduced circulation of blood, ischemic necrosis,
and ultimate perforation of the esophageal wall. An extrinsic constric-
nant (struma carcinomatosa). In dogs such as Beagles which are pre-
tion of the esophagus (stenosis) is caused most frequently by anomalies
 disposed to the condition, relatively frequent autoimmune inflamma-
in the course of the large blood vessels (right aorta see 44.4).
tion of the thyroid (thyroiditis) can cause a reduction in size of the
 gland and hypofunction (hypothyroidism).
14.6 and 14.7 Sonographic longitudinal section through the thyroid gland (1)
and the cranial external parathyroid gland (2).
14.7 The PARATHYROID GLANDs regulate calcium and phosphate
ubu e um bop e u snbeudoseehau jeipueoaud yo yde.boipe ise.uo ttl
metabolism. Their hormone, parathormone, functions as an antagonist
 of calcitonin, resulting in an increase in blood calcium levels and simul-
aorta and persistent ductus arteriosus.
taneously a reduction in phosphate levels. Within a short time a func-
tional failure of the parathyroid glands leads to a life-threatening
14.5 A CONSTRICTION OF THE TRACHEA (TRACHEAL STENOSIS) leads tO
hypocalcemic tetany; this is why parathyroid glands are preserved
 l n o e s e si   a 
unconditionally in thyroid surgery. Errors in feeding, for example with
branous wall and m. trachealis resulting in the dorsoventral flattening
 the predominant feeding of meat especially in young dogs, are a fre.
of trachea (tracheal collapse). The condition is diagnosed almost exclu-
quent source of excessive exposure to phosphate and/or insufficient
sively in dwarf dog breeds (Yorkshire Terrier Toy Poodle, Chihuahua)
supply of calcium. Counter regulation results in increased distribution
and is at least partly congenital. Alterations in shape such as lateral flat-
of parathormone (alimentary secondary hyperparathyroidism) and
tening (scabbard trachea) or hypoplasia of the tracheal cartilages in the
ultimately a hyperplasia of the parathyroid glands. The sequel is an
Bulldog, are rarely congenital. An acute life threatening dyspnea due to
increase calcium resorption from the bones and this is why the condi-
obstruction of the upper airway for example in laryngeal edema can be
tion is also termed juvenile osteoporosis or osteodystrophia fibrosa.
treated through an opening of the trachea (tracheotomy). After ventro-
The demineralization of bones leads to a distortion of the long bones
median exposure of the trachea an incision is made through one of the
 and a tendency for greenstick and vertebral fractures to occur. A typi-
182
cal cause of hyperplasia of the parathyroid glands in old dogs is a
chronic kidney insufficiency. This, due to the interruption of enteral
calcium absorption and likewise an increased distribution of parathor-
 e s r ss  a
with corresponding consequences for the skeletal system.
Adenomas of the parathyroid glands can develop autonomous parat-
hormone and lead to rare symptoms of primary hyperparathyroidism
of which a direct symptom is hypercalcemia (see also 6.3).
16.1 In order to facilitate lateral access to the neck of the scapula dur-
ing surgery the AcRoMIoN can be detached temporarily at its base by
osteotomy. In so doing one notes the close relative position of the
paoeear si uouroe a Araans jo pua aui iy 'sarau ieinderseidns
 using surgical screws and wire.
16.2 In growing dogs the HuMERus possesses an epiphysis (the head of
the humerus) and an apophysis (greater and lesser tubercles). Both cen-
ters of ossification fuse in the course of development and are then sep-
s ro d   e  s a  
Distally the trochlea and capitulum of the humerus each possess an
individual center of ossification both of which fuse after about 2
months of age and likewise form a common epiphysis. The proximal
growth plate or epiphyseal suture has an essentially higher growth
potential that the distal so that longitudinal growth of the humerus
takes place predominantly towards its proximal part. Hence compres-
sions or fractures of the proximal growth plate have potentially more
aul jo qmona jeupniauof aimy al rog sasuanbasuos sunearae
humerus than injuries to the distal growth plate.
16.5 and 16.6 Short radius syndrome (left) and short ulnar syndrome (right)
16.3 FRACTUREs OF THE OLECRANON occur due to traumata acting lat-
as a result of growth retardation after fracture of the ulna.
ous traction of m.triceps brachi on the tuber of the olecranon causes
evident radiologically as a persistent conical area which is scarcely
fracturing in a cranioproximal direction. The dislodged part of the ole-
radio opaque. In very large dog breeds it is easily defined almost on a
cranon is restored surgically using kirschner wire and plates. Addition-
regular basis.
ally traction forces of m.triceps brachi must be absorbed using tension
webbing.
 18.1 The nerves of the BRAcHIAL PLEXUs can be injured through pres-
sure, contusion or over extension but also by tumors or abscesses ema-
16.4 The ANcoNEAL PRocEss provides stability to the extended elbow
 nating from the axillary lymph nodes. Particularly during over exten.
joint against sideway and rotational movements. Its detachment (iso-
sion the nerves with shorter course distances between the lacuna at the
lated or fragmented anconeal process) leads to slight instability and
 mscalenus and entrance into the appropriate muscle/s are vulnerable.
development of arthrosis. The symptoms of isolated process are includ-
The axillary nerve is an example. Lacerations or tearing away of the
ed with the complex of elbow dysplasia. It is caused not only by trau-
roots of the plexus from the spinal cord are generally the result of
 ma but is a probable consequence of growth and nutritional disturb-
extreme abduction of the limb, as in car accidents. A complete avulsion
ances of its cartilaginous apophyseal suture. Promoted for example by
of the brachial plexus leads to paralysis of the whole of the limb mus-
deficient nutrition and poor breeding there is also a genetic predisposi-
culature with drooping of shoulder and elbow and a flexed carpal joint.
 tion as in the German Shepherd dog.
In addition, laceration of n TV1 causes deficit of the panniculus reflex
the cervicothoracic ganglion produces an ipsilateral Horner syndrome
(see 118.1)
18.2 Injuries of M. BicEps BRAcHIl are generally concerned with its
tendon of original which ruptures directly, or in young dogs can tear
away from the supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula (avulsion fracture).
A typical diagnostic characteristic of this rupture is that the shoulder
joint can be overflexed considerably and in addition the elbow joint
overextends.
18.3 Due to the effects of trauma the RADIAL NERvE can be easily injured
in its course over the lateral supracondylar crest. The result is a (distal)
radial paralysis accompanied by a deficit of action of digital
 and carpal extensor muscles leading to what has been described as the
"kiss hand position'. With injury of the radial nerve in the region of the
brachial plexus there is an additional deficit of action of the m. triceps
brachii (proximal radial paralysis). Besides a motor deficit with radial
 paralysisthere isa deficiency ofsensation on the dorsal aspect of the paw.
18.4 The ULNAR NERvE is palpable on the medial surface of the olecra-
pue peudeus ueey e ui (x) sseoad leuooe peelosi (hen) tal
non and with the elbow extended and the triceps musculature relaxed it
can be followed proximally.
 20.1 The CEPHALic VEIN at forearm level is suitable for venipuncture
16.5 FRAGMENTATION OF THE MEDIAL AND LaTERAL CoRONOID PROcES-
for the taking of blood samples, for intravenous (i/v) injections and for
SES are likewise included in the complex of dysplasia of the elbow joint
the placement of longterm cannulae. Medially and laterally the vein is
and occur predominantly in large breeds of dogs such as Berner Sen-
accompanied by sensory branches of the radial nerve. Therefore para-
nenhund and Rottweiler One of the possible causes lies in growth
venous needle perforations produce violent defence reactions by the
retardation of the radius (short radius syndrome). The humerus no
canine patient concerned.
 longer articulates with the shortened radius but bears particularly on
 20.2 The SUPRAscAPULAR NERvE can easily be damaged in its course
the medial coronoid process which becomes deformed or fragmented
u sinsr Ainu sii sae oi anp ndess au jo yau aui por
as a reaction.
instability of the shoulder joint, abduction of the shoulder with weight
16.6 Eighty percent of the longitudinal growth of the ulna occurs in
bearing, as well as problems of protraction or forward movement of
the distal ULNAR EPIPHYSEAL SUTURE. Genetic (Dachshund, Basset),
the limb.
 raumatic or alimentary (delayed mineralization see 14.7) factors can
 20.3 An overloading of M. INFRASPINATUs with accompanying swelling
result in a retarded longitudinal growth. The sequel is a shortening and
leads toa reduced blood circulation (acute functional compartment syn-
distortion of the ulna (short ulna syndrome) and a steplike growth of
  se dp   
resultant contraction of the muscle. The shortening of the muscle pro-
growth of thedistalradius beyond thestyloid proces of theulnaleads
duces an outward rotation of the limb with an adducted elbow and
to outward rotation of the distal limb segment (carpus valgus). A
decreased motility. Early transection of m.infraspinatus usually leads to
delayed mineralization of the cartilaginous ulnar epiphyseal suture is
 complete recovery of limb function (see also 146.2).
183
20.4 The LoNG HEAD OF M. TRICEPs BRACHIl can rupture due to a fall
30.2 DIAPHRAGMATIc HERNIAE can be congenital or acquired traumati-
or springing to a higher level. As a result the affected dog is no longer
cally with displacement of abdominal viscera such as liver stomach and
able to extend its elbow.
small intestines, into the pleural cavity. Hence, in inspiration, expan-
 22.1 The strong ANTEBRACHIAL FAsCIA encloses the caudomedial mus-
e oi an 'uodn panonoua Auns sal ro anou si ui aui jo tos
cles of the forearm completely and forms fascial compartments hous-
reduced pressure during inspiration, abdominal organs to some extent
are sucked into the pleural cavity. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia has
ing the muscles concerned. On the other hand the fascial envelope of
the craniolateral muscles of the forearm forms no distinct muscle com-
its aperrure of rupture mostly at the site of passage of the esophagus,
 a  si sd  s r a s s 
partments (see also 146.2).
22.2 The tendon of insertion of M. FLEXOR CARPI ULNARIs due to sur-
 closure of the ventral section of the insertion of the diaphragm and a
gical translocation to the extensor tendons of the carpus, can be used
in the recovery of carpal extension in irreversible radial paralysis.
 them. Traumatically acquired diaphragmatic hernia (rupture of the
26.1 The SHouLDER JoINT of the standing dog forms an angle of 110°-
diaphragm) occurs generally due to rupture of the muscular portion of
120°. When flexed it is about45-70° andin extension is possibly10
 the costal part of the diaphragm and produces no hernial sac. It always
30°. Adduction is up to approximately 30° and abduction possibly up
 produces serious clinical symptoms.
to 40°. An intrarticular injection of the shoulder joint can take place a
fingerbreadth distal to the acromion and above the greater tubercle of
the humerus. After puncture of the skin horizontally the needle is
pushed mediocaudally until synovial fluid flows out.Mechanically, the
articular surface of the head of the humerus is severely stressed in its
 caudal section, which predisposes to injury of the articular cartilage.
This condition is known as osteochondrosis dissecans (OCD, see
142.4).
 26.1 OCD of the shoulder
 joint (Computer tomogra-
phy: Animal Clinic Kruiger.
Hamburg).
 30.2 Partial displacement of liver and stomach into the pleural cavity after
26.2 In the standing position the ELBow JoINT occupies an angle from
rupture of the diaphragm.
125°-140°. Flexion is possibly about 90°-110° while extension results
in only 5°-20°. Puncture of the slightly flexed joint is made from a cran-
32.1 The PREPUTIAL OsTIUM (ORIFIcE) can be constricted (phimosis)
iolateral direction by inclining the needle mediodistally and distal to
either congenitally or with wound healing after injury and then impedes
the palpable lateral epicondyle of the humerus. A series of diseases of
extrusion of the penis. Urinary retention and a severe inflammation of
the elbow joint (isolated anconeal and coronoid processes, distractio
 prepuce and glans penis (balanoposthitis) can result. A slight bacterial
cubiti, and congenital luxation of the small head of the radius) is
balanoposthitis (preputial catarrh) develops chronically in many male
 grouped under the name dysplasia of the elbow joint. In particular it
dogs.
results from a disturbance of skeletal development with asynchronous
longitudinal growth of radius and ulna (see 16.6) leading to steplike
 32.2 The MAMMARY GLAND is a skin gland, more specifically an apro-
 crine sweat gland modified markedly. Mammary gland tissue is imbed-
development of the elbow joint (distractio cubiti).
ded in septa of superficial fascia of the trunk. Consequently its surgical
 26.3 In the PRoXMAL AND DisTAL RADIOULNAR ARTIcULATIONS a prona-
 removal (mastectomy) can be oriented by the surgeon due to deep fas-
tion around 10° and a supination around 20°-30° can take place with
cia lying underneath it. Only in the region of inguinal and thoracic
elbow and carpal joints flexed around 90. Following rupture of the
mammae do blood vessels approach the gland tissue dorsally. Dorsal to
lateral collateral ligament of the elbow, on the other hand, there is an
 the inguinal mamma in a majority of bitches one observes a fat filled
inward rotation of more than around 45° and after rupture of the medi-
al collateral ligament possibly an outward rotation above 90°.
26.4 The CARPAL JoINTin the standing dog occupies an angle from 190°
200° which is a slightly overextended position. Besides this overexten-
sion there is also a slight physiological valgus position from 12°-20°. A
further extension of the carpal joint is strictly limited (maximum 5°).
07-o0 punore qissod uoundns e pue 0l-0st on dn si uox
The flexibiityof thedfferent joints comprising the verall capal artic-
ulation is very different. The main mobility takes place in the antebra-
chiocarpal joint which also permits a slight rotation of 5°-10°. On the
other hand, the mediocarpalarticulation can be flexed only up to 15° and
the carpometacarpal articulation only 5°. A traumatic rupture of the pal-
'u iedie au jo uosaixaiad u sinsa seedde uue r
 26.5 The SUBCUTANEOUs BURSA OF THE OLECRANON can fill with syn-
 ovial fluid (hygroma) as a reaction to a markedly excessive demand or
 strain on it. It becomes visible as a tense plump swelling up to hen's egg
size at the olecranon.
28.1 Left and right M. LoNGus CoLl are separated from each other by
blunt dissection after an incision through the deep fascia of the neck.
This provides a ventral approach tointervertebral discs of the cervical
vertebral column.
30.1 INsPIRAToRY MuscLEs are more strongly developed than their
expiration takes place largely in a passive manner, the latter due to con-
traction of elastic elements of the lung which become stretched during
inspiration. Only in forced respiration or more difficult expiration
 32.2 Indirect lymphography of an abnormal cancerous mammary complex adja-
(expiratory dyspnea) are expiratory muscles involved intensely includ-
cent to thorax, 20 minutes after application of radiographic contrast medium iota-
ing abdominal muscles acting as accessory expiratory muscles. Respira-
sul-schering). Afferent lymph flow takes place cranialy in the direction of the axil-
tion with greater increased expansion of the thorax is defined as costal
lary lymph nodes and caudally in the direction of the superficial inguinal lymph 
in type as distinct from abdominal where the diaphragm is chiefly
 involved. Physiologically in dogs costal respiration predominates.
cavity within (Radiograph: Professor Dr: D. Berens von Rautenfeld, Hannover).
184
- ed a  do ue sd  si ssnd ie
ring forms the aperture of rupture and the vaginal proces the hernial
ity. Lymph drainage and regional lymph nodes (axillary, superficial
e s ss ai 's sp a r oi i un 
inguinal) determine the routes of metastases of malignant mammary
always overdeveloped in the bitch and is predisposed to inguinal her-
tumors which occur relatively frequently in old bitches. Efferent lym-
nia since it does not have to envelop the srucrures of the spermatic
phatic vessels from thoracic mammae also penetrate the thoracic wall
cord as in the male. In addition, in several dog breeds (Cocker, Dachs-
and discharge by way of mediastinal lymph nodes. The possibility of
hund, Golden Reriever) an abnormally wide, vaginal ring of heritable
ur   pqe  d yo p 
 origin has been detected as the basis of an indirect inguinal hernia. In
lymph nodes has also been detected in old bitches.
animals so disposed, due to pressure increase in the abdominal cavity
 34.1 ABDoMINAL MuscLEs are brought into action for the active reduc-
(abdominal press, pregnancy) it is easy to have not only a prolapse of
tion of abdominal volume during which intra-abdominal pressure is
sections of omentum and fat, but also loops of intestine, urinary blad-
raised (the abdominal press) by the contracted diaphragm. This press
der, uterus etc into the vaginal process. A prolapse of portions of vis-
is established during efcation,micturition, omition and during a
cera through the vaginal ring of the male is referred to in the clinic as
turition for the expulsion of the fetus. In difficult expiration, on the
scrotal hernia. In direct inguinal hernia generally the aperture of rup-
e aq a pssd si se px a  ra
ture lies medially besides the inguinal ring. Consequently there is tissue
viscera due to tense abdominal musculature and thus decreases the size
laceration and abdominal viscera bursts through the abdominal wall by
of the pleural cavity.
the shortest direct route.
34.2 The LINEA ALBA in the dog is selected as the most frequent site for
 36.2 In rare cases the FEMoRAL RING is the aperture of rupture (femoral
surgical access to the abdominal cavity (laparotomy). After incision of
hernia) whereby peritoneum and ransverse fascia are everted in the
femoral space with secondary laceration.
preumbilical fat bodies within the falciform ligament; these should be
38.1 The FIELD OF THE LUNG is determined by percussion. In the dog
detached from the body wall and flapped away from the site.
the caudal border of the lung lies approximately at the level of the tuber
coxae in the 11th intercostal space, mid-thorax in the 9th intercostal
space and at the level of the tuber of the olercranon in the 6th inter-
costal space.
38.2 LuNG FuNcTON is involved essentially with gas exchange between
blood and inspired air. Air is introduced by means of a non-anasto-
mosed bronchial system to lung alveoli involved in air exchange. These
signify an enormous increase of the internal surface of the lung. Respi-
ration is based on an alteration in volume of the thoracic cavity. With
inspiration its increase is artained by a flattening of the diaphragmatic
dome (diaphragmatic respiration) and through craniolateral displace-
al cavity, the lung must follow the movements of the wall of the tho-
34.2 Sonographic transverse section of the ventral body wall cranial to the
umbilicus. 1, Linea alba: 2, 2' right and left mm.recti abdominis; 3, 3' night and 
is produced due to perialveolar elastic nets which contract the alveoli in
left internal laminae of the rectus sheath; 4 Preumbilical fat bodies (Sonograph:
 a passive manner.
Professor Dr. C. Poulsen Nautrup, Munich).
 38.3 In radiographs the BRoNcHI which contain air are not delineated
from surrounding lung tisue also containing air. If for example, lung
 34.3 UMBILICAL HERNIA is the most frequently occurring hernia of the
tissue is compressed or condensed due to inflammation air-containing
dog. As a rule only fat or a section of omentum prolapses through the
bronchi in the affected region are defined (air bronchogram). Their
relatively small aperure of rupture. With the exception of inguinal her-
artificial presentation is also possible by using a positive contrast medi-
nia (see 36.1) other forms of hernia of the abdominal muscles are rare.
um (contrast bronchogram). Whereas the rachea has sensory innerva-
36.1 Essentially INGUINAL HERNIA occurs more frequently in the bitch
tion and releases a cough reflex as a reaction to an inhaled foreign
than in themaledog,thecomplete ppositeto theproportioninother
body, no cough stimulus is produced by a similar body inhaled further
domestic mammals. One differentiates 2 types of inguinal herniae, the
an ue apoq e yons jo jeaoan pe kds au ouq aun o
more frequent indirect - generally congenital - and the rarely direct,
 place endoscopically (bronchoscopy).
 38.3 Bronchoscopic view of the primary bronchi of a healthy dog (let) and
bronchoscopic display of an inhaled awn right). (Bronchoscopic photographs:
Professor Dr. w. Kraft, Munich).
40.1. The PULMONARY ARTERY OF THE CRANIAL LOBE OF THE LUNG always
courses dorsal and parallel to the corresponding pulmonaryvein lying cran-
ioventrally. Radiographically both vessels are separated clearly from air-
contained lung. In a laterolateral radiograph both vessels can be identified
monary artery dorsally, the pulmonary vein ventrally.
 40.2 The absent or only slightly developed ViscEROSENsoRY INNERVA-
TION of the bronchial tree (see also 38.3) and lung is why pulmonary
and bronchial tumors are not recognized until later or often too late,
since they cause no or hardly no pain.
40.3 The AoRTA and the large arteries ramifying in the vicinity of the
heart are recognized as containing elastic tissue due to their yellowish
uud u yum (i ien aeway au u euneu leuinu leeea po uoeedaud y tae
color. The wall of the ascending aorta stretches because blood is driven
out of the heart in systole. In the following diastole it contracts again
ciple, can be present in the same form in the bitch. Left side of illustration: direct
inguinal hernia. Right side of illustration: indirect inguinal hernia with opened
and therefore fransporrs the blood further in a passive manner. (See
vaginal process (note fenestrated abdominal wall.
text book of physiology).
185
40.4 The STERNAL LYMPH NoDE is not directly accessible for clinical
cavity which contains air. Likewise the heart is displaced dorsally and
 diagnostic procedures, but with a pathological increase in size is dis-
no longer lies with its apex on the sternum. A frequent cause of
played in laterolateral radiographs.
hydrothorax is cardiac insufficiency with a damming back of blood
40.5 The THyMus is a primary lymphatic organ which, on comparative
in the pulmonary circulation. This results in an increased diffusion of
liquid from the blood vascular system into the surrounding cavities.
anatomical grounds, has only a thoracic part with right and left lobes.
Involution with accompanying fatty degeneration is never complete,
functional remnants remaining even in old age. According to dominant
opinion fetal stem cells migrate from bone marrow into the thymus
工
p su d se ns s ud aeps a azo as
spleen, and after their imprinting to T-lymphocytes are responsible for
cellular immunity (undesirable activity with rejection of transplants).
Thymic atrophy can occur with disappearance of lymphocytes 
in
alimentary upsets, stress and wasting diseases. An unphysiologically
delayed regression is present in endocrine disturbances and can be a
consequence of premature castration. A thymic hyperplasia with over-
function analogous to that in humans occurs rarelyin young dogs with
myasthenia gravis (neuromuscular interruption of conduction with
 ao  i aa tt as) (  
thymus) an improvement can be achieved in humans.
42.1 The CosTAL PLEURA is provided with sensory innervation from
branches of the intercostal nerves. As a result inflammation of the pleu-
ra (pleurisy) is very painful. Diaphragmatic and mediastinal pleurae
s  u d   n a s 
innervation via the vagus nerve. On the other hand the pulmonary
pleura is either not innervated or only with low grade viscerosensory
42.3 Massive effusion of liquid into the pleural cavity (hydrothorax).
fibers.
42.2 Air can penerate the MEDIASTINUM (pneumomediastinum) due to
42.4 The CoSTODIAPHRAGMATIC RECESSES are complementary Or
injuries of the tracheal or bronchial wall and the esophagus for exam-
 ple with a perforating foreign body. In a pneumomediastinum those
 reserve spaces into which the lungs do not extend during normal respi-
ration. In large dog breeds they are 2 or 3 finger breadths wide. Cra-
organs, blood vessels and airways not visible under normal physiolog-
nially they are limited by the caudal border of the lung field (see 38.1)
ical conditions are reproduced radiographically.
ap m  p  jo  no au a aq  p
 inspiration as in yawning or in pathologically increased lung size, for
example in emphysema, do the caudal borders of the lung extend part-
 ly into the costodiaphragmatic recess. In lung emphysema which occurs
rarely in dogs the field of the lung can extend almost up to the line of
insertion of the diaphragm.
42.5 The PERICARDIAL CAvITY as with the pleural cavities is a capillary
gap filled with serous fluid. It brings about frictionless heart movement
with each action of the heart. The further filling of the cavity with flu-
id restricts the expansion of the ventricles of the heart and therefore
limits cardiac efficiency and capacity. A chronic hydropericardium can
 be reated surgically by drainage into the pleural cavity. Severe hemor-
rhages into the pericardium after rupture of a large artery cause con-
ade) and can cause heart stasis.
44.1 SPECIAL TERMs RELATING To HEART are derived from the Latin
right atrium relate to the heart itself and not to position in the general
body.
42.2 and 42.3 Bilateral appearance of a pneumomediastinum which conveys a
44.2 In the realization of its FuNCTION AS A PREssURE AND SUcTION
distinct image of the large blood vessels, and a pneumothorax which has, as a
 PuMP the heart runs through a regular cycle of ventricular muscle con-
sequel, the removal of the heart apex from the sternum.
 traction(systole) and relaxation (diastole) with a frequency of 80 - 120
contractions (beats) per minute.
42.3 In a physiological sense the PLEuRAL CAvITIEs simply exhibit a
S         
 capillary wide gap filled with a serous liquid film. The limiting parts
 approaching the heart apex lying in direct contact with the left and
of the pleura (parietal and visceral) cling to each other across the
right thoracic walls. Here one can feel the apex beat at its strongest
serous gap, by adhesion, without, however the loss of their sliding
and sonographic examination of the heart (echo cardiography) (see
 capacity during respiratory movements of the lung. In a qualitative
pp 168 and 169) is possible. Percussion enables one to define this
and quantitative regard the pleural cavities can exhibit unphysiolog-
 area as a dampened heart field. The direct association of heart to tho-
racic wall generates a severely dampened or deadened knocking
(hydrothorax), lymph containing fluid (chylothorax after rupture of
sound (absolute heart dampening). Due to the sloping position of the
longitudinal axis of the heart, the right heart lies more to the right
and cranially and the left heart more to the left and caudally. With
mothorax results if air penetrates through an external injury into the
pleural cavity (external pneumothorax) or due to a laceration of the
expiration the heart is contiguous with the diaphragm. In a latero-
lung tissue (internal pneumothorax). The consequence is widening of
lateral radiograph it rests on the sternum by means of the apical end
the potential fluid filled gap and therewith a termination of the adhe-
 of the right ven tricular border.
sive forces holding the lung to the thoracic wall. The pulmonary lobe
 44.4 The LIGAMENTUM ARTERIOsUM is the connective tissue remnant of
of the affected side collapses to a fraction of its original size. A bilat-
the ductus arteriosus which is patent prenatally and through which
eral pneumothorax can occur if the mediastinum of both pleural cay-
 the current of blood is conveyed directly from the pulmonary trunk to
ities is not completely separated. This results in difficult life threat-
sh snsoe snp an aon  a ioe sn eoe a
ening shortness of breath (dyspnea). Valvular pneumothorax likewise
closed completely a few weeks after birth, becoming the fibrous liga-
results in a life threatening dyspnea. With this, further air at the
 mentum arteriosum. On the basis of an altered yolume ratio an abnor-
 mal persistence of the ductus leads to a severe load on the left ventri
expiration since the site functions as a valve only permitting an
cle, since a portion of the blood volume (shunt volume) arrives at the
inflow of air. During auscultation no respiratory noises are heard and
 pulmonary trunk directly from the aorta (left-right shunt) and by pul-
heart sounds also are reduced markedly in intensity. A radiograph of
monary veins into the left arium. The right left shunt is essentially
a pneumothorax has characteristic features: The collapsed pul-
 rare and originates in humans from a shunt reversal. With ausculta-
monary lobe is displaced dorsally towards the hilus of the lung, is
 tion of a left - right shunt typical *machine murmurs are audible. At
dense radiographically, and is separated distinctly from the pleural
 times a persistent ductus arteriosus is coupled with other heart anom-
186
alies (for example ventricular defects). The ductus arteriosus is closed
lizes the shape of the heart and serves as inserion for atrial and ven-
using different surgical techniques. During the procedure one takes
ticular myocardium. These approach the heart skeleron from both
note of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve which branches away from
directions but do not go beyond its boundaries. The closure of pul-
the vagal nerve, and at the ductus arteriosus *copes with' rounding the
 monary and aortic semilunar valves produces the second (short) heart
aortic arch. In abnormal persistence of the right aorta (see embryolo-
sound. The (longer) first heart sound results from tension vibrations of
gy of the arteries of the branchial arches), instead of the normally pre-
cardiac muscle in ventricular systole. Heart murmurs are abnormal
sent left aorta, the right aorta lies to the right of the esophagus where-
noises which can occur due to narrowing (stenosis) as well as persis-
as normally the aorta lies to its left. In this abnormality the distinctly
tent ductus arteriosus (flow murmurs) or due to defective closure
displaced ductus arteriosus courses dorsally from the pulmonary
(insufficiency) of the heart valves (valvular murmurs).
trunk which lies continuously on the left, over the esophagus and
stricted due to the ductus arteriosus and is severely dilated precar-
dially (causes of esophageal dilation see 14.4.). The dilation is easily
 seen radiographically after a barium meal.
 44.9 Hypertrophy of the ight ventricular wall and insuficiency of the tricuspid
valve as a sequel to increased pressure (Pv in the right ventricle with a subval-
vular pulmonary stenosis (Ps). RA right atrium; VC cranial and caudal venae 
cavae; PA pulmonary artery.
44.10 The FossA OvALis is the thinnest part of the atrial septal wall
(septum). It originates due to the sudden closure of the foramen ovale
with the first respiratory movement during birth, following the sudden
altered pressure relationships. Due to the foramen ovale, blood flow to
 the as yet functionless lung is avoided. During the fetal period oxygen-
rich blood flows from the placenta, through the umbilical vein and via
 the caudal vena cava to the right atrium. From there it flows through
the foramen ovale into the left arium and ventricle. Here it courses via
44.4 Persistent night aorta. 1 esophagus; 2 Descending aorta; 3 Ductus arterio-
aorta, brachiocephalic trunk and common carotid artery to the head
sus. Details see p 41.
a po no  on a pd si dp ar
 -  u rd si  t p a  o
44.5 The ENDocARDIUM merges into the inner lining of the large blood
through the right atrium (where it intersects with the forenamed oxy-
vessels and is constructed in a similar fashion to this.
genated blood) to the right ventricle. It proceeds via the pulmonary
trunk, ductus arteriosus and descending aorta to the caudal part of the
body which consequently retains blood poor in oxygen and lags behind
dominates and in addition, a myocardium which conducts stimuli. The
in its development.
myocardium is the thickest constituent of the heart wall by far; it con-
sists of several layers with fibers coursing in different directions to
44.11 In is large apical region the INTERvENTRIcULAR SEPTUM consisIS
 intermingle thoroughly in a yortex-like manner at the heart apex. Just
essentially of cardiac muscle. A small membranous area of connective
as skeletal muscle hyperrophies with increased work so too does car-
tissue is situated in the vicinity of the atrioventricular valves. Here in
diac muscle. A proportionate “harmonic' cardiac hypertrophy exists in
 the mermbranous portion an interventricular foramen can exist as an
 all myocardial areas with increased cardiac output. By comparison, in
anomaly. In comparison foramina in the muscular portion are very
a disproportionate hypertrophy only certain myocardial portions are
rare. In septal defects, corresponding to the different pressure ratios,
 thickened (for example, the right ventricle in pulmonary stenosis and
blood flows from the left to the right ventricle.
the left ventricle in aortic stenosis). Since a constant numerical ratio
44.12 Insufficiency of the BicusPID or MITRAL VALVE is the most fre-
quent cause of cardiac insufficiency in older dogs. It is due to an ongo-
is possible only to a limited degree. When a threshold range is exceed-
ing fibrosis and thickening of the margins of the valve (endocardosis)
with simultaneous shortening of it. Reflux blood flow leads to dilation
 jo  aq p si r   sn 
 of blood in the left atrium as well as damming back of blood in the pul-
wall thicknesses. Dilation of the heart results in an inability to expel the
d a  asd p jo ss e i  sa r
-nb apin e i os asas p sas  po
circulation which has as a consequence in high grade insufficiency, the
ty of blood remains to be mixed with the inflow of blood.
 passage of fluid into the lung alveoli (pulmonary edema).
44.7. The EpicARDiuM is the continuation of the serosa of the peri-
cardium on the heart surface and thus corresponds to the visceral lay-
er of the serous pericardium. In general terms the smooth mesothelial
covering brings about a sliding between serosal membranes, in this
 44.12 Medium level insuf-
case the frictionless sliding berween heart and pericardium with car-
 ciency of the mitral valve
diac action.
with evident systolic back
44.8 In TRIcusPID INsUFFicIENcY the right ventricle is hypertrophied.
flow (blue color marking. 6)
By comparison the right atrium is dilated since a portion of blood drifs
from the left ventricle (1) into
back by reflux flow through the atrioventricular ostium which closes
the left atrium (5). 2 M.
papillaris subauricularis; 3
inadequately.
Pericardium; 4 Mitral valve.
44.9 The VALVE OF THE PULMONARY TRUNK often exhibits congenital
 a r    (s  s
work and consequently hypertrophy. The pulmonary valve as well as
the aortic valve is a semilunar valve with 3 cusps attached to the inter-
nal wall of the vessel like swallows' nests. With blood flow through the
valve during ventricular systole the margins of the cusps are pushed
 Decompensated heart insuffi-
against the internal wall of the pulmonary trunk. In diastole the blood
ciency with high grade enlar-
shaproq aun ieu os sdsno e au spioun, spremyeq mo on supual
gement of the left atrium (3),
 come together tightly and hence guarantee valve closure. Cardiac
dilated left ventricle (1) with
valves are attached to the cardiac skeleton. This becomes partly carti-
thickening of the mitral valve
laginous and indeed partly ossified in cattle and consists of fibrous
(2). (Sonographic image:
Professor Dr: C. Poulsen
rings with a fibrous triangle lying berween them. The skeleton stabi
Nautrup, Munich).
187
44.13 Insufficiency of the AoRTic VALvE is rare in dogs. In contrast
Impairment of blood supply in the coronary arteries causes angina pec-
 congenital aortic stenosis is frequent with Boxers a predisposed breed,
 toris in humans with severe cardiac pains which radiate to the left arm
and is situated mostly in a subvalvular position. The narrowing of the
(see zones of Head, 48.1).
outflow channel from the left ventricle causes a pressure load on the
Blood supply to the heart ensues during diastole by way of the ascend-
latter with resultant hypertrophy of the myocardium.
ing aorta from which the coronary arteries arise. With an abnormal
 increase in heart frequency diastole in particular is shortened resulting
 in an under supply of blood.
 46.2 The GENERATION AND CONDUCTION OF THE CARDIAc IMPULSE muSt
function permanently to maintain heart action even with loss of con-
sciousness. The conduction system consists of modified specific heart
muscle cells which have largely lost their capability of contraction. As
soon as the formation of the impulse does not take place in the sino-
atrial node, the subsequently organized portions of the system of con-
duction (atrio-venticular node and the bundle of His) can assume a sub-
stitute pacemaker function, but with an essentially decreased frequen-
cy.
With heart transplantation a portion of the conduction system, at lease
the bundle of His, is transplanted due to which heart function is main-
tained after the insertion of an artificial pacemaker in the recipient.
Knowledge of the generation and conduction of the impulse makes
44.13 Hypertrophy of the left ventricular wall(LV) and insuficiency of 
 possible an understanding of the electrocardiogram (ECG). In setting
the mitral valve consequent to an increase in pressure (Pv) in the left ventricle
up an ECG one can derive, concentrate and record the electrical poten-
 due to a subvalvular aortic stenosis. LA left atrium; PV pulmonary veins;:
 tials arising from the body surface with heart action.
Ao Aorta
 46.3 The AUTONOMIc NERvous SYsTEM modifies the frequency of gen-
eration of impulse (positive or negative chronotroph), the conduction
Valve mechanics of all heart valves are basic prerequisites for heart
of impulse (positive or negative dromotroph) as well as the contraction
action. Ventricular muscle contraction (systole) and relaxation (diastole)
strength of the working muscle (positive or negative ionotroph). More-
each always consisting of 2 phases, occur in the left and right sides of
 Over, sympathetic (positive) and parasympathetic (negative) parts of the
the heart synchronously. In diastole, in phase 1, the tension release or 
-d na rn e u anse t uss son
relaxation phase, all valves close and either lower pressure or lack
a u nuasd are (sioidasai anssaid) siondaaog ra ieon
thereof predominates within the ventricle. In phase 2, the filling phase,
right atrium and the sinus venosus.
with higher pressure in the atrium, the A-V valves are pushed open due
 48.1 AuToNoMIc NERvEs and sensory cutaneous nerves of the somat-
uado saop ases ou u) ioop e suado isne pum e ayl snl mo poolq oi
ic nervous system arising from the same segment of the spinal cord
ing occur due to contraction of papillary muscles). In the first instance
form viscerocutaneous reflex or conduction arcs making reciprocal
ventricular filling occurs due to lowering or subsidence of valve level
 effects possible. Due to cross communication, skin stimuli in certain
whereby blood from the atrium is sucked into the ventricle. Addition-
 areas (zones of Head) can influence the appropriate viscera and recip-
al factors involved in ventricular filling are residual pressure in the
rocally excessive excitability in defined viscera can have consequences
 in the pertinent zones of Head namely the appertaining skin areas. The
venae cavae and atrial contraction.
saltation of an impulse from autonomic to somatic nervous system
In the following systole ventricular muscle contracts. In phase 1, the
 and vice versa occurs in the spinal ganglion since it is there that small
tension phase, atrioventricular valves close passively because pressure
viscerosensory (autonomic) and large pseudounipolar (somatic) nerve
Jo sdn a aem s u 'ue a un ie uui raeaa si aun au 
cells are directly adjacent. In diseases of certain internal organs pain is
the cusps of the A-V valve are pressed in the direction of the atrium
 noticed in pertinent skin fields; for example infarct of the heart in
(valve recoil). The chordae tendinae which are now tense, however,
d s e  ai i d aais sd s
prevent the recoil of the valve apex into the region of the atrium. On
hyperemia in a zone of Head in humans can affect the appropriate
the contrary the borders of the sail - shaped valve lie so tightly togeth-
 internal organ indirectly.
er that a leak-proof closure results. In phase 2, the expulsion phase, due
 48.2 Injuries of spinal cord segments T1 - T3 can reduce sympathet
to additional pressure increase blood is propelled into the blood vessels
ic tonus in the CERVIcOTHORACIC GANGLION manifesting itself as
leaving the heart (aorta, pulmonary runk). Thereby the semilunar
Horner syndrome associated with the eye (see 118.1). With an injec-
-ndxa aul jo pua au iy mo pooq Aq Aaaissed uado pausnd are saaiea
 tion of local anesthetic at the cervicothoracic ganglion one can inter-
sion phase and by the beginning of diastole, blood pressure in the ven-
rupt temporarily, the sympathetic innervation of head, neck and the
tricle falls below that in the large blood vessels. As a result the three
ipsilateral thoracic limb (stellate blocade). This method is used in
pocket-like cusps expand or puff out due to blood flow pressing back
neurotherapy to control chronic pain-producing conditions of the
 on them. This expansion causes closure of the valve.
thoracic limb.
 48.3 Injuries of the REcURRENT LARYNGEAL NERVE result in unilateral
-e paii aq A uoe ieaq sess jea ieaixa oi an
 s s     no s
 cially for a limited space of time. In transient (temporary) heart stasis,
why, during surgical access to the cervical vertebral column, this nerve
for example with a severe shock-determined parasympathetic tonus,
is taken into consideration at all times.
strong external pressure in rhythm with heart beat is exerted on the
thoracic wall. Hence the heart, which, within its pericardial envelope
50.1 The SURGICAL APPROACH TO THE PERITONEAL CAVITY is termed a
laparotomy. Most frequently access is along the linea alba. With a
cannot avoid external pressure, is compressed. Due to this pressure aor-
tic and pulmonary valves are opened passively and due to relaxation
be moved forward and detached from its insertion at the linea alba.
blood is sucked from the venae cavae into the atrium. Without ventic-
ular contraction therefore, a directed blood flow can be maintained
artificially leading to restitution of heart beat.
46.1 Under strict anatomical criteria CoRONARY ARTERIES are not end
  a  sisons d a s sn
arteries do not anastomose with one another and only supply com-
 pletely definite areas of tisue. From the functional view-point, howey.
er, coronary arteries can be regarded as end arteries since their anasto-
moses are so narrow, they cannot adapt to thrombosis of a neighbor-
the myocardium which cause cardiac infarction. If the patient survives,
heart muscle cells cannot regenerate but are replaced by scar tissue
50.1 Laparoscopy:
which undergoes less stress. (In contrast to humans, cardiac infarction
1 Right hepatic bbe.
 in dogs is of minor importance).
2 Quadrate lobe, 
3 Gall bladder, 4 Greater
The danger of thrombosis in coronary arteries is increased by endo-
curvature of stomach.
carditis in the left ventricle because detached portions of endocardium
(Laparoscopy: Professor
can arrive directly in the coronary arteries at the origin of the aorta.
Dr. W. Kraft, Munich).
188
Alternately, in specific instances, access is possible by paracostal sec-
54.1 SPECIAL TERMs RELATING TO THE STOMACH derive from the Latin -
tion parallel to the costal arch or in the flank. In laparoscopy an endo-
a n s a r q r ra a e =) s
scope is introduced through a small incision to the abdominal cavity,
term is also ermployed for the ventricles of heart and larynx), or from
 making possible a direct adspection of intra-abdominal organs and
Greek - gaster (= a stomach, for example gastrosplenic ligament, or
       
 clinically gastritis = inflammation of stomach).
invasive surgery occurs purely under laparoscopic control with the
54.2 STOMAcH FuNcTION involves the ransient storage of food and the
help of specific instruments introduced through a further small inci-
regulation of its further transport in smaller quantities into the small
sion.
intestine. The hydrochloric acid of the stomach brings about disinfec-
tion and the activation of pepsinogen generated from the gastric
52.1 The GREATER OMENTUM, a loose expansive sliding layer, lies
 glands, which, as pepsin, initiates digestion.
between the ventral abdominal wall and convolutions of intestine. It
is an important defence organ of the abdominal cavity rich in
 54.3 A direct examination of the GAsTic MucoUs MEMBRANE follows
macrophages and lymphocytes and moreover it serves as a storehouse
 the introduction of a flexible endoscope through the esophagus and
for fat. When inflammation or injuries occur at the peritoneal cover-
ing of abdominal organs or of the abdominal wall, the omentum glues
stomach ulcers and tumors as well as the successful taking of biopsy
to the site and thus protects it against the surroundings. This attribute
material.
can restrict pathological processes in the abdominal cavity and can
54.4 ToRSION OFTHESTOMACH is a dramatic progressive condition pre-
delay adhesions of the bowel which restrict intestinal movement and
sent generally in large dog breeds. It necessitates the immediate inter-
peristalsis. This protective function of the omentum can be put to use
vention of the veterinarian. The stomach is fixed cranially due only to
in surgery where it lies over the surgical sutures. Fissures in the omen-
 the attached esophageal hiatus, while the dorsal mesentery of the stom-
is a n p si  r ai e p n
ly to intestinal blockage (ileus), if intestinal loops push inside it. A dis-
of the position of the stomach. The pyloric part of the stomach and the
placement of such loops into the epiploic foramen with ileus as a
 initial segment of the duodenum are freely moveable so they too can-
'sop u Aarer kiaa Auo suaddeu pnbass
 - p s ae s d u s a x n
due to an overloading of the stomach with once daily feeding combined
 52.2 INTESTINAL LYMPH or chyle, depending on the digestive process-
with an incipient accumulation of gas - lead to gastric torsion.
'The
es, is more or less milky in color because of its fat content. With the
rotated stomach distends in a life threatening manner and as a further
U Aeme painodsueni are spioe Aiiey ueuo suop dund sna e jo pie
consequence stomach blood vessels, especially the veins, are strangu-
the form of chylomicrons (see biochemistry) in lymphatic capillaries
and in the central lymph vessel of the intestinal villus. Short chain fat-
-so ro uonsqo oi anp paep s uads u uon mo snouaa
ty acids and the building blocks of protein and carbohydrate metab-
tion of the splenic veins. This develops into massive splenic congestion.
olism are conducted to the liver via a network of blood capillaries and
 In turn torsion of the stomach leads to an acute failure of the circula-
the portal vein. SoLITARY LYMPH NoDULEs are scattered in the tunica
tion demanding urgent surgical intervention.
mucosa of the mucosal membrane. (They are also present in lym-
phatic organs, spleen and lymph nodes). Aggregated lymph nodules
(for example Peyer's patches) are situated in particular in the antime-
senteric section of the wall of the ileum. Primary lymph nodules are
spherically or elliptically shaped accumulations of the lymphocytes
with a diameter of approximately 0.5 mm. Secondary lymph nodules
 possess a yellow germinal center and are significant in the production
of B lymphocytes.
52.3 SPLENIc FuNcTIoN involves blood storage, regulation of blood
pressure, metabolism through the decomposition of hemoglobin, blood
processing due to phagocytosis of older erythrocytes, and the genera-
tion of immunocompetent cells. In spite of these many and varied roles,
the spleen is not essential to life since the named functions, obviously,
 can be taken over by other organ systems. The spleen, however, is not
a superfluous organ and should not be removed carelessly. Neverthe-
less splenectomy can be necessary in a series of conditions such as tor-
sion of the stomach, injuries and tumors. With splenectomy in human
surgery small pieces of splenic tissue a ccm in size are sutured into the
 greater omentum. Ruptures of the spleen afer abdominal traumata
 54.4 Gastric torsion combined with severe gaseous distension of the stomach.
and tears from splenic tumors, lead to severe life threatening hemor-
The greater curvature is situated dorsally (arrows) and the lesser curvature and
rhages into the abdominal cavity; these require the quickest possible
angular incisure (+) are directed ventrally.
surgical interference.
 54.5 Interruption of motility of the SPHINCTER MUsCLE OF THE CARDIA
which results in an insufficient relaxation (achalasia) or more frequently
The spleen is adapted to its function of blood storage. This becomes
 an inability to close (chalasia) can cause a megaesophagus. Affected ani-
apparent due to the different size and shape of the organ, because of the
high content of smooth muscle cells in the splenic capsule and the tra-
 mals are disposed to the altogether rare appearance of an invagination of
becular system proceeding from it. Due to the storage and dispersal of
 the stomach into the esophagus (gastroesophageal invagination).
blood the spleen also serves in the regulation of blood pressure, for
example due to the easing of the load of the hepatic portal circulation
spleen on account of the increased blood storage a *congested spleen'
results. This splenomegaly can necessitate a splenectomy, rendered dif-
ficult due to the congestion. By applying adrenalin, contraction of the
smooth muscle cells is attained and with it a removal of blood. In
euthanasia a congested spleen can occur supposedly caused by a paral-
ysis of the vasomotor center of the brain (note the condition in the
anatomy preparation room).
The white splenic pulp with its splenic corpuscles and periarterial lym-
phatic sheaths serves in the formation of lymphocytes. The red splenic
pulp is so named because of its high content of red blood cells. Here
blood processing takes place. According to predominant text book
a pann aed smo dnd suds pn aun un pog a uoo
54.3 and 54.5 Endoscopic view of the pylorus of a dog (gastroscopy, left) and
splenic sinuses (closed circulation) and partly free in the lymphoreticu-
a gastroesophageal invagination (esophagoscopy, ight).
(Endoscopic photographs: Professor Dr. W. Krat, Munich).
lar connective tissue (open circulation). This is not certain due to indi-
vidual animal differences. Radiographically the spleen is demonstrated
laterolaterally. The ventral end of the organ which bends towards the
54.6 Narrowing of the PyLoRus (pyloric stenosis) leads to interrup-
right and over the midline to attain the right side of the body, is
tion in emptying the stomach. Its congenital shape is demonstrated
 described in general as a triangular shadow. The triangle corresponds
after weaning and transfer to solid food. In adult dogs an hypertro-
 approximately to the cross-sectional shape of the spleen.
phy of the pyloric mucous membrane and musculature can lead to its
189
 in a five-layered wall construction. The internal surface mucous mem-
 of gastrin is thought to be the cause. Likewise foreign bodies and
brane is demonstrated due to its high echogenicity (1). The wide
tumors can produce a partial or complete closure of the outlet of the
mucosal tunic has a low echogenicity (2) and is separated by a slender
stomach.
echogenic line (3) from the anechoic, but narrow muscular tunic (4).
 Again the outer surface of the smallintestine with its outer serosal cov-
 i  (s  g o g   t
 ering is displayed as a narrow echogenic line (5).
directed on the parietal surface, along the axis of the stomach midway
between both stomach curvatures which convey the blood vessels.
54.10 The DESCENDING DuODENUM is identified with certainty by its
 Because of muscle tonus the incised mucous membrane is always evert-
characteristic straight course along the right lateral abdominal wall as
ed strongly to the outside.
a single section of small intestine. It serves as an aid for orientation of
54.8 The PANcREAs produces digestive enzymes in its exocrine por-
tion for degrading proteins, carbohydrates and fats. The protein
splitting enzymes are present within the pancreas as inactive precur-
sors. Initially they are activated to trypsin and chymotrypsin after their
transport through the pancreatic ducts into the intestinal lumen. If,
with alterations to the pancreas due to disease, the activation occurs
 54.9 Jejunal bops in sonogra-
within the gland, this leads to self digestion with the development of
phic cross section.
pancreatic necrosis. After a dramatic course death often supervenes.
1. Mucous membrane surface 
Post mortem autodigestion occurs rapidly and in so doing the yellow.
 and ingesta 
ish - pink colored pancreas is stained a dirty red followed by loss of
2. Mucosal tunic
lobule structure due to swelling. A pancreatitis can lead to an inflam-
3. Submucosal tela
matory swelling of the excretory ducts and the greater duodenal papil-
4. Muscular tunic
la. In turn closure of the bile duct, a damback of bile and icterus occur.
5. Serosal tunic 
With acute necrosis or malignant degeneration, a partial pancreatecto-
the sonographic image of the pancreas.
place through the careful separation of the gland lobules in the inter-
56.1 FuNCTION OF THE LARGE INTESTINE consists essentially in the extrac-
lobular connective tissue, while preserving pancreatic ducts and vessels
tion of fluid, the inspissation and concentration of intestinal content, and
(see p57). One notes the anastomosis berween the cranial and caudal
 the admixture of mucus from very numerous goblet cells. This promotes
 pancreaticoduodenal arteries in the right lobe of the pancreas.
 the further transmission of content to the anus. Luminal surface increase
"l jo aouasad aui yanoru ieuol ou pue sidkio on Ajuo anp s!
The endocrine portion (islets of Langerhans) regulates carbohydrate
metabolism by means of its hormones glucagon and insulin.
 56.2 Radiographically, the CoLON is wellrepresented, generally to the
. This is
interrupted by disease atrophy of the islers, the relative and absolute
 right, due to accumulations of gas and feces. On the other hand, alter
deficiency of insulin causing diabetes. Tumors (insulinoma) of the B
ations to the colonic wall by tumors, ulcers and stenosis are detected
cells producing insulin autonomously lead to hypoglycemia which can
 frequently with contrast medium. This can be applied in a retrograde
cause resulting loss of consciousness and convulsions (spasms).
 manner Dilation of the colon (megacolon) occurs frequently as a result
of constipation (coprostatis) due to feeding errors or obstructions. The
54.9 FUNCTION OF THE SMALL INTESTINE cOnsists essentially of the
congenital
 form (megacolon
 congenitum) is1
rare,
caused
processes of secretion, digestion, resorption and transport. Secretion is
by a lack of intramural ganglion cells of the myenteric plexus
maintained by mucous producing goblet cells interspersed in the sur-
(Hirschsprung's disease).
face epithelium, from tubular intestinal glands (= intestinal crypts,
 epithelial indentations with contained cells-
 kryptos = hidden), from
 56.3 ATRESIA OF ANUs, RECTUM AND BoTH are anomalies which occur
一
submucosal duodenal glands and in particular from the pancreas adja-
cent and external to the small intestine.
Digestion, that is the degrading of nutrients into smaller resorbable,
units occurs at one time in the intestinal lumen, at another bound to the
 cell membranes of the brush border cells of the surface epithelium.
The brush border cells situated superficially act in resorption. They
 produce an enormous increase in surface area due to very thick erect
microvilli with a length of approximately one thousandth of a millime-
ter. Transport of resorbed nutrients occurs via blood capillaries with
the exception of long chain fatty acids which are transported by lym-
phatic vessels.
The surface increase leads to the creation of a large intestinal resorp-
tion surface due to structures recognizable at macroscopic, microscop-
ic or electron microscopic levels.
The circular folds (plicae circulares) recognized macroscopically are the
 56.2 Massive obstruction of the colon due to feces (coprostasis).
results of a simple folding of mucosa and submucosa, but not, howey.
er, of intestinal muscle layers. The microscopic crypts and especially the
during ontogenesis (atresia = absence of opening of the as yet closed
everted fingerlike intestinal villi approximately 1 mm long bear the
brush border cells with their microvilli which are detected microscopi-
embryonic anus or rectum). The anomaly is often accompanied by fis-
cally. The microvilli are covered by glycocalyces seen with the electron
tulae between ano-rectal and urogenital systems.
microscope.
56.4 CICUMANAL GLANDS see 6.3.
 Motility of the intestine is concerned with the villous pump mecha-
 56.5 The ANAL SAcs (more correctly termed paranal sinuses) store
secretion from glands situated in their walls. Due to adhesion onto
innervation promotes and sympathetic supply inhibits motility. Inter-
    p  srs s s p
 alluring partners. Normally the sacs ermpty with fecal deposition due to
the pressure of m. sphincter ani externus, normally formed feces sery-
also 56.2).
 ing as an abutment or site of resistance. A soft unformed feces result-
The villous pump leads to a shortening of the villi due to contraction of
 ing from a defective diet cannot serve as a resistance site and delays the
sparse smooth muscle cells. In this way lymph ransport in the central
discharge of the anal sacs. The decomposition of contained secretion
lymphatic vessels (chyle vessels) is promoted.
 can cause inflammation and secondary infection. Subsequent abcesses
can develop. The abnormally filled anal sac is expressed manually.
Pendulous movement due to contractions of the longitudinal muscle
 Rinsing of the sacs is possible via their excretory ducts which open
layer serves chiefly in the thorough mixing of intestinal content or
along the anocutaneous line at the 4 and 8 o'clock positions. Extirpa-
chyme.
tion of the chronically inflamed sacs must preserve the m. sphincter ani
Due to peristaltic waves intestinal content is transported further. Ini-
externus.
tially the longitudinal muscle contracts and then above all the circular
 56.6 Under the terrm PoRTAL VENoUs SysTEM one understands the
muscle layer.
 au o qu sa a u q aede ps e jo u
 In abdominal sonography intestinal loops are identified with certainty
 ry system. The connecting vein between the arteriovenous capillary bed
190
and the venovenous capillary bed is defined as a portal vein. Here extra
arterial blood can be introduced to form mixed arterial - venous blood.
To distinguish the different portal veins, one appends the name of the
a pd sn p s u iod a m o 
hypophyseal portal vein).
58.1 The LiveR lies within the intrathoracic part of the abdominal cav-
ity with the exception of the ventromedial portion which, however.
cannot be palpated. With pathological enlargement the liver reaches
further caudally beyond the costal arch. This can be established using
sonographic examination. The size of the liver which normally consti-
tutes 3.4% of body weight, is correlated with its multiplicity of func-
 tions: 1 Function as an endocrine gland (synthesis of blood plasma pro-
tein such as albumen, globulin and fibrinogen): 2 Function as an
exocrine gland (bile and cholesterol): 3 Intermediary metabolism of fat,
protein and carbohydrate: 4 Storage of fat, glycogen and iron: 5
Glycogenolysis and glyconeogenesis as well as the maintenance of a
physiological glucose level: 6 Detoxification of drugs and medicine. In
the fetal stage the liver is relatively larger and occupies a dominant part
58.2 Contrast radiography (portography) of an extra-hepatic portocaval shunt.
of the abdominal cavity, the size being connected with blood forma-
After injection the contrast medium flows into a jejunal vein (1) into a portal vein
tion. Pathological atrophication due to pronounced pitting and accom-
(2) and from there, by avoiding the liver (5) through a portocaval shunt (3) direct-
 panying shrinkage can occur as in cirrhosis of the liver.
ly into the caudal vena cava (4). (Photography: Prof. Dr. Gravel, Leipzig)
The classical liver lobules are functional units detectable macroscopi-
consequently increases in size thus improving the effectiveness of
cally with a diameter of approximately 1mm and a height of up to
enzymes. Bile acids and bile pigments are resorbed again in the small
 2mm. The lobules possess a central ein, appearing macroscopically as
intestine (enterohepatic circulation) and accordingly secreted anew in
a dark point, with radially discharging liver capillaries or sinusoids. As
the bile. An excessive content of bile pigment in the blood becomes evi-
well there are liver cell trabeculae arranged radially and a fibrous tis-
dent as icterus (pre-, intra-, and posthepatic). In prehepatic icterus
 increased bile pigment results from an increased destruction of ery.
throcytes. Intrahepatic icterus is caused by injury of hepatic cells and
Pathological fatty degeneration of the liver due to the effects of toxins
posthepatic icterus occurs due to obstructions within the bile duct sys-
or lack of oxygen and leading to yellowish discoloration is recognized
macroscopically in its advanced stages. Since blood flows in the liver
prematurely, with adjacent tisues exhibiting a bile colored imbibition
sinusoids from the periphery of the lobule to its center, the cells situat-
 observed during autopsy.
ed peripherally are affected firstly and thus undergo fatty degeneration.
On the other hand with oxygen deficiency (hypoxia) fatty degeneration
 60.1 The SACRAL PART OF THE PARASYMPATHETIc SYSTEM arrives by dif-
 begins generally at the center of the lobule.
ferent routes at its effector organs about which there exists no agree-
ment in the literature. Different statements exist also about its radius of
58.2 The intramural architecture of the PoRTAL VEIN is adapted to high
influence and region of supply, which are based perhaps, on species
blood pressure. This high blood pressure is necessary for the perfusion
specific peculiarities. According to the opinion of several authors of
of the second (hepatic) capillary bed of the portal venous system. The 
texts on veterinary medicine is radius of influence or range is supposed
 pressure is maintained due to arteriovenous anastomoses in the region
uass ai oi oupunxa saarau ai cuar an oi paul aq on
of the intestine as well as the effect of rising blood pressure in the spleen
of which the venous blood reaches the portal vein. Characteristic of the
colon. (According to that therefore the hypogastric nerve would be
wall sructure are muscle fasciculae lying externally and oriented lon-
-n s uono asiasn an ue unq u (nidus kinnd
gitudinally which are also termed adventitial subserosal musculature.
cated as the boundary of supply between the parasympathetic part of
In sonographic examination of the portal vein and its branches it has a
 the sacral spinal cord and the vagus nerve. The newest conclusions
characteristically distinct echogenicity caused by the relatively thick
-sd iees al kq adds jo eae rar e jo yds ures 
wall. On the other hand hepatic veins show no wall structure which is
pathetic system which is supposed to include the entire colon.
evident sonographically.
60.2 Because of its protected position essentially the LuMBAR PLEXUS
 In the portal vein due to arteriovenous anastomoses and the spleen, an
 a  is  s   e  s
plexus. In contrast functional disorders are caused relatively frequent-
lary bed. The large part of the blood already at the commencement of
ly due to a narrowing of the intervertebral foramina. Causes are, for
 the venous limb (for example in the intestinal wall) flows through a
 example discopathies (see 10.3) or massive spondyloarthroses (see 8.6).
capillary bed. The limited decrease in blood pressure caused by this is
equalized by the blood pressure regulating function of the spleen (see
 62.1 Regarding the KipNEY the adipose capsule of live animals has a
52.3) and numerous arteriovenous anastomoses at the source of the
soft consistency so that kidneys, to some extent, swim in their own fat.
portal vein thus avoiding the capillary bed. Due to this a sufficient oxy.
 On radiographs where contrast medium is not employed, the kidneys
gen content is guaranteed for the supply of the liver since the thin
are not always shown satisfactorily, particularly the left (caudal) kid-
hepatic artery cannot supply this gigantic organ alone. The portal vein
 collects blood of unpaired veins from unpaired organs.
ney. In beter radiological display a compatible contrast medium is
employed to detect urinary pathways (urography see 62.2). On the oth-
The venous outflow from the caudal section of the rectum occurs extra-
er hand sonography makes a detailed representation possible (see ultra-
portally by way of paired medial and caudal rectal veins. This blood
sound anatomy pp170 - 171).
does not arrive at the liver by way of the portal vein but flows through
Congenital anomalies - manifest in a failed joining of the nephron to
a auq paqrosqe os anip an uo Aroisoddns u siuaueann jo uon
the canaliculus system, lead to cyst formations in the kidney. This
 defect is promoted due to the different origin of the nephron (from the
cient due to its full concentration.
       
 In the fetal circulation the portal venous blood is conducted directly
ureteric bud). The blood vessels of the kidney (renal artery and vein)
past the capillary bed of the liver via the ductus venosus into the cau-
 penetrate the kidney via the interlobar arteries and veins and finally the
dal vena cava. If this short circuit persists after birth a diagnosis of con-
arcuate aa and vy. These vessels play a part in urine formation and
 genital portocaval shunt is applied. Avoiding the liver, the central organ
 besides provide blood supply to the renal parenchyma and play a part
of metabolism, has as a consequence that its essential detoxification
 in the resorption of the non-urinary constituents from the loops of
function is inefficient. The blood concentration of toxins such as
Henle.
ammonia results in injury to the central nervous system, leading in turn
to development of hepatoencephalopathy. Congenital shunts can be
 The afferent glomerular arterioles from the arcuate artery rarely con-
ligated surgically. Since various forms of this defective vessel develop-
tribute to the primary formation of urine which is produced predom-
inantly by interlobular aa. Within the kidney lobules these course radi-
ment can crop up, the position of the shunt must be established by
administration of a contrast medium directly into a vessel in the
ally to the kidney capsule. In the renal corpuscle the afferent glomeru-
 drainage area of the portal vein (portography).
e  s en r ai   se 
glomerular arterioles of the subcapsular renal corpuscles accumulat-
58.3 Bile is concentrated in the GALL BLADDER by water resorption. A
ing from the glomeruli open into a (cortical) capillary net which entan-
sphincter muscle at the opening of the bile duct regulates bile flow into
gles the loops of Henle (renal tubules) of the renal cortex and unite
the duodenum. Bile serves as an emulsifier of fat, the surface of which
with the interlobular veins. The renal medulla is supplied by arterio-
191
lae rectae (spuriae) which come from a juxtamedullary renal corpus-
64.4 In particular the SUSPENSORY LIGAMENT OF THE OVARY of the left
cle as well as from arteriolae rectae (verae) which radiate from inter-
side is relatively short and with speying of the bitch (ovariectomy)
lobular arteries or more rarely from arcuate arteries. The blood flow
impedes the forward positioning of the ovary. The ligament is palpat.
out of the renal cortex is via the interlobular veins and from the renal
ed as a tense cord directed cranially and one differentiates it from the
medulla via venulae rectae which conduct blood via arcuate veins and
q u s  a a sr n e 
interlobar veins into the renal vein.
vessels it can be penetrated safely without prior ligation.
62.2 The URETER penetrates the urinary bladder wall, with the section
associated with its opening taking a long oblique course. In this way a
reverse or reflux flow of urine to the renal pelvis is prevented. With an
increase of internal pressure in the urinary bladder during micturition,
the orifice section of the ureter is closed by compression. A unilateral
duplication of the ureter is present as a congenital anomaly if the
ureteric bud is distributed prematurely before reaching the renal sinus.
This can also proceed to a duplication of the renal pelvis. Ectopic open-
ings of the ureters with on-going urinary incontinence can be present
caudal to the sphincter muscle of the urethra. The closure of a ureter
can have many causes such as urinary stones (uroliths), tumors, scar
tissue or anomalies. This leads to damming back of urine, a dilation of
the ureters (hydroureter) and finally of the renal pelvis. With a chronic
retention there is pressure atrophy of the common renal papilla and
finally the whole renal parenchyma with complete loss of function. The
residuum of the ersrwhile kidney remains as a large sac filled with
urine.
64.1 The MuCOUs MEMBRANE OF THE URINARY BLADDER is folded and
with filling of the bladder the folds are eliminated, conferring on it
an enormous potential yolume. Obtuse abdominal trauma can lead
quently affected than bitches. In the latter the short wide urethra
 64.3 Urinary bladder stones in a male dog.
makes possible an easier, fast emptying of the bladder with excessive
increase in pressure.
64.5 The TesTIcucLAR TuNIics - the peritoneum and the continuations
 of the layers of body wall- are reated differently depending on the dif
ferent methods of castration. In castration (orchidectomy), with cover-
asoa  wm an ssad pudon e 'ssd pa 
spermatic cord is ransected distal to the ligation site. In castration with
 an opened vaginal process the *naked’ deferent duct is removed togeth-
 er with nerves and blood vessels.
64.6 Due to DEscENT, THE TesTEs are displaced from their site of ori-
gin into the scrotum by a continuous process occurring pre- and post-
natally. The testes enter the inguinal canals from the abdominal cavity
 3 - 4 days postnatally and migrate into the scrotum over the following
weeks. On average the descent is complete after 1.5 months and at the
latest should be complete after 3.5 months. If testicular descent is
incomplete and the testis remains in the abdominal cavity or remains
stuck in the inguinal canal, hence concealed, the condition is spoken of
as cryptorchidism (cryptos = hidden, orchis = testis).
 The retained testis exhibits an abnormally long proper ligament of the
testis and ligament of the tail of the epididymis. Such a testis is predis-
sddesdud
mones are produced in an almost uninterrupted manner For normal
62.2 Urography: Contrast medium has concentrated in the left ectopic ureter (1)
spermiogenesis an essentially lower temperature is needed and the
which is distended, and in the regularly flled urinary bladder (2).
internal temperature of the testis lying normally in the scrotum
approaches that of the skin.
64.2 The URETHRA is short and wide in bitches, and long and nar-
row in male dogs. Hence a blockage of the urethra by bladder stones
With the physiological site of the testis in the scrotum several factors
(urolithiasis) occurs almost exclusively in the male. Predilection sites
regulate testicular temperature which is approximately 2°c below body
for blockage of the male urethra are the narrowing of the urethra
temperature. Two factors may be named: 1. Venous outflow from the
adjacent to the os penis and the curvature of the urethra at the ischial
testis occurs via the pampiniform plexus. Through the vascular loops
arch.
 of this venous plexus passes the testicular artery the blood of which is
cooled slightly before its perfusion of the testis due to the somewhat
cooler blood of the pampiniform plexus (Varicose changes of the
64.3 MUsCULATURE OF THE URINARY BLADDER takes its cOurse in an
internal and an external muscle layer with a circular layer berween
 pampiniform plexus can cause sterility in man and animals). 2. The cre-
them. The layers are not exactly separated from one another and here
 master muscle (external) and the smooth muscle of the tunica dartos
and there change over, one layer with another. Muscle fasciculae shear
 cause the testis to be drawn upwards, approaching the warmer body or
- with relaxation of this muscle - to glide into the bottom of the cool-
off and change over from the neck of the bladder to the initial section
 er scrotum. Of course this might be more efficient in species with a pen-
of the urethra. With contraction of the urinary bladder the initial sec-
tion of the urethra dilates. Contraction is initiated by parasympathetic
dulous scrotum such as the bull or ram - than in the male dog.
fibers originating in pelvic nerves. Sympathetic fibers reach the bladder
66.1 The OvARy has a dual function comparable to that of the testis
by way of the hypogastric nerve. Neuro- and myogenic derangement
furnishing egg cells or oocytes for fertilization and the production of
can cause an uncontrolled urinary outflow (incontinence) or a reten-
sex hormones.
tion of urine. Urinary incontinence occurs frequently after speying in
 In the ovarian cortex are situated the egg cells (oocytes I) which are
ter response to sympathetic innervation. This can be counteracted with
enveloped postnatally and depending on the stage of development are
estrogen substitution and/or sympathomimetic drugs. A variety of
causes from discopathies (see 10.3) to chronic inflammation of the uri-
has a diameter of 20 μm and is surrounded by flat squamous epithelial
nary bladder can produce paralysis with urinary retention and ulti-
cells which become cuboidal. First of all with puberty individual pri-
mately massive bladder distention. From the viewpoint of differential
mary follicles grow into secondary follicles, of which the oocyte has a
diagnosis, with bladder distention an interruption of urinary outflow
 diameter of 1/10 mm surrounded by the zona pellucida and a multi-lay-
 caused by urolithiasis (see 64.2) has to be ruled out of the question.
 ered follicular epithelium as well as a connective tissue envelope (theca
192
externa and interna). The resultant bladder-like tertiary follicle con-
 Uterine epithelium consists of cilia-free secretory cells and ciliated cells
taining follicular fluid has a detectable follicular antrum (cavity)
which change in shape depending on the phase of the cycle. During fol-
between the follicular epithelial cells which are soft and separating
from one another. The oocyte, with a diameter of about 2/10 mm is
supported by a mound of follicular epithelial cells, the cumulus oopho-
pedesis of erythrocytes through the endometrium leads to the develop-
rus, and surrounded by a corona radiata, a single layered stratum of
ment of a sanguinous discharge during this phase of the cycle. After
follicular epithelial celis. A few individual tertiary follicles grow into
 ovulation a rising progesterone level produces secretion of uterine
mature follicles which have a diameter of about 2 mm. The greater
glands and the closure of the cervix of the uterus. Frequently in the
number of follicles do not reach ovulation but die due to follicular atre-
bitch this course of events is deranged through infection and/or ovari-
 sia (atresos = without light or opening).
an dysfunction and this causes different forms of endometritis.
Towards the end of estrus, even before the closure of the cervix, bacte-
ria can penetrate into the uterus, producing endometritis and filling the
uterine lumen with purulent secretion (pyometra) which cannot dis-
charge since thecervix is closed.With persistence of follicles strogens
are produced on a permanent basis, keeping the endometrium edema-
tous over a long period, leading to chronic sanguino-serous - and after
secondary bacterial infection - purulent discharge (chronic endometri-
tis). Mostly follicular luteal cysts develop which produce estrogen and
progesterone. Continuing hormonal stimulation of uterine glands leads
to continuing proliferation as well as secretion and ultimately to a very
frequent development of glandular cystic endometritis.
fetus is expelled and the perimetrium guarantees the ease of displace-
ment of the organ. During pregnancy smooth muscle cells of the
myometrium can lengthen perhaps 10 times (up to 1 mm) and at birth
they contract due to the influence of the hypothalamic/hypophyseal
system (oxytocin).
66.4 In the male genitalia the PROSTATIc UTRICLE or UTERUs MAscULl-
NUs is present as a blind-ending pocket in the vicinity of the coliculus
seminalis. (It is a remnant of the caudal end of the Muellerian ducts).
66.5 The CERVIX OF THE UTERus has a mucus plug in its canal which
hinders ascending infection, its consistency depending on the phase of
the estrus cycle. At the time of breeding it liquefies and is expelled to
make the passage of sperm through the cervical canal possible.
66.6 The EPITHELIUM OF THE VAGINAL MUCOUS MEMBRANE undergoes
 alterations depending on the phase of the estrus cycle. Hence the micro-
scopic examination of a vaginal smear makes an estimation of the
status of the cycle of the bitch possible. In anestrus large nucleated
epithelial cells dominate. In the course of proestrus they are replaced
increasingly by large keratinized non-nucleated epithelial cells which
degenerate in estrus and towards the end of estrus and in metestrus they
 disappear under the influence of progesterone. Under the impact of
 estrogen in proestrus and estrus the mucous membrane, predominant
ly in young bitches of the larger dog breeds, becomes edematous. This
can lead to a prolapse of the membrane. With this seasonal prolapse,
in contrast to a true vaginal prolapse, the urethral orifice is not includ-
66.1 Longitudinal section through the ovary. 1 Primary follicle; 2 Secondary fol-
ed.
icle; 3 Tertiary folicle; 4 Cumulus oophorus; 5 Corona radiata; 6 Cycling corpus
66.7 In the bitch the URETHRAL ORIFICE lies in the ventral midline on
luteum; 7 Medullary cords; 8 Blood vessels.
 the floor of the vagina, 2-5 cm cranial to the commissure of the lips of
the vulva. To obtain urine, with the aid of a vaginal speculum and the
sense of sight, one can introduce a stiff catheter and it can be passed
After rupture of the follicle, an endocrine gland, the corpus luteum,
into the urinary bladder.
develops from the epithelium and connective tissue of the follicular
66.8 The CuiToRis can be enlarged considerably with hormonal imbal-
envelope In the bitch this remains in existence for around 75 days inde-
ance derived predominantly from gonads and adrenal cortex. There-
 sanpond unan sndios au au su suna Kueuard jo juapuad
fore it is often termed a miniature penis. Nevertheless this analogy has
a a a   a m j ars
important limitations. Other than at the penis, the urethra in no case
  d  r rs e  s s s
ends at the clitoris and a section of corpus spongiosum is displaced into
pregnant bitch post partum, consequently after 63 days, there is an
 the wall of the vaginal vestibule as buibus vestibuli.
abrupt decrease in the concentration of progesterone. Under the influ-
ence of this in both the cycling and gravid bich, there is a rise in blood
68.1 Concerning the Tests the anatomical terminology is derived
concentration of prolactin preparing the mammary gland for lactation.
chiefly from the Latin ‘testis' with some exceptions such as epi-, meso-
Consequently in cycling bitches after regression of the corpus luteum
and periorchium. Clinical usage is derived from the Greek word *orchis
 there is frequently a false lactation also known as pseudopregnancy.
orchios', for example orchiectomy for castration. The testis is an
endocrine gland, besides producing sperm, which together with secre-
 Interruptions of ovarian function with the formation of cystic degener-
tion from epididymis and prostate makes up the ejaculate. In old male
ative and/or persistent folicles in the bitch are frequently a cause of
dogs testicular tumors are the most frequent type. Estrogens produced
delayed cycles.
un oi pea usdou a u ua sn oas uo
Continuing sonographic examination makes a direct record of the
(gynacomastia, penile atrophy) and the attraction of other males.
ripening follicle, ovulation and formation of the corpus luteum possi-
ble and can be consulted for the control of ovarian function.
66.2 With ovulation the UTERINE TuBE collects the ovum. If the fertil-
 ized ovum arrives in the abdominal cavity there is an abdominal preg-
 68.1 Sonographic longitudi-
ai niu an an s d a u 
nal section through a testis
 are vascular rich proliferations which are insufficient for the feus;
with echogenic neoplasms
therefore this dies prematurely. Hence, in comparison with abdominal
(3) and a cyst (4).
pregnancy in human medicine extrauterine gravidity, which can also
1 Testicular parenchyma;
begin in the ovarian bursa is of minor veterinary importance.
2 Mediastinum of testis
(Sonography: Professor 
66.3 The UTERus (metra in Greek) with its endometrium rich in glands
Dr. C. Poulsen Nautrup.
and blood vessels makes the nidation of the fertilized ovum possible.
Munich.
193
68.2 The EpiDipyMIs (epi-upon; didymos - twin in a metaphorical
68.6 EREcTION is controlled by the parasympathetic and ejaculation by
sense) with its efferent ductules is developed from the ransverse canali-
 the sympathetic divisions of the autonomic system. Erection of the
culi of the mesonephros, and its epididymal duct from the Wolffian
penisisattainedbywlingf teolid arrialerectilbody
duct of the mesonephros. From the divisions into head, body and tail
 pus rigidum (cavernosum) penis and the spongy venous erectile body.
of the epididymis one can deduce the underlying sections of testis as
 the corpus spongiosum penis.
head and tail extremities. The long duct of the epididymis is a place of
 Erection is realized in the arterial erectile body (corpus rigidum penis)
 storage and maturation of sperm which attain motility and fertilization
due to the following factors: 1 The cushions of intima within the
capacity here. Damaged sperms will be eliminated by phagocytosis.
helicine arteries in the quiescent state occlude these vessels. Therefore
68.3 The DEFERENT DucT is the direct continuation of the epididymal
 blood diverts through arteriovenous anastomoses and avoids the cay.
duct. The surgical removal of a section of the former resulting in ster-
-ai aa  sd  i sdr  jo a
ilization is known as vasectomy since the duct was previously called the
 mal cushions flatten out and blood flow is conducted in the helicine
yas deferens. In most cases the surgical reunification of both stumps
arteries to the cavernae. 2 Due to closure of the forenamed arteriove-
does not lead to an intended reattainment of male fertility. With the
 nous anastomoses an intense blood flow is conducted in the cavernae
 original surgical transection, autonomic nerves are severed by necessi-
 which thereby are flled in a tense distended manner. 3 The cavernae are
ty. This is detrimental to testicular function and distal to the transec-
“opened? due to relaxation of surrounding smooth muscle cells. 4 The
tion site there is deficient peristalsis of the deferent duct which is indis-
veins with their oblique passages are pinched off due to stretched tra-
pensable to semen transport.
beculae. 5 Engorgement or damming back of blood in the venous limb
is intense due to contraction of m. ischiourethralis and the compressing
68.4 With ejaculation, the CoLLicuLus SEMINALIs closes the com-
mencement of the urethra at the urinary bladder due to its erectile tis-
effort of the erectile bodies in the vaginal vestibule of the bitch. The m.
 ischiourethralis arises at the ischial arch and inserts jointly with that of
 sue. Hence semen is diverted distally.
 the other side at a fibrous ring situated medially. Due to its contraction
68.5 In young male dogs the PRosTATE lies within the pelvis and is dis-
the blood flow from the dorsal vein of the penis which traverses this
placed incrementally in a cranial direction with age until at about 5
ring, is throttled or cut off. Due also to intimal cushions in the veins,
 years of age it lies completely within the abdomen. Prostatic hyperpla-
 drainage of blood is delayed. In the most recent investigations, howey-
 cushions is doubted.
 In the first phase of coitus the paired corpus rigidum penis becomes
s r no sd us sdrs pun  po
cally the corpus glandis penis. Ejaculation begins within a minute of the
commencement of coitus. In the second phase the male turns irself
through 180° and initially cannot detach itself from the bitch. An S-
shaped twist of the penis delays further the venous outflow of blood in
particular from the glans penis, due to which the phenomenon of lock-
ing? has its origin. (Blood supply of penis see p7i).
 Innervation of the penis occurs via parasympathetic, sympathetic
and sensory neurons. Parasympathetic supply stems from the pelvic
plexus and causes erection. Sympathetic supply innervates smooth
muscle as well as helicine arteries and is responsible for ejaculation.
Sensory nerve endings are numerous in the glans penis and prepuce.
68.7 Due to its roof shaped superposition the Os PeNis restricts the
68.5 Negative contrast of the urinary bladder (1) due to inflation with air to
ability of the penile urethra to dilate. Therefore urinary stones from the
differentiate it from a paraprostatic cyst (2) which lies caudally and is homoge-
 bladder can be impounded and accumulate directly caudal to the penile
neous radiographically.
bone (urethrolithiasis).
sia is the result of an uncalibrated hormonal effect. Androgens are
68.8 An enlargement of the MEDIAL IuAc LYMPH NoDEs is demonstrat
responsible for glandular hyperplasia while estrogens cause squamous
 ed radiographically as shadow ventral to the last lumbar vertebra and
can cause a ventral displacement of the rectum.
dogs is a smooth one and mostly combined with intraparenchymatous
 70.1 The Ovary is supplied with blood by OvARIAN AND UTERINE ARTE-
cyst formations. The enlarged prostate can constrict the adjacent rectum
RIES AND VEINs respectively and these anastomose each with the other.
leading to difficult defecation. By contrast, a constriction of the urethra
With speying both vascular tributaries have to be ligated.
and difficult urination are rare in male dogs. Elimination of androgenic
 effects through reatment with antiandrogens or by castration results in
70.2 The LUMBOsACRAL TRUNK and its roots in the spinal cord seg-
a decrease of prostatic size within a short time. In addition to frequent
 ments L6 to S1 can be injured and functionally so, due to a multiplici-
parenchymatous prostatic cysts, rarely do large uni- or multichambered
ty of causes. The most frequent problems are lumbosacral constrictions
cysts occur as retention cysts. These are connected to the prostate or as
(see 10.2), lateral spondyloses with narrowing of intervertebral foram-
ina (see 8.6), but also fractures, subluxations and luxations of the cau-
paraprostatic cysts of unknown origin only lie adjacent to the gland.
Cysts of this type can assume extreme dimensions and occupy a consid-
 dal part of the lumbar vertebral column.
erable proportion of the abdominal cavity before producing clinical
 70.3 The ADRENAL GLANDs just as the kidneys and large blood vessels
 pain or annoyance.
(aorta and caudal vena cava) are located in the retroperitoneal space.
They are situated at the cranial extremity of the kidneys. These close
s au spua uedns oouan u ppp sdsu
68.5 Sonographic cross section of a hyperplastic prostate with numerous
intraparenchymatons cysts 1 Prostate parenchyma; 2 urethra; 3 Cysts:
4 Rectum. (Sonography: Professor Dr C Poulsen Nautrup, Munich).
70.3 Sonographic longitudinal section through the dumb-bell shaped left adrenal
 Aee peuopge leue t ene peue e ee peuog z r) uen 
194
jeuuopqe jeuen aui jo auasad an on anp jeuaipe jal aul jo uon
predisposition (Terrier Toy Poodle) exists. Radiographicallyat progressive
vein confers on it the characteristic dumb-bell shape seen in sono-
stages of the disease the following are recognizable: a deformation of the
graphic longitudinal section, while the right adrenal is comma shaped.
head of the femur an indentation of the head as well as reparativereactions
As an endocrine gland the adrenal has a completely divergent function
such as compression of the substantia spongiosa and fibrous development
to that of the kidney. Its medulla develops from ectoderm (sympa-
in the endosteum. In the progressive disease, morphologicalalterations can
thicoblasts) and produces adrenalin as well as noradrenalin. Irs cortex
encroach upon the neck of the femur with the development of endosteal
 develops from embryonic mesoderm and produces steroids. Hyperpla-
connective tissue. Good therapeutic results are attained with resection of
sia and tumors (adenoma and adenocarcinoma) of the adrenal cortex
the head of the femur. In young dogs the blood supply of the femoral head
takes place by way of a vascular plexus in the joint capsule and the epi-
cortex is due to the excessive production of adrenocortical hormones 
 physeal artery which courses in the ligament of the head of the femur. Not
(see 150.1). With surgical removal perhaps due to neoplasms, the pres-
untilafter the closure of the epiphyseal (growth) plate isit supplied in addi-
ence of the greater splanchnic nerve on its dorsal surface and its blood
tion, by intraosseous vessels (diaphyseal arteries) (see illustration).
supply, resulting from cranial, middle and caudal adrenal blood vessels
should be taken into consideration.
72.1 Today, contrary to older definitions PERINEUM is denoted as the
entire cutaneous muscular closure of the pelvic outlet in the environs of
the anal and urogenital canals. An atrophy of the pelvic diaphragm,
specifically of the m. levator ani, often leads to perineal hernia present in
older male dogs. Hormonal influences are considered the cause. Prostat-
 as i  e pe s iie (ss s sedad 
leads to increased pressure during defecation and with it increased stress
on the perineum. The hernial sac contains mostly retroperitoneal fat,
rarely small or large intestine. At times also, a caudally directed urinary
 bladder and/or prostate can occur. Surgical closure of the hernia can be
effected after detachment of the tendon of m. obturatorius internus (see
illustration p78) and its transposition and union with the mm sphincter
ani externus and m. coccygeus which are sutured to each other. Cogent
 n  si  n o sis
hypertrophy of the prostate.
 76.1 Deformation of the ight head of the femur resulting from an aseptic
necrosis of the head of the femur.
76.2 Fractures of the NEcK OF THE FEMUR are important and detri-
Aai anonau u a jo peau a jo Addns pooq ai on iuu
must be paid attention to quickly in a surgical and anatomically correct
manner.
76.3 The TIBIAL TuBEROsITY, the site of insertion of the m. quadriceps
femoris is an apophysis, which is united to the remaining tibia by an
 apophyseal cartilage during the growth period. The apophyseal carti-
lage consists of acaudoproximal approximately perpendicular portion
and a craniodistal approximately horizontal portion. The craniodistal
portion of the cartilage, on account of the tension of m. quadriceps
femoris via the patellar ligament, which is continued on, attaching to
the cranial border of the tibia distally has a capacity for traction. An
138.5). It occurs almost exclusively in young dogs between 4 and 6
months of age. This is before the final ossification of the apophyseal
cartilage which is closed after 1 year of age. Because of its different
pathogenesis, fracture of the tibial tuberosity in the dog is not equated
with Osgood - Schlatter disease in humans.
72.1 Radiograph of a perineal hernia in a male Collie. The urinary bladder.
 flled with contrast medium via a catheter is displaced into the hernial sac
(retroflexion of the urinary bladder). (Radiograph: Prof. Dr. E Henschel, Berlin).
An incision of vagina-perineum (episiotomy) is undertaken to alleviate
parturition by the enlargement of the yulvar cleft, or for the removal of
vaginal neoplasms. The cleft is incised dorsally but not as far as the m.
 sphincter ani externus.
74.1 The OssEous PELvIc GiRDLE is often fractured in car accidents. In
fractures with minimal displacement of the fractured parts sponta-
neous recovery can occur in a quiet calm situation without surgical
interference. The adjacent muscles attached on all surfaces can pro-
-n i on p oe iq a is  on ap s ao
traction, they can increase the displacerment of the fractured parts. In
uexa og sasuanbasuoo snoes aaeq ueo sueq snosueuods ase si
ple narrowing of the birth canal. Injuries of intrapelvic organs are often
combined with pelvic fractures involving, for example urinary bladder,
urethra, rectum, and branches of the lumbosacral plexus (see 78.2).
76.3 Radiograph (leftillust.) and histological section tright illust.) of the tibial
74.2 At the PELvic SYMPHYsIs the Os coxae of one side can be separat-
aeeo easudode aut yo uomsso peu ym bop buno e jo Aisoiean 
ed from the other on account of trauma, occasionally accompanied by
(Radiograph Frau Dr. von Ruedorfer, Berlin).
simultaneous separation of the iliosacral articulation. Such separations
affect young animals in particular since the pelvic symphysis is still car-
tilaginous and ossifies firstly in adulthood. The tight iliosacral articu-
76.4 DewcLAws are particularly well developed in large dog breeds
lation also becomes sronger or more compact with increasing age. In
(Mastiff, St. Bernard) and can also be duplicated. In individual dog
young individuals the symphyseal union which is still cartilaginous,
breeds such as the Briard, they are a requisite breed standard.
brings about an insignificant widening of the osseous birth passage.
 78.1 In dogs the most common site for intramuscular injection is the
76.1 Aseptic necrosis of the HEAD OF THE FEMUR (Legg-Calve-Perthes dis-
ISCHIAL MUSCULATURE.
ease) occurs in growing dogs between 4 and 12 months of age. An insuffi-
78.2 The ScIATic NERvE is injury prone in its course over the greater
cient blood supply is presumed as a causal agent (see 84.1); as wella breed
sciatic notch, due to pelvic fractures. With defective injection technique
195
intramuscular injections of iritant drugs in the long ischial muscles can
to spontaneous rupture. After complete rupture there is plantigrade
 lead likewise to irreversible damage of the nerve.
PosiTioNING of the PEs. In general partial ruptures affect only the super-
ficial digital flexor tendons.
80.1 The M. GRAcILis can rupture due to intense action causing trau-
 82.6 The CALcANEAL CAP' can luxate laterally or more rarely medial-
ma. As a result the knee joint can no longer be extended actively. A
ly. Luxation occurs particularly in overweight dogs and is combined
shortening of m. gracilis can occur in extremely active or rigorously
 with a severe swelling of the subtendineal calcaneal bursa.
trained German Shepherd dogs as a result of a chronic functional com-
 partment syndrome. In the affected dog at a walk and more intensely
 82.7 Tearing away of the tendon of origin of M. PopLiTEus leads to a
at the trot, the hock or tarsal joint is over extended and positioned out-
 dislocation of the contained sesamoid bone, which is detected radio-
ward while the paw is directed inward. Surgery consists of a complete
logically.
resection of the muscle.
 84.1 The LATERAL AND MEDIAL CIRCUMFLEX FEMORAL ARTERIES develop
 80.2 The M. PEcTINEUs (ET ADDUCTOR LONGUs), in addition to its action 
a vascular plexus in the capsule of the hip joint from which the main
as an adductor, draws the femur proximally, pressures the head of the
 blood supply to the head of the femur results.
femur at the dorsal border of the acetabulum and therefore stabilizes the
 86.1 The Hip JoiNT in the standing position occupies an angle of 85°-
normally shaped hip joint. In hip dysplasia (HD, see 86.1) on the other
100°. Flexion is around 45°-79° and extension 30°-75°. Adduction
hand, this pressure increases symptoms of pain on the reduced acetabu-
and abduction can take place at times to 70°-80°. For an intraarticular
lar margin and accelerates joint wear and tear. Therefore with hip dys-
injection of the hip joint a needle 5-7 cm long must be advanced 4-6
plasia, pectinomyotomy can lead to a temporary improvement of symp-
 ri a j raroq isoi a   
toms without, however halting the process of the condition.
Luxations of the hip joint are caused mostly by a severe external blow
80.3 A shortening of the m. quadriceps femoris generated traumati-
 or impact and, as a rule, take place craniodorsally. The affected limb
    gosxrd pe ss  s a
with an abduction or dragging of the pelvic limb. The affected muscle
coxal tuber, ischial tuber and greater trochanter of femur is flatter dor-
is yellowish-white, atrophied and ultimately fibrotic with local degen-
sally and by contrast wider ventrally (triangle test). Hip displasia (HD)
eration and necrosis.
is the most frequent condition of the hip joint in dogs. It is familial
 chiefly in many middle and large sized dog breeds and is inherited as a
 82.1 The LATERAL SAPHENoUs VEIN can be used for venipuncture prior
to the subtraction of blood or for intravenous injections.
 polygenetic trait. With HD it is a question of a postnatal retardation of
the development of the hip joint. Posibly due to an unsatisfactory
 developmental stimulus through the head of the femur, the acetabulum
 nerve in the clinic. With a functional deficit the tarsal joint is main-
ses e ui pi si  a jo pea a paq no ie s
tained in an extended position and no longer can it be flexed actively
 tory manner in the acetabulum and can subluxate or luxate. Instabili-
(fibular paralysis). Deficit of the digital extensors leads to knuckling of
ty in the hip joint leads to overstress on the joint cartilage and the for-
the fetlock.There is alsoa loss of senation onthe dorsal aspect of the
mation of subchondral bone which causes secondary degenerative
paw.
changes of the hip joint (coxarthrosis). Diagnosis is by radiography, a
 82.3 The CRANIOLATERAL AND CAUDAL TIBIAL MUSCLES are isolated into
classification of examined dogs being undertaken in groups A and E.
a closed compartment by crural fascia and fascia of the knee as the case
(Group A = HD free, Group E =
: severe HD). A criterion for the depth
may be. After oblique tibial fractures or injuries caused by biting, a
 of the acetabulum is the angle of Norberg. This angle between a line
severe pressure increase can occur in these locations (Comparrment
through the mid point of both femoral heads and a line projected from
syndrome see 146.2).
here to the cranial border of the acetabulum in healthy, large sized dog
 breeds should amount to not less than 105°. With mid- and small sized
 82.4 Bone laceration at the tendon of origin of the M. ExTENsoR DIGl-
 dogs, one refers to varying specific angles for each breed to make an
 TAus LoNGus occurs rarely and this most frequently in young dogs.
 evaluation. In severe cases different surgical procedures are at one's dis-
With the tendon displaced distaly splinters of bone injure the knee
 posal. Pectineomyotomy is the simplest, providing symptomatic pallia-
joint leading to high degree lameness. Digital extension is not really
tive relief (80.2). With the different surgical techniques employed one
restricted.
 attempts to improve the congruency between acetabulum and head of
 82.5 Partial or complete rupture of the CoMMOM CALCANEAL TENDON
 femur. This is attained after osteotomy of ilium, ischium and pubis with
is caused mostly by trauma. Only the Dobermann breed is predisposed 
a triple swivel osteotomy whereby the acetabulum is tilted over the
86.1 Healthy hip joint with the head of each femur fiting deeply into the
 86.1 Severe hip dysplasia. The head of each femur is not surrounded sufficient-
acetabulum.
ly by the beveled or flattened acetabular margin. On the right a hip arthrosis 
 (coxarthrosis) is fully developed.
196
head of the femur. With variation osteotomy the head of the femur is
 the insertion of the patellar ligament laterally and/or the deepening of
tilted further into the acetabulum by removal of a wedge of bone from
the trochlea of the femur.
the proximal shaft of the femur. The total replacement of the hip joint
86.4 In the standing position the TARsAL JoNT occupies an anglefrom
by a prosthesis has also been carried out for some years.
110°-135°. Flexion is approximately 60°-80°, and extension 20°-35°.
86.2 The KNEE JoINT in the standing dog occupies an angle from 1050
Only in the flexed joint is there a slight possibility of rotation around
to 160% on its popliteal aspect. Flexion ranges between 65°-90° and
10°-15°. A sidewards motility is an indication of fracture of the medial
extension between 35°-60°. With a knee joint angle of 90°
the
or lateral malleolus or rupture of the collateral ligaments. For an
tibia can be rotated 10°-20° inwards and 35°-40° outwards.
.By
arthroscopic examination of the tarsocrural articulation an endoscope
comparison, in extension the tense collateral ligaments permit no
can be introduced lateral to the tendon of m. extensor digitorum
rotation. With intrarticular injection a needle is advanced in the slight-
longus. Arthroscopy is performed particularly to recognize lesions of
ly flexed joint medial to the patellar ligament half way between tibial
osteochondrosis dissecans of joint cartilage at the trochlea of the talus.
tuberosity and patella. The needle is then directed caudoproximally
and into the joint cavity. Rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament of the
 88.1 In its original form in cartilaginous fish the PRIMOoRDIAL CRANIUM
knee joint is among the most frequent orthopedic conditions of dogs.
Average sized breeds are affected between 5 and 8 years of age, large
the roof becomes more and more defective so that finally only a basal
sized breeds already in their first year and dwarf breeds not until after
cartilaginous cranium remains. The connective tissue defects are filled
12years.hereasonfor theusceptibilityof thecranial cruciateliga
up by osseous laminae arising directly from the connective issue of the
ment to rupture is the progressive differentiation of fibrous cartilage in
 desmocranium and later fusing with the remaining cartilaginous pri
the mid-section of the ligament with increasing age, thus reducing its
mordial cranium at the base of the skull. Due to osification emanating
tensile strength. The basis for the differentiation of fibrous carilage is
from numerous foci, the cartilaginous primordial cranium divides into
the twisting of the cranial cruciate ligament around its own long axis.
 several individual endochondral or replacement bones. These fuse par-
 This increases with each flexion of the joint producing an increase in
 tially with the membranous or connective tissue bones of the roof of the
pressure within the ligament. Usually rupture does not occur suddenly.
cranium to give bones of a mixed nature for example the temporal
With stages of overstretching, there is an imperceptible disintegration
 bone. In adults the only parts of the primordial cranium remaining are
of ligamentous structure, ruprures within the ligament and partial rup-
 the nasal catilages and the cartilaginous growth sutures at the base of
 s s   a no s a  a
the skull.
total rupture after low grade trauma.The drawer test' provides diag-
 Fonticuli or fontanelle are connective tissue fssures which develop pre-
 nostic proof of the condition. With the fermur fixed in position the tib-
natally between the bones of the cranium. On account of the palpable
ia can be displaced cranially. In a majority of cases of cruciate ligament
pulse detected in them they are given the Latin name fonticulus mean-
rupture the rotational instability in the knee joint leads to damage of
ing a source. Due to peripheral growth of the defining bones of the cra-
the medial meniscus. Very different surgical techniques have been
nium the fonticuli unite prematurely to give cranial sutures. This
developed for stabilizing the knee joint: A strip of femoral fascia or a
s m sq    p p e  sa sn
section of patellar ligament can be pulled through the joint cavity as an
ly rounded or dished crania (see 88.2) the fonticuli can disappear with
intra-articular substitute for the ligament. By comparison synthetic
 complete closure.
materials are employed as extra-articular substitutes for the ligament.
These are wound around the sesamoid bones of m. gastrocnemius
 88.2 A marked curvature of the CRANIuM with simultaneous shorten-
(fabellae) medially and laterally and pulled through a hole bored
ing of the facial part of the skull is characteristic of brachycephaly
through the tibial tuberosity.
which is typical of many chondrodystrophic dog breeds (English and
French Bulldogs, Chihuahua, Pugs, Pekingese, Yorkshire Terrier etc).
In addition to the classical methods of ligament substitution a biome-
This skull shape leads to various health defects in affected animals and
chanical surgical method has also been developed: The removal of the
 is therefore rejected as bad breeding.
head of the fibula moves the insertion of the lateral collateral ligament
cranially so that this can take over the function of the cranial cruciate
88.3 The Hyoin APPARATus unites the root of the tongue and larynx.
ligament. With another method the tibial plateau is tilted craniodistal-
With swallowing, the tongue is arched upwards, the larynx is drawn
ly due to a wedge osteotomy of the proximal tibia and its slide forward
s spenor puns
is prevented. The raumatized meniscal portion, generally the caudal
Strangulations can fracture the apparatus generally involving the stylo-
 horn of the medial meniscus, is resectioned.
hyoids. Subsequently food intake, chewing and swallowing are severe.
 Further conditions of the knee joint occurring relatively frequently are
ly impaired or rendered impossible.
osteochondrosis dissecans (see 142.4) which is localized as a rule in the
 90.1. The WALL OF THE CRANIUM (roof of cranium = calvaria) consists 
lateral condyle of the femur, and rupture of the caudal cruciate liga-
 of 5 layers:
ment.
 I. The external periosteum or pericranum is fused with the connective
tissue of the skullsutures, while it can be detached from the large inter-
 jacent osseous surface (therefore subperiosteal hemorrhage cannot pass
to the outside by way of the sutures of the cranium).
 II. The lamina externa is a cortical (compact) osseous layer of the bones
of the cranium.
 II. The diploe is a reduced layer of spongy bone which nevertheless
exhibits structural peculiarities. Its small cavities contain diploic veins
a uamiq peazenbe ane saurap aeradua adp au qano
-uu uoeinn aniaduan au jo pup rano ue) uienq pue drens
anism results in sunstroke).
[V. The lamina interna is the internal cortical (compact) osseous layer
of the bones of the cranium.
V. The internal periosteum or endocranium is fused with the solid dura
mater.
90.2 The PARANAsAL SINUSES are Osseous cavities between the internal
86.2 Radiograph of the
and external laminae of the bones of the skull into which respiratory
drawer test with cruciate
 nasal mucous membrane extends. In neonates they are very small and
rupture. In relation to 
increase considerably in size with age. In long skulled dog breeds all 3
the femur the tibia is displa-
frontal sinuses are always well developed while in extremely short
ced cranially.
skulled breeds they can be completely lacking. Infections of the upper
air passages and also neoplasms can lead to accumulations of mucus
 a n on asis  sss  a u snd p
86.3 With luxation of THE PATELLA the latter is displaced further medi-
-in ieo ioa ron (uoneziuedan) eins paado aq is ssn
ally seldom laterally. Toy breeds are mostly affected and it is treated as
ment. The maxillary recess is an outpocketing of the maxilla directed
a congenital condition. In congenital patellar luxation, the rochlea of
laterally and is bounded medially by ethmoid, lacrimal and palatine
the fermur remains flat or is lacking completely because of absence of
 bones. The roots of the upper carnassial tooth are next to the maxillary
esu ere pauo au pue i euaudua ioor wiim ie os ssa
surgical techniques are the displacement of the tibial tuberosiry with
 gland are affected.
197
and smooth musculature (m. tarsalis) prevent the upper eyelid from
graphy, the size of the hypophysis which cannot be displayed itself, can
ou aie sien yq o ae jo ss e oi an a uop hu
be deduced.
distributed over the cornea and this leads to its desiccation and cloudi-
ness, and eye infection. (Similar injury with changes to the greater pet-
rosal nerve results in impairment to the formation of tears). The eyelid-
cornea reflex (see 118.1) is diminished with facial paralysis.
 94.1 With plastic Surgery the M. ScUTULOAURICULARIs SUPERFICIAUS is
 displaced dorsomedially for the elevation of ear muscles where there is
 a drooping pendant ear. The muscle is sutured to the m. interscutularis,
together with the scutiform cartilage.
 94.2 The MuscLEs OF MAsTIcATION are paralyzed in a spastic manner
with tetanus so that opening of the mouth and food intake are not pos-
sible. An inflammation of masticatory muscles of unknown origin
(eosinophilic myositis) leads to a chronic, complete atrophy and caus-
es a distinct prominence of bone contours.
 96.1 PARALYSIS OF THE MANDIBULAR NERVE leads tO a deficit of muscles
of mastication and with bilateral paralysis to a drooping of the
 mandible. In addition to inflammation and trauma, one must also con-
 sider infectious diseases such as rabies and distemper as causal agents.
96.2 The MENTAL NERvEs are blocked with local anesthetic at their
 palpable exit sites from the mental foramina. The nerves provide sen-
 sory innervation of the lower lip.
 96.3 To eliminate pain the INFRAORBITAL NERVE is anesthetized during
90.4 Skull of Boxer with pronounced upper brachygnathia.
surgery to lips, nose, incisor and cheek teeth by the injection of local
anesthetic into the infraorbital canal.
90.4 A growth disorder of the MAxLLA with shortening as a conse-
 98.1 The LACRIMAL GLAND AND THE GLAND OF THE THIRD EYELID seCrete
quence results in upper brachygnathia, and is typical of different chon-
serous lacrimal fluid. This provides nutriment and moisture to the
drodystrophic breeds such as Bulldog, Pekingese and Pugs.
 cornea maintaining its tumescent state. The secretion cleanses cornea,
conjunctiva and conjunctival sac as well as affording protection from
90.5 With lower brachygnathia the MANDIBLE is too short in relation
 inflammation due to contained effective antibacterial substances.
to the maxilla. Periosteal bony over-development on the mandible and
in the region of the bulla tympanica is characteristic of cran-
 A pathological drying up of lacrimal fluid results in keratoconjunctivi-
 iomandibular osteopathy. This is a proliferative bone disease of young
 tis sicca (dry inflammation of cornea and conjunctiva).
98.2 With obstruction of the NAsOLAcRIMAL DucT lacrimal fluid is dis-
charged over the margin of the lower lid (epiphora). With the intro-
duction of a fine catheter into the upper or lower lacrimal punctum one
can irrigate the duct. Particularly in toy breeds of dogs the nasolacrimal
duct is not constructed completely. Chronic lacrimal flow from the
medial angle of the eye results in chronic skin irritation and brownish
discoloration of the hair.
 98.3 ANESTHESIA OF THE EYE is attained by injection into the periorbi-
ta or into the orbital fissure. The (sensory) ophthalmic nerve (V1) and
the motor nerves of the eye (II, IV, VI) are blocked and one avoids
retraction of the orbit during surgery.
90.5 Bone tumor of ramus of 
mandible (Computer tomography:
98.4 In brachycephalic dog breeds such as Pekingese, the NosTRILS
 Animal Clinic Kruger Hamburg).
 show a tendency to develop stenoses, because the cartilaginous sup-
 ports of the nostrils are insufficient. According to the functional prin-
 dogs occurring in West Highland White Terriers. Limited mobility of
ciple of a one way valve, with inspiration there is closure of the nostrils
the temporomandibular articulation leads to problems of food and flu-
and severe dyspnea. Surgical correction occurs with wedge shaped sec-
id intake. Alterations appear bilaterally symmetrical and can therefore
 tional resection of the lateral nasal cartilages. In brachycephalic breeds
be differentiated from bone tumors.
 the bones of the facial skeleton are short proportionately and do not
 cover the nasal cartilages at the level of the tip of the nose. By keeping
 92.1 In the narcotized dog, the SUBLINGUAL VEIN is situated on the ven-
 the muzzle closed during a clinical examination of the deformed nasal
tral side of the tongue and is easily accessible for intravenous injections 
 cartilages one can interrupt the airflow unintentionally.
 in emergency situations.
 m  ee ra, a oi sq a is a ro
92.2 After exposure to injury FAcIAL PARALysIs always leads to dliffer-
respiratory air in its passage alters its temperature and humidity and is
cleansed of foreign particles.The equalization of breath remperature
ent pathological deficiencies appearing either uni- or bilaterally. With
central facial paralysis the lesion lies in the medulla oblongata of the
and body temperature is attained due to turbulence and the very good
brain in the vicinity of the facial nucleus. With deficit of the mimetic
blood supply of the nasal cavity. For example inspired air at -30°c in
muscles, the musculature of eyelids and forehead remain entirely intact
winter is warmed to 37°c. The warm moist nasal mucous membrane
because the nuclei only of these muscles preserve impulses from both
assures the extensive saturation of inspired air. Foreign bodies such as
cerebral hemispheres. With peripheral facial paralysis lesions are pre-
fine particles and insects can be held up by the hair covering of the nos-
sent along the course of the facial nerve generallydue to ablow around
 trils. The finest particles, bacteria and spores remain adherent to the
the border of the mandible ventral to the manibular condyle.
In complete peripheral paralysis, nerve branches leaving the petrous
temporal bone can be injured with appropriate grades of damage.
(Derangement of taste sensation due to damage of the chorda tympani
nerve, faulty secretion of the lacrimal glands due to changes of pregan-
glionic nerve fibers in the greater petrosal nerve, an injury to saliva for-
mation due to injury of the chorda tympani which is significant in
  d re (iss p o) s  a 
flaccid manner as for example with drooping of the lips. With a deficit
of m. buccinator, food collects in the oral vestibule adjacent to cheeks
and cannot be pressed between the series of teeth. With a deficit of the
100.1 Endoscopic view of the
muscles of the eyelid, the lids can neither be completely closed (m.
nasal cavity (rhinoscopy and
 orbicularis oculi) nor completely opened (m. levator anguli oculi medi-
the nasal septum.
198
moist mucus. These are transported away with associated mucus due
100.5 The VocAL LiGAMENT extends from the vocal process of the ary-
 a i jo n n a n  a  no as 
tenoid cartilage to the internal surface of the thyroid cartilage ventral-
cavity fulfils a further important function in the regulation of body
ly. It consists predominantly of elastic fibers and in common with the
temperature, due to heat emission with panting.
m. vocalis, belongs to the vocal fold.
With conditions of the nasal cavity diagnosis is centered around radio-
100.6 In brachycephalic dog breeds the LATERAL VENTRICLES can pro-
logy and microbiology together with mycology, histopathology, com-
lapse into the laryngeal lumen which occurs due to negative pressure
puter tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. Among these
ratios. Surgical treatment involves their excision.
processes endoscopy plays a prominent part. Not only are structural
changes understood butbiopsy material can alsobe taken for on-going
100.7 The LARYNGEAL CARTILAGEs form the skeleton of the larynx. The
 elastic epiglottic cartilage is situated over the laryngeal entrance pro-
microbiological and histopathological examination. With radiography
tecting it with swallowing. The remaining laryngeal cartilages are
wholly or partially (arytenoid) hyaline and in old age there is a tenden-
ferentiate changes in the turbinates and nasal septum but also soft tis-
sue changes as in neoplastic tissue or mycotic infiltration. One is tempt-
cy to calcification detectable on radiographs. The cartilages are united
ed to use magnetic resonance imaging due to its very detailed imaging
of soft tissue.
100.1 Purulent rhinitis and 
sinusitis with destruction 
of bone in the night nasal
cavity and frontal sinus with
 discharge of pus into the
100.7 Laryngeal cartilages (1) with the Basihyoid bone (2), Nasopharynx (3) Tra-
nasopharyngeal meatus (Com-
chea (4) Oropharynx (5). Details of basihyoid see p88.
puter tomography: Animal
(Radiograph: Professor Dr. E. Henschel, Berlin). 
Clinic Kruger, Hamburgy).
mutually by articulations thereby having a certain freedom of move-
ment. The cricothyroid articulation lies between the caudal process of
the thyroid cartilage and the cranial border of the cricoid carilage. The
For the surgical removal of neoplasms as an example, surgical access to
cricoarytenoid articulation lies berween the arytenoid cartilage and the
the nasal cavity takes place over the bridge of the nose after osteotomy
 cranial border of the cricoid cartilage.
and nostril flap of the nasal bone (rhinotomy) have been made.
(Oronasal fistula see 104.11).
100.8 The LARYNGEAL MuscLES unite thyroid, cricoid and arytenoid
100.2 One can advance a nasal tube through the VENTRAL NAsAL MEA-
cartilages with one another. According to their function one differen-
TUs into the stomach. After fixing it to the head the tube can be left in
tiates positional muscles which attach to the arytenoid cartilage and
place for several days to permit artificial feeding.
through its change of position alter the breadth of the glottis and
*tension muscles' which alter the tension of the vibrating walls of the
100.3 The LARYNGEAL MucoUs MEMBRANE can swell markedly in the
larynx. M. cricoarytenoideus dorsalis is a positional muscle. It draws
region of the vestibule as in allergic reactions, due to which the airway
the muscular process of the arytenoid caudodorsally and medially
is blocked to an extreme extent. The popular notion *edema of the glot
- s an im s ai sd p an in m p
tis' is incorrect because the glottis, adjacent to the vocal folds is not
wise the m. cricoaytenoideus lateralis is a positional muscle and func-
swollen but rather the edematous epiglottis. Regarding the mucous
tions as an antagonist of the first muscle. It draws the muscular
membrane folds of the larynx, beside the ventricular and vocal folds
process of the arytenoid cartilage ventrally and laterally and thereby
swivels the vocal process of the arytenoid cartilage medially. Thus the
forms the lateral boundary of the aditus of the larynx. Lateral to the
vocal folds lie together. The m. cricothyroideus innervated by the cra-
 aryepiglottic fold and the aditus lies the piriform recess of the pharynx.
nial laryngeal nerve is one of the 'tension muscles'. After injury to the
The cuneiform and corniculate processes of the arytenoid cartilage
recurrent laryngeal nerve (see 14.2) the laryngeal muscles innervated
 by it are paralyzed and flaccid (laryngeal hemiplegia), and atrophy.
the cuneiform process occurs in small brachycephalic dog breeds and is
This results in a loss of tension in the ipsilateral vocal fold, over-
often associated with stenosis of the nostrils. This can cause serious
development of an inspiratory noise and eventually dyspnea under
inspiratory shortness of breath, since, during inspiration the cuneiform
stress.
 process is displaced into the lumen of the larynx, which is narrowed
 100.9 By way of suggestion the ORAL VEsTIBULE is divided rostrome-
down as a result.
dially into 2 halves by the upper and lower frenula of the lips. The
100.4 The GLoTis is formed ventrally by the yvocal folds (the inter-
philrum (philtron gr - love spell) courses in the midline to the nasal
membranous part) and dorsally by the arytenoid cartilage (the inter-
plate. A lateral cleft lip (or harelip in humans) is a congenital defect in
cartilaginous part). The glottis functions in sound formation or phona-
the formation of the lip which lies between the embryonic nasal and
tion due to vibrations of the vocal folds. The tension of the vibrating
maxillary processes. A maxillary cleft is directed through the maxilla
vocal folds can be altered voluntarily due to the laryngeal muscles.
between the canine tooth and the incisors.
With the force of the airflow this affects vibration frequency and ampli-
tude jointly thus regulating pitch and intensity of sound. Age, sex and
100.10 In the HARD PALATE a cleft palate is present as an embryonic
testosterone level affect length and thickness of the vocal folds and with
defect or after trauma; a median cleft plate is often seen after
this the pitch. With castration the longitudinal growth of the vocal lig-
accidents in cats. A median congenital cleft palate originates as a
ament ceases. Sound is modified due to resonance chambers such as
 defective or incomplete union of the embryonic lateral palatine
nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, and oral cavity. The glottis also parti-
processes. The separation between oral and nasal cavities due to a sec-
cipates functionally in coughing. In connection with this, first of all the 
 ondary palate ceases and so swallowing is impaired considerably. A
glotis is closed. Then through an expiratory impulse the glottis is
combination of several defects can occur in the shape of a labiomax-
pushed open under greatly elevated pressure so that air is literally
llary cleft. Hereditary, toxic, hormonal as well as environmental fac-
jerked forwards. Coughing drains and cleans the airways because with
tors such as hyper- and hypovitaminoses, are cited as the cause of the
the impact of air, foreign bodies and mucus are expelled.
defects.
199
The soft palate in contrast to the hard palate, has no oseous founda-
 Deeply the lymphoreticular tissue is limited by a distinct connective tis
tion but is supported by striated muscle and the palatine aponeurosis.
sue tonsillar capsule.
The mucous membrane coating the soft palate of which the side adja-
Functionally tonsils take part in the defence against infections which
cent to the oral cavity and that adjacent to the nasal cavity consist of
penetrate nose and mouth. The penetrating infection trigger is detected
cutaneous and respiratory mucous membrane respectively, is moveable 
and organized specific antibodies released. Just as other lymphatic tis-
sue is particularly well developed in the young animal so are tonsils.
 mal has become immune already. With increasing age tonsils undergo
regression. With chronically residing tonsilitis or pharyngitis or in
squamous cell carcinoma of the tonsila tonsillectomy is indicated, with
r n s jo s  ns rs 
capsule. Complications can result from hemorrhage since the palatine
tonsil is richly supplied by numerous branches of the lingual artery.
Tonsils should not be removed thoughtlessly since they fulfillimportant
functions of the immunity process, yet an excessive outpouring of anti-
injury in the course of recurring tonsillitis.
102.1 Of the PHARYNGEAL MusCLEs, the pharyngeal constrictors take
origin from skull, hyoid bone and larynx. The slings so formed and
opening ventrally end in the dorsal midline of the pharynx along its
raphe. This is a tendinous strip directed longitudinally, which in turn
 attaches the pharynx to the skull. The muscles of the soft palate radi-
100.10  Congenital median 
ate in the palatine aponeurosis forming the connective tisue skeleton
cleft palate in a young Rhodesian 
of the soft palate. Their organized interplay is essentially geared to
Ridgeback.
swallowing.
With swallowing or deglutition the moistened food from the oral cavi-
and swells severely with inflammation. In a majority of brachycephal-
ty is conducted through the pharynx into the esophagus during which
- si  e se aid ios ai po  e sq  i
 the airways namely nasopharynx and the laryngeal aditus are closed.
bined usually with stenosis of nostrils and larynx. Surgical correction
 During the initial voluntary phase of swallowing the muscles of the
involves shortening of the soft palate at its free border.
floor of the mouth become tense and the tongue like a piston, becomes
100.11 The AuDiToRy TuBE extending from the nasopharynx is sur-
pressed against the hard palate. In this way the food is pushed caudal-
ly, arriving in the oropharyx and, by an upward arching of the base of
rounded by a pad which develops partly from supportive cartilage and
 the tongue, into the vicinity of the intrapharyngeal ostium. The invol-
ssd e s sns a roe a    
untary end phase of swallowing commences here with contraction of
equalizer between the middle ear, occupying the tympanic cavity, and
the external acoustic meatus; the ear drum (tympanic membrane) lying
the pharyngeal constrictor muscles. The chyme, as a result, slides
 directly to left and right past the epiglottis and through the left and
between them can only oscillate optimally if air pressure ratios are
right piriform recesses into the esophagus. By peristalsis it then arrives
equal in both spaces. This is established by swallowing. The contract-
ing m. tensor veli palatini inserts onto the wall of the auditory tube
 at the stomach. In the narrow oropharynx the food path must be guar-
anteed from going 3 *wrong ways'. 1 Retrogression into the oral cavi-
o a   m sd u s on a so m
ty is prevented due to the pressure of the tongue against the palate. 2
mechanism fails on account of severe swelling of the soft palate. Due to
Access to the nasopharynx is removed due to the elevation and tension
the closure of the auditory tube higher or lower pressure in the tym-
 of the soft palate. 3 With regard to the covering of the laryngeal aditus,
panic cavity can no longer be adjusted. Sequelae are earache and a
the larynx is displaced rostrally, the elastic epiglottis is deflected due to
derangement of hearing since the eardrum can no longer vibrate freely.
upward arching of the base of the tongue and ies passively over the
100.12 ToNsLs belong to the lymphatic organs. The palatine tonsil is
laryngeal entrance, thus closing it. The passage of boluses through the
the most important tonsil of the lymphatic pharyngeal ring'. It is clas-
 esophagus and into the stomach is promoted by peristaltic contrac-
sified on comparative anatomical principles as fossular namely housed
tions.
in a fossa, and not having crypts and follicles.
 Deficient relaxation of m. cricopharyngeus contracts the entrance to
the esophagus and interrupts deglutition (cricopharyngeal achalasia).
102.2 The GLOSSOPHARYNGEAL AND VAGAL NERVES provide sensOry
tion to pharyngeal musculature respectively. Consequently they form
 afferent and efferent limbs of the swallowing reflex mediated by con-
tact of food with the pharyngeal mucous membrane.
102.3 The SYMPATHETIc PART of the autonomic supply to the head, by
way of postganglionic nerve fibers, courses to the effector organs in
company with the large blood vessels, particularly the internal carotid
artery (as the internal carotid plexus), the jugular vein (as the jugular
nerve), and the external carotid artery (as the external carotoid plexus).
Stimulation of the sympathetic part causes a dilation of the pupil
(mydriasis) due to strong contraction of the m. dilator pupillae, and a
widening of the rima of the eyelids due to powerful contraction of the
smooth m. tarsalis. With Horner syndrome sympathetic nerve conduc-
-108 kq aduexa ioy) peau aul oi qed suof sii uo pagueiap aq ues uon
ter enlarged lymph nodes, tumors of the mediastinum, and vertebral
disc prolapse). The syndrome is conspicuous due to ptosis (narrow
palpebral rima), miosis (narrow pupil), prolapse of the nictitating
membrane, and enophthalmus (a more deeply situated ocular orbit).
102.4 The PARASYMPATHETIc PART of the autonomic nervous system of
the head is connected to cranial nerves II, VII, IX and X. The pregan-
2 Lymph nodules; 3 Tonsillar capsule; 4 Mucous glands.
 glionic parasympathetic neurons of the oculomotor nerve II course in
the orbit to the ciliary ganglion and from there postganglionic neurons
extend to the m. ciliaris (accommodation) and m. sphincter pupillae
(miosis). The parasympathetic fibers of the facial nerve VI are direct-
Formally it is characterized by a stratified squamous epithelium. Lym-
ed in the nerve of the pterygoid canal to the pterygopalatine ganglion
phoreticular tisue, characterized by typical primary and secondary
and from there, after synapsing with postganglionic fibers,
to
 s ai po sp m d s  s 
 meninges, nasal and lacrimal glands, and nasal mucous membrane.
brane, is situated in the lamina propria mucosae under the epithelium.
 Another parasymphathetic portion supplies the salivary glands via the
Numerous lymphocytes penetrate into the epithelial covering from the
, sq r  u a ann rn
 predominantly into the larger body cavities and synapses firstly in the
200
intramural ganglia of the effector organs. The proximal ganglion lying
U panens ane suauiuo Aianes ree jo suonoe on pasod
in the jugular foramen contains the nerve cell bodies of the sensory
the excretory ducts and can obstruct them, leading to secretion dam-
(afferent) neurons. The nerve cell bodies of the viscerosensory neurons
back, retention cysts and pressure atrophy of the gland.
lie in the distal (nodose ganglion). Synapsing does not occur in the
104.7 Within its substance the PAROTID GLAND is crossed by blood ves-
proximal and distal ganglia as is generally true for sensory ganglia. The
sels and the facial nerve. Pathological changes such as inflammation
cell bodies of the autonomic motor neurons are located in the
and neoplasms can therefore cause facial paralysis. The parotid duct
rhombencephalon.
which courses over the m. masseter can be redirected surgically into the
102.5 ExTERNAL AUDITORY MEATUS see 120.2
lateral commissure of the eye to provide substitute tears with patho-
logical “drying up' of lacrimal flow.
104.1 The RooT OF THE ToNGUE is conspicuously large and torulose in
brachycephalic breeds of dog and can therefore reduce the airflow and
 104.8 The SUBLINGUAL GLANDs are significant clinically because injury
 impede breathing.
to their excretory ducts can cause formation of salivary cysts. A sub-
lingual cyst lies on the floor of the oral cavity and is known as a ranu-
content. With contrast radiography after injection of the medium via
the sublingual caruncle one can guarantee a diagnosis of left or right
side damage. Since the monostomatic sublingual and mandibular
glands bound each other tightly and surgery on the sublingual gland
without impairment of the neighboring gland is not possible, both
 organs are removed jointly.
(rostral)
104.2 Cross section of the rostral part of the tongue with its median lyssa (1).
104.2 The Tip OF THE ToNGUE contains the lyssa rostromedially which
was identified erroneously with rabies also knows as lyssa'. The lyssa
is a morphological specialization in the tongue of carnivors and can be
detected slightly n across section through thetip of the tongueThis
connective tissue tube, some 4 cm long, contains adipose tissue, striat-
 ed muscle and cartilage cells.
104.3 The TAsTE REcEPToRs are constituents of the taste buds which
are present mainly in the circular furrows of the vallate papillae, on the
foliate papillae with fewer on the fungiform papillae. In humans and
possibly our domestic mammals, taste buds are also present at the base
104.9 Polyodontia showing a doubling of the wolf toth (P1) of the maxilla (Pre-
of the tongue and epiglottis, which are innervated by the vagus nerve.
paration: Professor Dr. E. Henschel, Berlin)
The taste buds are barrel shaped and each consists of about 30 cells
(taste cells, supporting cells and basal cells). The ^open end of the bar-
rel' that is the taste pore, lies on the surface of the mucous membrane.
Taste cells are secondary sense cells which contact synaptic nerve fibers.
104.9 An ExCEss NuMBER OF TEETH (PoLYDoNTIA) results from a sur-
The circular furrow of a vallate papilla contains about 150 taste buds.
plus of primordial dental organs. A fewer number (oligodontia) is
sd s  ss  om s o r  
observed in brachycephalic breeds, where, as a rule, the last (caudal)
 dissolve the material to be tasted and besides this, after taste perception
teeth of the dental series are lacking. With a deficit of dental primordia,
washes it away. Moreover in the caudal one third of the tongue serous
unphysiological gaps appear berween the teeth (diastasia). With tooth
 and seromucous glands are present which belong to the scattered sali-
loss through trauma or extraction the osseous alveolus is already closed
vary glands.
after a few weeks. This is not true, however for the alveolus of the
canine tooth of the old dog. After food particles accumulate in the alve-
104.4 The INTRINSIc ToNGUE MuscLEs, on account of the 3-dimen-
olus, inflammation of the nasal cavity can result. Within the dental
sional arrangement of longitudinal, transverse and perpendicular mus-
cle fberbundlesdemonsrate structuralcharacteristicswhich are organ
series there is self-regulation with a tendency to re-establish continuity
of dentition. With normal tooth position the maxillary incisor teeth are
specific. The otherwise typical envelopment of the fiber bundles due to
situated somewhat rostrally in front of those of the mandible (a physi-
endo-, peri- and epimysium as well as muscle or deep fascia is modified
 ological shearing dentition). With faulty sectorial dentition upper and
to a marked degree. The striated muscle bundles also show occasional
lower dental arches lie exactly one over the other. Anomalies of posi-
ramifications in an untypical manner.
tion are present due to twisting of teeth around the long axis (torsion)
 Functionally the three dimensional arrangement of longitudinal trans-
and transverse axis particularly with brachycephaly.
 104.10 IncisoRs are three cornered in shape and their wear and tear is
which is of particular benefit to the uptake of food. With suckling the
subject to feeding and behavior parterns.
pue iejnoipuadad jo uonoeuos oi anq 'sqni e oiui paunoj si anguol
transverse muscle fibers the tongue becomes even longer, estimably a
104.11 In the dog the CANINE TooTH is used as a weapon. The very
unique muscle function.
long root makes extraction difficult. As a complication with extraction
104.5 The HyPOGLOssAL NERvE can be damaged due to trauma or
the very thin osseous wall leading up to the nasal cavity can fracture
and cause the development of an oronasal fistula.
inflammation in the mandibular space. With unilateral paralysis, the 
tongue is curved towards the healthy side and atrophied on the para-
To close the opening of the fistula tissue flaps from neighboring
mucous membrane of palate and connecting mucous membrane of
complete paralysis of the tongue which hangs flaccidly from the mouth.
cheek are moved, fitted over the defect and sutured.
104.6 The SALvARY GLANDs secrete saliva into the oral cavity or its
104.12 Premolar and molar CHEEk TeETH mince up and crush food. In
vestibule. The appendicular glands are grouped into the large salivary
om io (id) reound is an qan reod rao a on isno
glands. Of these in the dog, the parotid gland secretes a serous, the
 tooth always has 1 root and can therefore be identified radiographical-
mandibular and sublingual glands a seromucous secretion. The regula-
ly.Phylogeneticallyin thedog this tooth is in regression thus making a
tion of salivary flow takes place via parasympathetic and to a lesser
 place for the large root of the canine tooth.
extend sympathetic fibers.
 Parasympathomimetic drugs stimulate secretion of saliva, its flow stim-
ulated reflexly beforehand, and by the uptake of food. Salivary concre-
decomposable and foul smelling cell detritus. Molar teeth in the vicin-
ity of the openings of parotid and zygomatic glands are particularly dis
201
43
epithelium and bone (bone pocket-2) from the tooth.
humans this site poses the chief risk of caries. The pulp cavity contains
 blood vessels and nerves enveloped by connective tissue, which is sug-
 gestive of mesenchyme.
104.13 Temporary denttion showing the undertying primordia of the pemmanent
104.16 The GiNGIvA or gum is the section of oral mucous membrane
dention in a sectional computer tomograph taken through the mandible of a puppy
which protects the alveolar sockets of the bones involved in mastica-
(Photograph: Dr. Fahrenkrug, Quickborn, and Animal Clinic Kruger, Hamburg).
xa sii  ra pdes r e un sprmn sid ii n
deeply, attaching itself to the neck of the tooth. By means of this the
104.13 NuMBER OF RooTs of the teeth can show considerable varia-
tion finally due to the fusion of several roots; with exraction these are
observed at a glance on remaining portions of the root. Positional
the inner marginal epithelium from the tooth, gingival pockets form.
anomalies of the roots particularly those divergent and pressing out-
With tooth extraction the affected tooth is exposed from the gingiva
wards from one another make tooth extraction considerably difficult.
 and in doing so one pays attention to the innervation thereof by buccal
 and sublingual nerves.
104.17 On account of the PARADoNTIUM the tooth is suspended in the
alveolus. The pressure of chewing is transmitted by oblique collagen
fibers as an impulse load on the pressure susceptible bone of the alveo-
lus. Generally inflammation of the paradontium (paradontitis) origi-
nates in gingival pockets infected with bacteria. With the progressive
course of the infection there is loosening and ultimately the loss of the
affected tooth.
106.1 The TEMPOROMANDIBULAR JoINT is important first of all as the
 primary joint of mastication developed from derivatives of Meckel's
cartilage (cartilage of branchial arch 1.) In the course of evolution this
underwent an alteration of function with its transformation into audi-
104.14 Carnassial tooth (M1)
tory ossicles and construction of the secondary (remaining) temporo-
of the mandible. Enamel (1),
 mandibular joint. The joint is classified as condylar, with a large angle
Dentin (2), Cement (3) and Pulp
of opening affording greater mobility simultaneously. Luxations are
 Cavity (4). (Microfocus radiograph:
rare in the dog and take place only as subluxations in conjunction with
 Professor Dr. C. Poulsen Nautrup.
Munich).
luxations can take place spontaneously due to defective development of
the socket and a shortening of the mandibular condyle (temporo-
104.14 The CARNAssIAL TEETH possess 3 roots in the maxilla and 2
 mandibular dysplasia). This should be taken into account with breed-
-e addn a jo anuannd pue uouui aipuu a u sioo
ing.
nassial can radiate into its surroundings. From its caudal root the open-
106.2 Fractures of the INTERMANDIBULAR SYMPHYSIS are frequent in
ings of emanating fistulae are found ventral to the orbit under the eye.
dogs. After repositioning, the fragments can be fixed either by wire
104.15 DENTAL ENAMEL is the hardest substance of the organism,
 loops around both canine teeth or by pins.
108.1 The DuRA MATER can ossify (pachymeningitis ossificans) in old-
tion the enamel forrming cells and the epithelium are soon worn away.
er males of larger breeds (Mastiff, Saint Bernard). Only rarely does
ossification cause clinical symptoms.
Enamel cannot regenerate if for example it undergoes demineraliza-
tion, and disintegrates with dental caries caused by acid forming bac-
108.2 EpIDURAL ANEsTHEsIA involves a local anesthetic suited to block-
teria. Enamel hypoplasia with the formation of troughlike enamel
 ing nerve conduction, which is injected into the epidural space. The
defects and therewith an accompanying predisposition to dental caries
injection site is chosen in principle so that injury to the spinal cord and
occurs particularly on the incisor teeth with distemper (distemper den-
injection into the subarachnoid space are avoided. The anesthetic dif
 sra s  no sr a n s   s
and first molar of the upper dental arch. Due to disintegration of enam-
 ing the cord, and, in a reversible manner blocks the nerve stimulus
el the exposed dentin is stained dark brown. Tooth cavities can com-
impulse transmission. Corresponding to the quantity of anesthetic
 applied (and dependent on the site of injection) segments situated cra-
 Occlusal surface of the tooth, rarely on the enamel-cement boundary. In
nially (= high) from the sciatic nerve or caudally (= low) are desensi-
108.3 Myelography after the application of contrast medium into the subarachnoid space through the atlanto-occipital space (cranially into the cerebellomedullry cistern)
and through the lumbosacral space (caudally into the subarachnoid space). Between the thoracic and lumbar vertebral column at the interruption to fling with contrast 
medium, an unphysiological increase in circumference is demonstrated leading to compression of the subarachnoid space. (Radiograph: Professor Dr. K Hartung, Berlin).
202
tized. Accordingly one differentiates a high or a low epidural anesthe.
arrive at the brain by way of the vascular system. Tumors injure the
sia. With high epidural anesthesia the motor nerves of the pelvic limb,
brain tissue through compression or transformation into neoplastic tis-
femoral, obturator and sciatic nerves, are anesthetized and the animal
is incapable of standing. With low epidural anesthesia, one desensitizes
ity and to edema of the brain (sweling) owing to an unphysiological
 predominantly sensory nerves (pudendal and caudal cutaneous femoral
accumulation of fluid. In the diagnosis of brain tumors imaging
 nerves) and motor nerves to the muscles of the tail and the pelvic
diaphragm. Furthermore the patient is capable of standing which is
and magnetic resonance are of great significance. They make possible
important in large animal surgery.
an unimpeded (free of overlay) image of soft tissue structures including
those within the cranium.
the interarcuate lumbosacral space (lumbosacral injection). The injec-
110.4 With lesions of the brain sterm the RETICULAR FoRMATION medi-
pq umiq jeue eq a o Aenudiad apu s un
ates alterations in muscle tone and derangement of movement to
 requ i l jo ssaoid sods a o ipnes pue siaq iers
impairment of consciousness ranging from apathy to coma (deep
tebra. With aspiration one estimates that the needle is situated neither
unconsciousness).
in the subarachnoid space (aspiration of cerebrospinal fluid) nor in the
110.5 The CEREBELLuM regulates and coordinates voluntary move-
venous vertebral plexus (aspiration of blood). Otherwise the needle is
retracted slightly and aspirated once again as a further check. The
ment due to sensory linkage with motor conduction. It receives infor-
mation from the ascending tracts of the spinal cord and receives
impulses from centers of balance, sight and hearing as well as from
 spaces I to III are chosen as the injection sites for low epidural anes-
motor areas of the cerebral cortex. A progressive heritable degenera-
thesia.
tion of the cerebellar cortex, leads to a clinical picture of cerebellar
108.3 By means of injection of contrast medium into the SuBARACH-
ataxia. There is an increase in tone of the extensor muscles of the pelvic
NOID SpAcE, the contours of the spinal cord are displayed radiographi-
and finally the thoracic limbs and in the final stages of the condition the
cally (myelography). Constrictions and lesions of the spinal cord are
 affected animal can no longer stand.
caused by alterations to vertebrae (see 8.4, 10.2), discopathies (see
110.6 The ventral portion of the MipBRAIN serves as a conduit for the
10.3) and for example neoplasms, and can be displayed with myelo-
graphy. The injection of contrast medium takes place either through the
atlanto-occipital space into the cerebellomedullary cistern or between
Important autonomic centers are situated in the tegmentum such as res-
lumbar vertebrae 5 and 6 into the subarachnoid space. Both injection
piratory and vascular centers. Complex motor output is mediated for
sites are suitable also for obtaining cerebrospinal fluid.
dorsally contains the optical reflex center facilitating the pupillary
108.4 Functionally the nerve fibers coursing within the SpINAL CoRD
reflex. In the caudal colliculus lies a subcortical integration center for
are fasciculated in common (mutual) tracts. The ascending sensory
auditory function.
tracts can be subdivided into tracts for conscious proprioception (dor-
 110.7 The THALAMus is a subcortical integration center for sensation
sal funiculus), unconscious proprioception (spinocerebellar tract) and
such as the perception of temperature and pain as well as deep sensa-
deep pain (spinothalamic tract). A typical symptom for a lesion of the
 tion. It also contains a coordination center for sight function. In condi-
spinal cord is a retardation or deficiency of conscious proprioception.
 tions which cannot be treated with analgesics, severe pain results.
During this a paw of the affected animal placed passively on its dorsal
aspect, either cannot or only after some delay be returned to its origi-
110.8 The EpiPHysis (pineal body), due to its output of the neurose-
nal stance. The descending motor tracts as upper motor neurons from
cretory hormone melatonin exerts a retarding influence on the devel-
the cerebral cortex are directed caudally in the ventral funiculus (exten-
opment of the gonads (antigonadotrophin). A deficit causes sexual
sors) and the lateral funiculus (flexors). After synapsing at the nerve
prematurity. According to the disputed opinion of several authors the
cells in the ventral horn of the gray substance (lower motor neuron)
epiphysis is supposed to regulate circadian rhythm.
information is conducted to the corresponding muscles. Not only
110.9 In the HypoTHALAMUs are situated the supraoptic and para-
injury to the upper but also to the lower motor neurons leads to paral-
ysis; with injury to the lower neurons ipsilateral muscle tone and reflex-
venticular nuclei which synthesize the hormones of the caudal lobe of
es are lost simultaneously which is not the case with injury to the upper
the hypophysis (oxytocin, adiuretin). Other hypothalamic nuclei syn-
motor neurons. As a peculiarity in the dog there are ascending neurons
thesize releasing hormones which regulate the secretion of the rostral
  (oi as a d so a yo a
from the lumbar spinal cord which impede the lower motor neurons of
also contains important autonomic centers for regulating body tem-
the extensors of the thoracic limb. Damage to these obstructing neu-
rons due to lesions in the thoracic spinal cord leads to excessive muscle
perature, water economy, hunger and thirst.
tone of the extensors of the thoracic limb (Schiff-Sherrington reaction).
110.10 The ADENoHYPoPHYsIs is the production site of numerous hor-
With regard to the resultant motor symptomatology lesions of the
mones which modulate the activity of most of the endocrine glands of
spinal cord are well localized.
the body (see p150). Tumors of the adenohypophysis are relatively fre-
A degeneration of the white substance in the thoracic spinal cord
ajo ar oi ea aesrop pxa Aa aera sop un sanb
hypothalamus. As a consequence there is insufficient adiuretin and the
(degenerative myelopathy) leads to progressive ataxia, weakness of the
 development of diabetes insipidus. A tumor of the adenohypophysis is
hindquarters and finally paralysis. This is observed predominantly in
 old German Shepherd dogs.
hormone producing, the clinical picture being connected, as the case
may be, with the hormone produced. For example, an excessive ACTH
110.1 An inflammation of CEPHALIC AND SPINAL MENINGES (meningi-
production leads to the development of a hyperadrenocorticoidism
tis) occurs rarely by itself in dogs but is generally a sequel to a primary
(Cushing syndrome).
illness such as endocarditis which results in a bacteremia. The most
diverse virus infections lead to encephalites (see 110.3) which can
112.1 The CEREBRUM is organized into lobes (frontal, parietal, tempo-
extend to the cephalic meninges (meningoencephalitis).
ral and occipital lobes as well as the insula). Functionally the cerebral
cortex is arranged somatotopically. Defined parts of the body are rep-
110.2 CEREBELLo MedULLARY CIsTERN See 116.3
resented by fixed areas of the cerebral cortex. A *map’ with its reci
 procal action between brain and the connected parts of the body is per-
110.3 INFLAMMATION OF THE BRAIN (ENCEPHALITIS) can OCCur as a result
ceived as an homunculus which is illustrated lying on the brain surface.
of numerous infectious diseases. Of greater significance are viral infec-
The form of the homunculus is disproportionate and severely distor-
tions such as rabies, distemper, Aujesky's disease and protozoal infec-
ed. Biologically important functions and the pertinent parrs of the body
tions such as toxoplasmosis.
-andan pue pazisiaao Aianeuoodoid umous aie peau pue pueq se uons
Rabies generally gains admission through a bite into the tissues and
sented on correspondingly large areas of the brain.
then proceeds along the nerves to the central nervous system. There it
112.2 The INTERNAL CAPsULE contains the strongly compressed initial
causes inflammation of the nerve cells, ultimately proving fatal.
segment of the pyramidal tract, about 4/5 of it changing to the oppo-
With distemper at first the white substance of the brain and spinal cord
site side of the body at the pyramidal chiasm which lies berween medul-
shows inflammatory changes (Brainstem symptoms: motor derange-
la oblongata and spinal cord. Lesions of the internal capsule ermanate
from neighboring blood vessels and in humans cause the symptom
ment, disturbances of consciousness; Cerebellar symptoms: ataxia;
Spinal cord symptoms: paresis).
complex of apoplexy. In dogs this illness is very rare.
Toxoplasmosis often causes inflammation of spinal cord and nerves as
112.3 The BRAIN STEM controls vital body functions (respiratory, car-
well as lesions of cerebrum and cerebellum.
diac) and likewise micturition, defecation, deglutition and vomition.
Besides, the brain stem includes centers for control of body posture and
Brain tumors can begin from glial cells (ectodermal portion) and from
mobility and harbors the nuclei of cranial nerves II - XIi, the reflex
 cephalic meninges together with associated blood vessels (mesodermal
centers for all motor and sensory - yiscerosensory functions in the head
portion). As metastases they can stem from other organ systems and
region. Functional derangerment of the brain stem makes itself appar-
203
pao aq un uum sus snas jo ias aosan e un ua
with deficits of movement, postural and positional reactions, distur-
bances of consciousness ranging to coma, and deficits of viral func-
tions.
112.4 The BAsAL NucLEl are synapsing centers for voluntary move-
ment, particularly for slow movements (comparable to cerebellar func-
tion).
114.1 Tisue samples are taken from the AMMoNic HoRN in the patho-
histological diagnosis of rabies, leading to the detection of virus anti-
 gen and inclusion bodies using immunofluorescence.
114.2 The ARTERIEs OF THE BRAIN are end arteries with sharply
defined areas of end flow, that is to say they produce no anastomoses
with adjacent parallel arteries. In general a deficient supply due to
reduced blood flow (vascular spasm or emboli) or massive hermorrhage
 due to rupture of blood vessels causes sharply defined infarcts with
continuous scarring.
The blood brain barrier is situated in the region of the capillary bed
116.3 Severe dilation of both lateral ventricles (intemal hydrocephalus) with dis-
(morphological substrate see histology texts). Due to the barrier the
 ger, Hamburg).
the blood do not reach the central nervous system. In this way, on the
One hand, brain tissue is protected from dangerous blood constituents,
 on the other, certain drugs reach the brain tissue only in severely
lar foramen, mesencephalic aqueduct and the lateral aperture into the
as e eq uq pog  on ana ss pn
fourth ventricle of the brain communicating between the “internal and
 cerebral milieu is maintained in the interstitial fluid indispensable for
‘external fluid spaces）. In dwarf dogs with disproportionately large
brain function, specifically for the synaptic communication between
skulls (Chihuahua, Yorkshire and Manchester Terriers, Miniature Poo-
nerve cells. On the one hand the brain must be protected from the
 dle) as well as brachycephalic breeds, an internal hydrocephalus occurs
metabolic fluctuations in the composition of the blood and on the oth-
 frequently as a consequence of congenital interruption to the discharge
 er must be responsible for the supply of nutrients and the disposal of
 of cerebrospinal fluid.
waste materials with the blood in indirect contact. The blood brain
 In addition to nutritive and thermoregulatory functions, the cere-
barrier makes the complete task possible. For the manufacture and
 brospinal fluid in healthy animals is principally mechanical in that it
 application of neuro-drugs it is essential to develop strategies for the
forms a protective envelope. With blows to the head, brain movement
is inhibited due to the presence of cerebrospinal fluid. This occurs at
Lipophilic substances overcome this semipermeable membrane easier
the site of impact and afrer some delay at the site opposite. With
than other materials, and can diffuse easier from the blood to the
 intense rotation, shearing forces occur at the passages of vascular and
brain tissue.
nervous structures from the skull leading to hemorrhages at the open-
The blood-fluid barrier can be conceived as a strongly modified variant
ings of the cerebral veins into the sinuses of the brain. With many
 of the blood-brain barrier.
infections causing inflammation of brain and meninges, cerebrospinal
fluid changes its composition. First of allthis relates to an increase of
116.1 The CEREBRAL SINUsES serve overall for the thermoregulation of
 protein content and cell content (lymphocytes and macrophages). In
the head (*keeping a cool head'). The blood of the diploic veins is
some infections the agent can be detected directly. Cerebrospinal flu-
cooled at the calvaria or roof of the cranium. In the nasal cavity blood
is also cooled due to inhaled or exhaled air. From both regions blood
 spinal cannula one enters the cerebellomedullary cistern (cisterna
flows in the cerebral sinuses, establishing consequently a cooling sys-
 magna) through the atlantooccipital space and aspirates the cere-
tem for the brain.
brospinal fluid.
The clinical significance lies in the fact that venous blood out of the
118.1 The UppER and LowER EyELIDs limit the palpebral rima which
nasal cavity is taken up by the ophthalmic plexus into the ventral cere-
 in rare congenital cases remains closed. The eyelids are fbromuscular
bral sinus system. With neoplastic changes in the nasal cavity, cels can
 tissue laminae with an epithelial covering. The inner surface of the eye-
be spread and sediment out in the sinuses with their slow to absent
blood flow. Brain tumors can result.
Sinus venography is a radiographic procedure for the display of the
yenous sinuses of the brain. A contrast medium is applied in the angu-
lar vein of the eye and via the ophthalmic plexus reaches the cerebral
sinus system. Interruptions to the flow of contrast medium can be
au ui ssoid jesigonoued au jo pueup aoeds aui on anp pasnes
 region of the brain. One can speak of a space occupying lesion.
116.2 With ENCEPHALOGRAPHY the contrast material can be dis-
formed of the surface configuration of the brain. A specific method is
ventriculography whereby a lateral ventricle of the brain (see text illus-
tration p 116) is punctured through the cerebrum. The contained cere-
which serves as a contrast material (pneumoencephalography). Ven-
triculography is a means of estimation of size and symmetry of the ven-
tricles of the brain. With the entry of computer tomography into vet-
decreased.
116.3 CEREBROsPINAL FLUID is formed in considerable quantities,
approximately 350m/day being quoted for the dog. Since the overall
quantity of fluid in the ventricles of the brain together with that in the
central canal and subarachnoid space remains constant, there must be
a balance between formation and resorption. The arachnoid granula-
tions (see pl17) are considered sites of resorption as well as the off-
shoots of the subarachnoid space at the initial segments of the spinal
nerves, and blood vessels to and from the brain. With an imbalance
between formation and resorption, with increased formation or inter-
rupted discharge, an internal hydrocephalus results. Moreover, the ven-
goblet cells);: 3 Sclera; 4 Limbus of cornea; 5 Cornea; 6 M.tarsalis superior;
 7 Superior tarsus; 8 M. orbicularis oculi; 9 Conjunctival lymph nodules: 
tricles are dilated and increasingly brain tissue is displaced. The head is
10 Tarsal glands; 11 Cliary glands.
disproportionately large and the bones of the cranium are thin. Patho-
logical increases of circumference come into question as the cause espe-
lid supports a stratified non-keratinized squamous epithelium. This
aia sinds pi u, a jo suin mneu a u 
 becomes cuboidal in the conjunctival sac, finally extending onto the
204
sclera and then cornea. Both lid surfaces merge with each other at the
view. The m.sphincter pupillae is innervated by parasympathetic fibers.
free border of the eyelid. The free border of the eyelid, approximately
A narrow pupil (miosis) can be produced by myotic drugs, through
rectanglarcrossetionuprtslashealngisou
inner edges. The “internal skeleton of the eyelid, the tarsus, is a curved
sis. The m.dilator pupillae is induced to contract with sympatho-
lamina of collagen fibers adapted to the curvature of the orbit.
 in   s nd a m   sp 
stroma-like formations lying on the outer surface of the iris and draw-
The muscular basis of the eyelid is formed by m.orbicularis oculi
(innervation: facial nerve), m.levator palpebrae superioris in the upper
ing over the pupil are indicative of a persistent pupillary membrane.
eyelid (oculomotor nerve) as well as the smooth m.tarsalis (sympathet-
 This is a question of remnants of the embryonic anterior vascular tunic
of the lens which, in the normal course of events has regressed com-
ic supply). A drooping of the upper eyelid can have different origins
 pletely by 3 - 5 weeks of age. Tissue interstices in the iris (iris kolobom)
such as injury to the oculomotor nerve, facial paralysis (see 92.2) and
paralysis of the sympathetic supply. With injury to sympathetic fibers,
are due to an arrested development with incomplete closure of the
one discerns Horner syndrome with ipsilateral miosis (narrowing of the
choroid fissure.
pupil), a narrowing of the palpebral rima due to drooping of the upper
118.7 The RETINA can be examined with an ophthalmoscope. Further-
 more the pupil is dilated with a mydriatic and a beam of light thrown
mus (abnormally deep position of the orbit in the orbital cavity). Of the
onto the fundus of the eye by a mirror The examiner inspects the fun-
glands of the eyelid the tarsal glands (sebaceous glands of Meibom)
 dus through a central aperture in the mirror. Conditions of the retina
open on the border of the lid; with obstruction of their excretory ducts
a painful nodule formation is produced known as a stye. Similarly the
 glands of the eyelashes (ciliary glands, glands of Moll - apocrine sweat
glands) when blocked can become inflamed.
With blinking, tears (lacrimal fluid) are distributed on to the cornea.
Closure of the eyelids is initiated reflexly by contact with the cornea
(corneal reflex). The afferent nerve fibers of the reflex arc are contained
in the long ciliary nerves (V1 see p98) and the efferents in the facial
nerve to the m.orbicularis oculi. In dog breeds with markedly protrud-
ing eyes, a complete closure of the eyelids is no longer possible in indi-
vidual cases. A central horizontal srip of the cornea is not kept suffi-
118.7 Fundus of a dog's eye with
ciently moist and becomes increasingly cloudy or turbid.
branching of the central artery and
 Deformity of the free border of the eyelid is present as an inturning or
view of the retina. The tapetum
lucidum is light blue. (Ophthalmos-
entropion due to which the cornea is irritated mechanically; an out-
turning or ectropion exposes the conjunctival sac. Without surgical
copy: Dr. I. Allgower, Berlin).
correction abnormal positioning of the free borders of the eyelids leads
to corneal and conjunctival inflammation.
such as inflammation, atrophy and detachment can be detected.
118.2 The THiRD EYELID (nictitating membrane) lies at the medial
 Increased pressure within the cranium for example hydrocephalus,
angle of the eye supported by the cartilage of the third eyelid. With the
causes abnormal swelling of the optic disc over the retinal surface. Of
application of pressure it comes across the orbit, and with contraction
the photoreceptors the rods predominate clearly over the cones, the
of m.retractor bulbi, as for example in tetanus, and with specific
ae s as oos si ni s  sam sop ui sis a o
responsible for the perception of color in dogs there is probably only
myositis) it falls forward passively over the cornea. On the outer side
slight expression of this. Cones of the yellow macula are responsible for
and particularly on the inner surface of the third eyelid there are numer-
acuity of vision. Since the macula is underdeveloped by comparison
ous lymph nodules (so called lymph follicles) which increase in size
acuity of vision is probably less well defined. The rods are purely for
with follicular conjunctivitis and then are removed through rubbing.
 the appreciation of light intensity. Electroretinography permits a func-
The conjunctiva extends from the inner surface of the eyelid at the
 tional test of the retina even with extensive cataract of the lens. Action
 potentials (visually induced potentials) are recorded after the appear-
fornix of the conjunctiva (the conjunctival sac) to the rostral surface of
 the sclera and is border with the cornea.
ance of a light flash on the retina.
118.8 CATARACT OF THE LENS can have very diverse origins being dif-
The cuboidal epithelium of the fornix is adapted to resorption hence
 the application of eyedrops into the conjunctival sac. The sac also pro-
ferentiated into those of congenital, inflammatory, traumatic or toxic
duces a mucous secretion from its goblet cells which decreases friction 
during blinking.
betic) cataract. In progressive cataract with restricted sight one possi-
ble treatment is the extraction of the nucleus of the lens while main-
118.3 The CoRNEA retains its transparency due to a precise state of
taining its capsule. The implantation of an artificial lens within the cap-
tumefaction or swelling maintained externally by lacrimal fluid and
sule is routine surgery in the dog. After rupture of the zonular fibers, a
internally by aqueous humor. Light is refracted at the outer surface of
luxation of the lens can occur into the anterior chamber of the eye or
the cornea but not at the inner; therefore the cornea can be compared
onto the floor of the posterior chamber. In Terriers luxations of the lens
with the stiff front lens of a camera.
 take place cumulatively on account of an hereditary weakness of the
The healthy cornea is non-vascular. Since it is nourished by diffusion,
zonular fibers.
 metabolic diseases such as diabetes mellitus can cause a turbidity or
118.9 The PRoDUCTION AND DRAINAGE OF AQUEOUS HuMOR are in a
cloudiness of the cornea. Moreover, with inflammation such as kerati-
state of flow equilibrium. Derangement of outflow at the iridocorneal
 sasnn pe aiq s sian rq roae a jo a
increase of intraocular pressure leading to glaucoma. The pressure rise
of the cornea and with inflammation of the deeper corneal layers cap-
 results in pressure atrophy of the retina and ultimately in blindness.
illaries penetrate from the major arterial circle of the iris. Scar tissue
 The view within the iridocorneal angle (gonioscopy) is possible after
and unphysiological curvatures of the cornea cause distortions. Cloudi-
ness of the cornea follows soon after death because the normal tume-
fied state is lost due to alterations of the outer (membrane of Bowman)
and inner (membrane of Descemet) imiting membranes.
118.4 Adspection of the ScLERA is an integral part of each general
examination of an animal. Thus the faulty self-coloring of the sclera
 makes the recognition of, for example jaundice (icterus) possible at an
early stage.
118.5 Inflammation of the UvEA is spoken of as uveitis.
118.6 On the INNER SURFACE OF THE IRIs is the shimmering pigment
118.9 A view of the iridocorneal
epithelium responsible for the blue or green color of the eye present for
angle showing the pectinate liga-
example in Siberian Huskies. If, in addition, pigments are present in
ment (Goniscopy: Dr. I. Allgower,
arger quantities in the iridic stroma, a brown eye color results. Con-
Berlin).
nective tissue concentrations of the iris, which are pigmentless, appear
white. A partially white iris is a characteristic of heterochromasia
where iris colors differ between right and left eyes, while a wall eye' is
the setting of a contact lens on the cornea. Gonioscopy is an important
diffusely white. Both are seldom present in dogs. The smooth muscles
method of clarifying the origin of glaucoma.
 of the iris are developed from ectoderm according to the dorminant
205
120.1 The AURIcULAR CoNcHA produces extensive hematomas (othe-
138.2 To permit CHONDROcLASTIC ACTIVITY, mineralization of cartilage
a s ro si o e e pis aan  s uo s
ground substance during bone growth is an essential prerequisie.
are caused by different factors in some cases not yet clarified, such as
 Unmineralized cartilage cannot be disintegrated by chondroclasts and
shaking of the head with otitis externa or due to a blunt blow or
 thus cannot be replaced with bone. With vitamin D deficiency, calcium
impact. This causes hermorrhage from the small branches of the auric-
deficiency, or by a shift of optimal Ca/P ratio, mineralization is restrict-
ular vessels which course through small aperrures in the auricular car-
ed in the cartilage resorption zone. The penetrating chondroclasts can-
tilage to the concave inner surface of the concha. Treatment is through
 not degrade the cartilage and on account of the continuing prolifera-
drainage or surgical resection and must be repeated once or twice
 tion, a thickening of the epiphyseal cartilage (growth plate) is detected
because of high return rates.
radiographically. This then no longer is adequate to support the static
load.
120.2 The EXTERNAL AUDIToRY CANAL shows a sharp bend along its
scopically the canal must be stretched caudodorsally by traction on the
auricular concha. Chronic inflammation of the external auditory canal
(otitis externa see also 6.2) is a frequent condition of dogs. In difficult
cases a surgical opening of the perpendicular section of the canal is nec-
 essary to provide drainage of the secretion and better access for local
treatment. In addition to this a strip of cartilage is excised from the lat-
eral wall of the canal after which the external skin is sutured to the skin
of the external auditory canal lining its inner surface. Fundamental
 pathological changes such as neoplasms at the horizontal part of the
 canal can demand, in rare cases, the removal of the perpendicular and
horizontal parrs of the entire canal while preserving the free part of the
auricular concha..
120.3 The MippLE EAR is in communication with the pharyngeal cav.
ity by means of the auditory (Eustachian) tube. Infections can ascend
from the pharynx into the tympanic cavity and cause inflammation of
138.3 Increased radiographic
density of the metaphyses of radius
and ulna combined with overdeve-
lopment of periosteum (arrows) in a
young dog with hypertrophic osteo-
dystrophy.
138.3 A congenital interuption of OsTEOBLAsTIc FuNcTIoN including
 the synthesis of collagen causes defective bone development (osteogen-
esis imperfecta congenita), an hereditary affliction occurring in Poo-
dles, Collies and Shelties. Already in utero this causes fractures and
skeletal deformations. In large and fast growing dog breeds a further
 form of osteoblastic insufficiency can occur between 3 and 8 months of
120.3 Computertomographic section of the left (1) and night (1'). Tympanic cavi-
 age - hypertrophic osteodystrophy - which perhaps has an infectious
ties. 2, 2' External acoustic meatus; 3 Cochlea; 4 Internal acoustic meatus 
 or diatetic origin. Animals are afflicted with painful swelling of the
 (Computer tomography: Animal Clinic Kruger, Hamburg)
metaphyses of radius, ulna and tibia which can be combined with
 periosteal overdevelopment.
the middle ear (otitis media). Affected animals show a typical obliqui-
138.4 OssIFICATION CENTERs are defined distinctly and wellrecognized
ty of the head to the infected side. Local treatment and cleaning of
 radiographically from the background due to mineralization of the
 purulence caused by middle ear inflammation takes place through the
spongy substance. Ossification centers appearing on different bones at
 external auditory canal after the tympanic membrane is perforated oto-
very definite times can be used to estimate age.
 scopically. The defect so caused in the membrane heals up without
o aq    a ss i  s
from its ventral aspect (bullaosteotomy).
120.4 INFLAMMATION OF THE LABYRINTH (LABYRINTHITIS) is generally a
consequence of middle ear inflammation passing to inner ear. Affected
animals undergo considerable disturbance of balance, vomition and
 obliquity of head carriage.
120.5 A paralysis of the VEsTIBULococHLEAR NERvE can be caused
 ra rn a  a a jo s no  q
effects are movements in a circle, falling to the affected side and
ataxia.
122.1 MuscLE AND TENDON SPINDLES are receptors of involuntary
deep sensation. The information relating to the state of tension of indi
vidual muscles, tendons and ligaments is conducted further. Firstly con-
stant information regarding the state of tension of individual compo-
138.5 Avulsion of the tibial
nents of locomotion make the course of smooth motion possible. Neu-
tuberosity (*) with subsequent 
rologicalexaminationtests involuntarydeep sensation,duetomus
dislocation due to traction of 
reflex. Conscious deep sensation, on the other hand facilitates infor-
m. quadriceps femoris.
mation for example, on the position of a limb in space. It is examined
by checking the position reflex (see also 108.4).
138.1 The intrauterine stasis of ENDOcHONDRAL OsSIFICATION by unin-
138.5 Longitudinal growth of bones takes place in the (EpipHysEAL)
terrupted PERICHONDRAL OsSIFICATION leads to a stoppage of the longi-
GRowTH PLATE. Genetic, traumatic and alimentary factors (see 14.7
tudinal growth of bones. This heritable condition termed chondrodys-
and 16.6) can cause interruptions of longitudinal growth. Epi- and
trophy (chondros-cartilage, dys- defective, trophia - nutrition), is
 established in many breeds of dogs consciously to attain definite breed
the growth plate, still cartilaginous and weaker, is not capable of sus-
characteristics. (for example Bulldog, Boxer, Dachshund, Pekingese,
taining stress. Quick response and fixation of the ends of the fracture
West Highland White Terrier, Sealyham Terrier, Welsh Corgi).
206
are aimed at maintaining the ability of the growth plate to grow. With-
138.7 GRowTH IN THIcKNEss of bones proceeds from peri- and endos-
in certain limits decreased longitudinal growth in the epiphyseal plate
-siadaq e on panoauo sishudodouape au jo seuroup unan
of one limb bone can be compensated for by an intensified longitudinal
tion of growth hormone in adult animals causes an excessive growth in
 growth of other bones. Closure of the growth plate is well demonstrat-
bone thickness especially to limb extremities (acromegaly) and skull.
ed radiographically and is referred to for estimation of age. In the dog
There is also folding of the skin of the face. In mild form this aspect of
 almost all growth plates are closed at the end of the first year.
the condition is desired as the typical breed characteristic in New-
138.6 LoNGITUDINAL GRowTH ceases with the beginning of puberty
 under the influence of sex hormones. With castration before puberty
l sq  le jo s  ss ss e o
longitudinal growth continues for a longer time, early castration pro-
 osteopulmonary syndrome) which is visible externally.
ducing a more than average body size (large eunuchoid growth). Lon-
The repair of bone fractures by secondary intention or healing begins
congenital deficiency of growth hormone as a consequence of hypo-
from periosteum, perivascular connective tissue of blood vessels asso-
function of the adenohypophysis, is present as a recessive genetic defect
ciated with bone, and from the endosteal covering of the medullary
in German Shepherd dogs and leads to hypophyseal dwarfism. An
cavity which stabilizes the fracture initially through formation of a cal-
increased production of growth hormone causes gigantism. The
lus. Leading to callus formation connective tissue cells differentiate into
extreme growth of very large breeds depends on the temporary over-
osteoblasts. A primary callus is formed from cancellous bone if, by sec-
supply of growth hormone in the prepubertal period.
ondary healing of the fracture, an extensive fixation of the fragments is
attained through osteoblastic activity. If the fracture ends are fixed
insufficiently and succumb to traction and pressure fluctuations, con-
sdoap anssn suaneidar snoennre aq pamong anssn aa
before a secondary callus can arise from cancellous bone. Bone fracture
repair is concluded when the callus is replaced by lamellar bone issue.
After healing and with remodeling of the bone thickness at the site of
callus formation, the fracture is barely recognizable.
ous repositioned bone fragments. Osteosynthesis is undertaken using
 ad a si   s s i a 
if, after exact repositioning, the stable fracture ends are fixed together,
takes place along the fissure free fracture line according to the princi-
ple of physiological bone reconstruction. In this instance one arrives at
a situation involving either no or nonessential development of osseous
replacement tissue (callus).
140.1 The continually occurring REcONsTRUcTION OF BoNE makes
possible permanent adjustment to its functional load of which
the expression is the trajectorial system of bone. With degenerative
processes predominating local atrophy occurs which can be initiated
 through continuous pressure. A general atrophy of one or more bones
can be an expression of a defective functional load. For example this
 appears after prolonged lameness with complete loss of capacity of an
affected limb.
 Physiological bone reconstruction is effected also with autologous bone
Above all, the implant serves as stabilization and disintegrates gradu-
138.6 Objective assessment of longitudinal growth due to labeling of the
 ally but its surviving blood vessels prepare a connection to the sur-
diaphysis of a puppy (left), and after conclusion of longitudinal growth right).
The proximal humerus growth plate cartilage possesses a distinctly greater
rounding implantation bed and cause a proliferation of osteoblasts.
growth potential (Radiograph: Professor Dr. E. Henschel, Berlin).
140.2 Muscle attachments are anchored in the PERIosTEUM. They
occupy a large surface because the tendon fiber bundles spread out at
the site, (periosteal-diaphyseal attachment type). With excessive muscle
contraction bone fragments can be torn away to give what is termed an
avulsion fracture. With continuous local mechanical insult, periosteum
reacts by developing cartilage or bone tissue. In this way bony protru-
sions known as exostoses originate.
140.3 ENDosTEuM which lies at the boundary of the medullary cavity
and in places covers the medullary cells, is essentially thinner than
clasts proceeds from the endosteum. Hence the thickening of compact
a p s m i s ud ai aq p ai
medullary cavity is enlarged continuously (Principle: external con-
struction, internal destruction).
140.4 BLooD VEssELs of the long bones belong to 4 different systerms
of supply which anastomose with one another and guarantee an intense
blood supply. Hence the anastomoses and their collateral blood vessels
provide for the maintenance of the blood supply after multiple bone
vessels. The 4 supply systems are described consecutively according to
size.
I. The largest of the blood vessels are the nutrient vessels which, in the
midsection of the diaphysis, penetrate through the nutrient foramen
(foramina) and the connecting nutrient canal into the medullary cavity.
Ultimately they ramify in the sinusoids of the bone marrow and supply
the compact substance from the internal to the external side. The cap-
illaries course along continuing central canals (Haversian canals) in the
osteons and supply the bone tissue. Cross communications berween the
osteons, the perforating canals (of Volkmann) are drained via particu-
lar venules to periosteal veins.
138.8 Maintenance of a fracture of 
 II. The metaphyseal artery and vein begin adjacent to the epiphyseal
 the ibia with a surgical plate.
line in the metaphyseal section of the diaphysis.
207
140.4  Radiograph of a circumscri-
bed area (arrows) in the shaft of the
humerus with eosinophilic
panostitis.
142.1 Formation of a pseudoarthrosis after
unsatisfactory stabilization of a fracture of
the tibia.
III. The epiphyseal artery and vein supply the extremity of the bone
142.1 A PsEUDOARTHROSIs (*FALSE JoINT") arises due tO absence of
with its covering of articular cartilage. (In the femur the blood vessels
reach the femoral epiphysis from the pelvis through the round igament
 fracture extremities. These unite by connective tissue or carilage.
 There remain an unphysiological mobility and instability of the joint.
physeal vessels are separated from the meta- and diaphyseal vessels due
A NEARTHRosIs results if after luxation, tissue similar to articular car-
to the cartilage of the growth plate. After epiphyseal closure - accord-
tilage and joint capsule develop at the site of deformity (for example
ing to prevailing opinion-anastomoses form.
development of a new acetabulum). Formation of a new joint is desir-
IV. The thin periosteal vessels which also course from the joint capsule
able after a resection of the head of the femur (see 76.1) and makes sat-
along the bone approach it everywhere but supply solely the superficial
 isfactory function of the pelvic limb possible.
sections of the compact stratum. The branches infiltrate the periphery
 142.2 The JoINT CAPsuLE is situated in folds particularly on the flex-
of the compact stratum whereas the above named large vessels belong
ion aspect of a joint and these disappear with joint extension. Joints
to a centrifugal supply system.
with great freedom of movement have wide joint capsules. In contrast,
tight joints with scarcely any or no freedom of movement exhibit very
Growth derangement of bone can cause a narrowing of the
tight appressed joint capsules. Joint instability leads to an increased
interosseous blood vessels causing an interrupted venous outflow. This
load on the joint capsule, with thickening of the fibrous stratum.
produces edema in the medullary cavity which leads to an increase in
 Inflammatory stimuli cause synovitis which, in chronic cases, leads to
interosseous pressure and compression of further blood vessels. The
 thickening and villous formation of the synovial layer.
affected long bones are susceptible to pressure and show characteristic
shadowing with radiography. This so called eosinophilic panostitis
142.3 LiGAMENTs are overstretched with strains and can be torn with
appears in large growing breeds and German Shepherd dogs from 6 to
8 (18) months of age.
 u  an i  si pe n is a r
dog which ruptures (see 86.2).
140.5 As an additional BoNE SHAPE the international nomenclature
commission of 1983 introduced the term irregular bone (os irregulare).
142.4 ARTIcULAR CARTILAGE serves as a sliding cushion, elastically
According to the new classification a vertebra belongs to this category
 compressible and capable of being deformed reversibly. It has a high
and is no longer regarded as a short bone. As a basis for this, it is a
water content which decreases with age. On the smooth surface of hya-
line cartilage, perichondrium is lacking, and therefore capacity for
 question of the mode of ossification which takes place in short bones
through endochondral ossification and in long bones and verrebrae
regeneration is limited. Joints are never completely congruent with
through endochondral and perichondral ossification.
light loads. Not until joint carilage is deformed under a load is con-
 gruency improved and the load distributed over a larger surface. Due
140.6 SEsAMoID BoNEs function as *pressure - slide' bodies generally
 to movement the regular deformation of avascular articular cartilage
 associated with tendons directed over the external side of a joint.
ing supply of nutrients. In the case of an (osteo) chondrosis dissecans
140.7 Cartilage in contrast to bone is highly resilient to pressure, so
(OCD) the articular cartilage is distinctly thickened in places and is not
that articulation extremities are coated with cartilage. Cartilage tissue
nourished adequately in its deeper pars which exhibit necrosis. The
is not or only poorly infiltrated with blood vessels and consequently is
section which is altered pathologically is not capable of bearing a load
provided with its nutrition through diffusion from the surroundings.
statically and the superimposed intact cartilage loses its base and can
The poor vascularity delays the continuity of wound healing and pro-
break or cave in. OCD occurs in dogs particularly in the shoulder joint
motes autoimmune processes.
but also in the elbow, knee and tarsal joints.
140.6 Sesamoid bones of the
142.4 CTOAM: Color labeling
knee joint.
of the subchondral bone 
thickness in the trochlear notch
1 Patella: 2 and 3 Sesamoid 
 of the ulna and on the head 
bones of the m.gastrocnemius:
of the radius.
4 Sesamoid bone of the
Red = high bone thickness 
m.popliteus (microfocus radio-
Blue = sight bone thickness
 graph: Professor Dr. C. Poulsen 
(Photograph: Dr J Maien,
Nautrup, Munich).
Munich)
208
Body load is taken up by articular cartilage and transmited onto the
most frequently affected muscles are m.gracilis and m. triceps brachi.
subchondral compact bone plate of which the thickness is connected to
144.6 The INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF A MusCLE can be established in
the functional load. The exact thickness of the subchondral bone plate
yivo using ultasonography. With this one can also diagnose
can be ascertained by computer tomographic osteoabsorptiometry
hematomas, abcesses or fibroses.
(CTOAM). Symbolized in color the thickness is projected upon the
joint surface which is reconstructed three dimensionally from the CT
146.1 TENDoNs change their course of direction at joints. In general an
database. Absence and excess of load on a joint caused local increase
osseous groove or a retinaculum serve as a 'steerage pulley'. Fibrocar-
 of thickness (hardening) of the subchondral bone plate.
tilage is imbedded in the normal tendon with its parallel fibers to
remove pressure and shearing forces. These so called regions of tendon
142.5 BuRsAE react to chronic pressure stress with increased forma-
slide have a lower tensile strength than those tendon sections with pure-
tion of synovia (hygroma see 26.5).
ly parallel fibers associated with movements. Therefore, tendon rup-
142.6 INTERVERTEBRAL DISCS see 10.3
ture takes place, almost exclusively in the sections of tendon slide, for
example in the tendon of origin of m. biceps brachi (see 18.2).
144.1 According to differences in muscle CoLoR, one can deduce its
function. “White’ essentially anerobic muscle consists of “white' fiber 
146.2 OsTEOFIBRoTIc SITEs develop completely enclosed compart-
type which is larger than red. White type fibers can contract faster than
ments which cannot expand with contained structures. Therefore
the red type but also fatigue quicker. The former are associated with
extensive bleeding after a fracture, or swelling of muscles after intense
 posture, the latter with movement. The red aerobic muscles of move-
 stress, lead to a considerable increase in pressure, known as compart-
ment have a high content of myoglobin in their predominantly red
ment syndrome. Sequelae therefore are reduced vascularity and
(smaller) muscle fibers and are better supplied with blood than their
derangement of neuromuscular function with attacks of pain which
white counterpart. Not only contraction but also rate of fatigue are
can cause massive ischemic injury of affected musculature without
slower than with white muscle.
punctual treatment. (see 20.3, 22.1, 82.3).
144.2 MyoGENEsis begins in large part from the myotome of the prim-
146.3 INNERvATION OF SKELETAL MusCLE can be checked using elec-
 tromyography.
ferentiate in 2 directions. The numerically predominant (primary)
 148.1 NeuRoGLIA envelop nerve cell bodies and processes and separate
myoblast type develops with cells of the same kind into a long orderly
 these from blood vessels with enclosing connective tissue. Peripheral
an pe iu  s i , e  n ss
but there is no lumen; therefore the nomenclature myotubus or muscle
neuroglia (Schwann cells and satellite or capsule cells) are differentiat-
ed from central glial cells (ependymal cells, astrocytes, oligodendro.
 tube is misleading. Within the myotubes the plasmalemmata disappear
cytes and microgliocytes). Glial cells develop a supporting framework
s e n  ra e ard on sisqo rss ai umi
tium, which is characterized by numerous nuclei located in the periph-
 or stroma and are significant for the nutrition of nervous tissue. They
 maintain an optimal perineural milieu by eliminating neurotransmitter
ery. The smaller portion of (primary) myoblasts differentiates into a
few satellite cells lying between the muscle cells and the outer ensuing
substances in the central nervous system and protect nerves by synthe-
basal lamina.
sizing the myelin sheath (importance for nerve regeneration see 148.3).
With muscle regeneration the significance of the satellite cells becomes
mon with myelinated and unmyelinated fibers the neuroglia, which
clear In so far as the basal lamina remains intact with muscle cell
 constantly narrow the intercellular gaps, form the neuropil. In the gray
n aaiau al saneredas s uansis snoanau penuan a jo aueisqns
cells divide by mitosis and bridge over the defect. With further differ-
bodies from one another.
entiation of these bridging sections proceeding from satellite cells, due
148.2 MYELIN FoRMATIoN begins prenatally and continues postnatally
to synthesis of myofilaments, discontinuity between defective ends of
(maturity of myelin), important functional units developing faster than
muscle cells is gradually closed. Hence continuity is established once
those less important. As it were, the lamellated myelin sheath encloses
again. With greater defects such as tears in the muscle fiber bundles
the axon as an insulator. In cooperation with the nodes of Ranvier, this
healing occurs with the production of scar tissue.
brings about a saltatory excitation transmitter. The impulse jumps
144.3 The stimulus for transmission at the MoToR END PLATEs takes
from one node to another due to which the speed of conduction is
place due to acetylcholine. Due to formation of antibodies against
acetylcholine receptors, neuromuscular excitability is interrupted. This
rule of thumb it is approximately true that the thicker the axon or den-
disease, myasthenia gravis, is either congenital or acquired (see 40.5)
drite, the thicker the myelin sheath, and the longer the internode the
and is characterized by rapid muscle fatigue. Very often the striated
faster the conduction of the impulse.
-u saip i um oi np pie os si snuose a jo a
ophagus).
Oligodendrocyte
 Neurolemmocyte
144.3 Contrast radiography of a severe dilated esophagus (megaesophagus).
 Nonmyelinated nerve fiber
Myelinated nerve fiber
144.4 The CONTRACTION OF SMOOTH MusCLE is initiated due tO the
stimulus of stretching and spontaneous discharge at the neuromuscular
148.2 Schema of formation of the myelin sheath.
junction (for example in lymphatic vessels and in the intestinal wall).
144.5 MuscLE TeARs occur by abrupt traction of a contracted muscle
or by additional over extension in an already extreme position of
extension for example after a jump or fall from a greater height. The
209
148.3 NERvE REGENERATION (restoration of neuroconductivity) begins
150.2 THYROID AND PARATHYROID GLANDS see 14.6 and 7
after transection or after a lesion at the proximal and above all at the
150.3 ADRENAL GLANDS see 70.3
distal nerve stump involving degeneration. Only a few internodes
degenerate proximally, as in most cases the nerve cell bodies remain
150.4 RENIN is released by a fall in blood pressure of the kidney. It con-
intact. The axons of the distal nerve stump degenerate to the end for-
verts angiotensinogen of the blood plasma into angiotensin I. In differ-
mations. Regeneration occurs proximally with budding or sprouting of
e on ps i s s  a adxa ro so 
the cells of Schwann which with the likewise budding of the cells of
 II which stimulates the cells of the glomerular zone of the adrenal cor-
Schwann of the distal nerve stump develop a continuum bridging over
tex to synthesize aldosterone. This mineralocorticoid produces an
the defect. The band shaped series of Schwann cells act as conductivi-
 increase in the intravascular fluid volume through a resorption of sodi-
um and water. With this there is a rise in blood pressure due to which
 renin synthesis is retarded again.
slowly at about 3 mm per day. The prerequisite for nerve regeneration
150.5 An insufficient outpouring of INsuLiN leads to hyperglycemia
is among others, a relatively short distance berween the proximal and
 and the secretion of glucose in the urine whereby the condition derives
distal nerve stumps. Regeneration is promoted by approximating and
 its name diabetes mellitus.
suturing the nerve stumps. (On the other hand, with a neurectomy to
block pain, a sufficiently long piece of nerve is ablated to prevent the
 stumps growing together - a disputed method of treatment of sports 
horses less frequently used nowadays).
T
1.11
148.4 ENDO-, PERl-, EpINEURIUM protect the nerves from excess ten-
 sion and paraneurium anchors the nerves to their surroundings.
148.5 NoDEs Or RANvIER are situated at breaks in the myelin sheath
where the axon (dendrite) is slightly thickened. Between 2 nodes is the
internode. Because of a lack of myelin, local anesthetic has its initial
 effect at the nodes of Ranvier and extends from there.
152.1Outwar
arterialpulse on venous return
150.1 HoRMONE SYNTHESIS IN THE HYPOTHALAMUS - HYPOPHYSIS -
SYSTEM
Peripheral endocrine glands (thyroid, adrenal cortex, gonads) act by a
152.1 On the basis of numerous morphological and structural charac-
"feed back' mechanism on the hypothalamus - hypophysis system. An
 teristics Veins are clearly defined from arteries. Generally they have a
example of negative feed back is as follows: A stress situation causes
wider lumen and are more numerous. Several collateral veins can
accompany one artery in a common blood vessel - nerve - pathway.
ACTH incretion in the adenohypophysis. This is follwed by an
The wide lumened venous system of individual organs such as liver,
increased output of glucocorticoids in the adrenal cortex. Finally
lung, spleen and skin, functions in blood storage. Considerable quanti-
through negative feed back on the hypothalamus this in turn causes a
ties of blood can be withdrawn temporarily from the blood stream and
reduction in the release of ACTH - RH, ACTH and glucocorticoids.
 thus cardiac requirements are reduced by an economic maintenance of
With a positive feed back due to a high rate of hormone synthesis of
function.
peripheral glands (for example estrogen in the interstitial cells and fol-
 Venous blood return is promoted in several ways:
licular epithelial cells) the release of hypothalamus 
 - hypophysis hor-
mones (for example LH - RH and LH) is still increased to ovulation
 1. Due to the sucking action of the heart, blood is sucked from the ori-
term. (see also 110.10, 138.6 and 7)
fices of both venae cavae and from the right atrium due to displacement
of valve levels.
2. With body movements sections of the body such as parts of joints
Hypotha-
Posterior
Main
and digital pads are compressed repeatedly. Pressure is exercised on the
Lamus
Pituitary-
Organ
Function
 associated veins and blood flow is directed towards the heart due to the
Effector-
Or Cell
 venous valves. Due to muscle contraction blood flow is also propelled
Hormone
-   um sn ns  d n si s 
Oxytocin
Neurosecretory
Myoepithelium
 For example -
cle fascia.
Vasopressin =
 transport to the
Smooth muscu-
 labor pains, milk
 3. The pulse wave can be transmitted with rhythmic pressure vibra-
Adiuretin
 posterior pituitary
lature, Kidney,
flow, water
 tions to the closely adjacent accompanying veins.
 Blood Vessels
resorption in the
kidney, increased
blood pressure
Anterior Pituitary -
Effector-Hormone
RH and RIH Somatotrophic
Growing cell
 Body growth
Hormone (STH)
association
 RH and RIH Prolactin
 Mammary gland Milk secretion
Anterior Pituitary -
 Regulating-Hormone
RH
Thyroid stimulat-
 Thyroid Gland  Metabolism
ing hormone (TSH)
Gonadotrophin:
Sertoli and folli-
 Testicular and
Follicle stimulating cular epithelial
follicular
hormone (FSH)
cells
maturation
RH
Luteinizing
Ovarian and
Androgen,
hormone
testicular inter-
Estrogen
(LH = female
stitial cells
and Progeste-
ICSH = male)
Corpus luteum
 rone synthesis
154.1 Lymphography of the caudal regions of a puppy. 1. Popliteal
RH
Adrenocortico-
Adrenal cortex
 Steroid hormone
trophic hormone
synthesis
 (Radiograph: Professor Dr: Berens von Rautenfeld, Hanover).
(ACTH)
RH and RIH
 Melatrophin of
 Pigment cells
 Pigmentation
pars intermedia
Melanocyte stimu-
lating hormone
4. With respiratory rhythm and changing negative pressure in the
pleural cavity blood is sucked towards the heart. (With injury to the
(MSH)
veins near the heart, air can be aspirated because of negative pressure
 RIH = Release Inhibiting Hormone; RH=Releasing Hormone
with the resultant danger of emboli.
ICSH = Interstitial Cell Stimulating Hormone
154.1 “OpEN JuNcTIoNs' are the morphological basis for direct and
 indirect lymphography (radiography of the lymphatic system). With
210
indirect lymphography, initially a colored dye (patent blue violet) is
T-lymphocytes which of course are differentiated morphologically and
i   sd a s r a  n
by special methods. B-lymphocytes originate in the bone marrow, are
approximately 0.1 μm) reach the lymph capillaries via the open junc-
imprinted in the cloacal bursa or equivalent organs and discharge into
tions labeling these and the proximally ensuing lymph vessels and
 the bloodstream and lymph nodes. B stands for bursa cloacae of birds.
lymph nodes. Due to this labeling the lymphatic vessels, formerly
 The bursal equivalent in mammals is not known or defined exactly.
 n on pnd p  i q e i
 According to many authors bone marrow is in this category, hence, in
medium. With direct lymphography a suitable contrast medium is
 an incorrect sense B could be employed for bone marrow. B-lympho-
    a   a  
cytes are responsible for humoral immunity. This is based on the abil-
ognize lymphatic channels and perhaps pathological interruptions to
o   s u     
 produce immunoglobulins (antibodies). The T-lymphocytes originate
ing lymphangiopathy following degenerative dystrophic endothelial
in bone marrow, differentiate in the thymus (T stands for thymus) and
changes).
after that are discharged into the thymic dependent areas of lymph
node (paracortex) and the spleen. From the functional viewpoint one
154.2 LYMPH NoDEs are of medical significance since they are affected
by inflammation in their areas of drainage. Consequently such areas
lived killer cells are responsible for cellular immunity. They kill cells
should be known. Inflamed lymph nodes are enlarged, painful, and
(for example bacteria or transplanted cells - transplant rejection) and
 s d  d n s d
late the transformation of B-lymphocytes to plasma cells and with it
or less distinct. With lymph flow, floating malignant tumor cells are
deposited in lymph nodes and can be a staring point for daughter 
cells and due to this retard excessive immune reactions. The long living
tumors (metastases).
memory cells (more than a year) allow the defence system, by repeated
confrontation with a specific antigen, to react quickly with a secondary
 and large cells. From the functional viewpoint one differentiates B- and
immune response.
211
Index
3D-models 177
caudal deep temporal 102
rostral auricular 102
Blood sinus 4
 caudal epigastric 70
 rostral deep temporal 102
Blood supply 4
caudal gluteal 70, 84
rostral hypophysial 152
Blood vessels 32,40, 148, 154, 207
A
Abdomen 50
caudal mesenteric
56,60
saphenous 80,84
Body
Abdominal aorta 60
 caudal pancreaticoduodenal 56
short gastric 56
of the femur 76
Abdorminal cavity 50
caudal rectal 72
sphenopalatine 102
of the humerus 16
Abdominal muscles 34, 185
caudal superficial epigastric 32, 36
splenic 56
of the mandible 90
Abdominal organs 50
caudal vesical 70
sublingual 102
of the radius 16
Abdominal ostium of the uterine tube
cecal 56
subscapular 24
of the tibia 76
66
celiac 56,60
superficial bachial 24
of the ulna 16
Abdominal tendon 34
collateral ulnar 24
superficial cervical 40
Body regions 2
Abdominal wall 28
common carotid 14,102
superficial circumflex iliac 84
Body wall 32
Absorption 166
common interosseous 24
superficial epigastric 32
Bone forming cells 140
Accessory carpal bone 16
coronariae 46
superficial temporal 102
Bone marrow 142
Accessory glands 158
cranial abdominal 60
testicular 68
 Bone shape 208
Accessory pancreatic duct 54
cranial circumflex humeral 24
thoracodorsal 24
Bone tissue 142
Acessory lobar bronchus 38
cranial epigastric 40
transverse cubital 24
Bones of the crus 76
Acetabulurm 74
cranial gluteal 70, 84
ulnar 24 
Bones of the digit 16
Acinar glands 158
 cranial laryngeal 102
uterine 66, 70
Bony pelvis girdle 74
Acoustic impendance 166
cranial mesenteric 56, 60
vaginal 70
Brachial plexus 183
Acromion 16,183
cranial pancreaticoduodenal 56
ventral spinal 108
Brachiocephalic trunk 40
Adenohypophysis 152, 203
cranial rectal 56
ventral labial 32
Brain 110
Adipose capsule 62
 cranial superficial epigastric 40
ventral perineal 72
Brain stem 112,203
Adrenal cortex 152
cranial tibial 84
ventral scrotal 32
Bronchi 38,185
deep brachial  24
 vertebral 40,114
Bulb of the eye 118
Adrenal glands 70, 152, 194, 210
Adrenal medulla 152
deep circumflex ilic 60
Arterial rete mirabile 154
Bulb of the glans 68
Adrenal plexus 60
deep femoral 70, 84
Arterioles 154
Bulb of the penis 68
Adventitia 154
descending genual 84
Arteriovenous anastomoses 4, 154
Bulbus oculi 118 
Afferent fibers 150
distal caudal femoral 84
Arthrology 144
Bulla tympanica 88
Afferent lymphatic vessels 156
dorsal pedal 84
Articular surface 8,16, 76, 88
Bursae 208
Afferent neurons 108,150
dorsal perineal 70, 72
Articular capsule 144
Ala niasi 98 
ductus deferens 68
Articular cartilage 142,144, 208
C
Alar canal 88
extermal carotid 102
Articular cavity 144
Calcaneal cap 82,196
Alar fold 100
extermal iliac 60, 70,84
Articular circumference 16
Calcaneus 76
Alar ligament 10
external ophthalmic 102
Articular disc 144
Cambium 142
Alar notch 8
external pudendal 32, 36, 70
Articular facets 8
Canal of the n. trigeminal 90
Alar spine 74
external thoracic 24
Articular menisci 144
Canal of the transverse sinus 90
Alveolar canals 88
facial 92,102
Articular processes, joints of the 10
Canales perforantes 142
Alveolar glands 158
femoral  84 
Articulations 10
Canaliculus of the chorda tympani 88,
Alveolar juga 88
gastricae breves 56
Atresia of the anus, rectum and both
90
Alveolar margin 90
9 euaponponsa
190
Canine tooth 104,201
Alveolar process 90
greater palatine 102
Arytenoid cartilage 100
Capillaries 154
Ammon's horn 114
hepatic 56, 58
Atlanto-axial joint 10
Capillary rete 152
Ammonic horn 203
ileal  56
Atlantoaxial membrane 10
Cardiac conduction system 46
Amphiarthrosis 144
ileocolic 56
 Atlanto-occipital joint 10
Cardiac heart musculature 146
Ampulla
iliolumbar 70
 Atlanto-occipital membrane 10
Cardiac nerves 46, 48
of the ductus deferens 68
inferior alveolar 102
Atlas 8
Cardiac skeleton 46
of the uterine tube 66
infraorbital 102
 Atrioventricular bundle 46
Cardiac veins 46
Ampullary crests 120
intercostal 40
Atrioventricular node 46
Cardiovascular system 154
Amygdaloid body 112
interlobar 62
Atrioventricular ostium 44
Carnassial teeth 202
Anal sacs 190
internal carotid 102,114
Atrioventricular valves 46
Carotid crest 88
Anatomic diameter 146
internal iliac 60,70
Auditory ossicles 120
Carotid sinus 102
Anconeal process 16, 183
internal pudendal 70,72
pathway 114
Carpal bones 16 
Anesthesia of the eye 198
internal thoracic 32,40
tube 100,120,200
Carpal joint 26, 184
Angle of the mandible 90
jejunal56
Auricle 120
Cartilage 208
Angular process 90
lateral circumflex femoral 84
Auricular cartilage 102
Cartilage of the acustic meatus 120
Angulation of the join 122
lateral coccygeal 70
Auricular concha 205
Cartilage tissue 142
Antebrachial fascia 184
Jateral plantar 84
Auricular muscles 94, 120, 131
Cartilaginous joints 144
Antebrachial muscles 22
Jateral thoracic 24,32
Auricular surface 8, 74
Cartilaginous matrix 140
Antebrachium 16
left colic 56
Auris 120
Cartilaginous part 120
Anterior chamber of the eye 118
Jeft common carotid 40
Autonomic ganglia 150
Caruncula sublingualis 104
Anular cartilage 102,120
left gastric 56
Autonomic nervous system 48, 60, 102,
Cataract of the lens 205
Anuli fibrosi 46
left gastroepiploic 56
150,188
Categorizing structures on the sono-
Anulus osseous perichondralis 140
left subclavian 40
Auxillary structures of muscles 148
graph 167
Aorta 185
lesser palatine 102
Axis 8
Cauda equina 108
Aortic arch 40
lienalis 56
Axon 150
Caudal abdominal region 50
Aortic plexus 60
lingual 102
Caudal alar foramen 88
Aortic valve 44, 188
maxillary 102
B
Caudal carotid foramen 88
Apex of the nose 98
medial plantar 84
 Ball-and-socket joint 144
Caudal cerebellar peduncle 114
Apex pulmonis 38
median 24
Bands, connective tissue 6
Caudal colliculus 110, 114
Apical foramen 104
median sacral 70
Basal cells 122
Caudal constrictors of the pharynx 102
Apical ligament of the dens 10
middle caudal femoral 84
Basal fold 100
Caudal crural (leg) muscles 82
Apocrine glands 158
middle colic 56
Basal layer 4
Caudal crus 120
Aponeuroses 148
middle rectal  70
Basal nuclei 112,203
Caudal dorsal iliac spine 74
Apophyses 140
occipital 102
Basihyoid 88
Caudal fossa of the craniurm 90
Arachnoidea 108, 110
of the brain 203
Basilar sinus 116
Caudal gluteal line 74
Arbor vitae 110
of the clitoris 72
Basis pulmonalis 38
Caudal gubernaculum 64
Archipallumn_112
of the penis 72
Basis stapedis 120
Caudal leg (crural) muscles 130
Arcuate line 74
ovarian 60,66,70
Basisphenoid bone 88
Caudal lobar bronchus 38
Arcus veli palatini 100
popliteal 84
Biaxial joint 144
Caudal omental recess 52
Artery (ies),Arteria (ae),Vessels
prostatic 70
Bicipitoradial bursa 26
Caudal palatine forarmen 88
arcuate 62
proximal caudal femoral 84
Bicuspid valve 44, 46, 187
Caudal pharyngeal constritors 133
axillary 24
radial 24
Bifurcation of the trachea 38
Caudal thigh "hamstring" muscles 129
basilar 114
renal 60,62
Bipennate muscle 146
Caudal vena cava 60
bicipital  24
right colic 56
Bladder, round ligament 70
Caudal ventraliliac spine 74
brachial
24
right common carotid 40
Blind part of the retina 118
Caudal vertebral column 181
broncho-esophageal 40
right gastric 56
Blind spot 118
Caudate nucleus 112, 114
caudal auricular 102
right gastroepiploic 56
Blocking arteries 154
Caudomedial muscles of the forearm
 caudal circumflex humeral 24
right subclavian 40
Blood capillaries 158
22,125
212
Caudoventral (basal) border 38
 Conduction pathways 114
 Deep pectoral muscle 14
Elbow joint 26,184
 Cavernous body of the glans 68
Condylar canal 88
Deep sensibility 122
Ellipsoid joint 144
Cavernous sinuses 116
Condylar joint 144
Deep trunk fascia 32
Enamel 104
Cavity of the larynx 100
Condylar process 90
Deferent duct 68, 158, 194
Enarthrosis 144
Cavum oris 158
Conical papillae 104
Deltoid tuberosity 16
Encephalitis 203
Cavum thoracis 42
 Conjugate diameter 74
Dendrites 150
Encephalography 204
Cecocolic ostiurm 56
Conjunctional valves 156
 Dens lupinus 104
Encephalon 110
Cecum 56
Connections of the bones 144
 Dental alveoli 88
End arteries 154
Celiac ganglion 108
Connective tissue capsule 156
 Dental enamel 202
Endocardium 44, 187
 Celiacomesenteric plexus 150
Connective tissue septa 68
 Denticulate ligaments 108
Endochondral ossification 206
Cementum 104
Constriction of the trachea 182
Dentin 104
Endocrine (modified) myocardial cells
Central canal 108, 116,142
Contraction of smooth muscles 209
Dentition 104
46
Central nervous system 108,150
Contrast media series 177
Derrmal lamellae 6
Endocrine glands 158
 Central tarsal bone 76
Conus arteriosus 44
Dermis 4
Endocrine system 152
Central tendon 148
Conus medullaris 108
Descending aorta 40, 42
Endolymph 120
 Cephalic and spinal meninges 203
Convoluted arteries 154
 Descending duodenum 50, 190
Endolymphatic duct 120
Ceratohyoid 88
Coracoid process 16
Descent of the testes 192
Endomeninx 108
Cerebellar cortex 110
Corium 4,180
Dewclaws 195
Endomysium 146
Cerebellar fossa 90
Cornea 118,205
Diaphragm 30, 127
Endoneurium 150,209
Cerebellomedullary cistern 108, 110,
Corona ciliaris 118
 Diaphragma sellae 110
Endosteum 142,207
203
Coronary arteries 46, 188
Diaphragmatic herniae 184
Endothelial cells 156
Cerebellum 110, 203
Coronary groove 44
 Diaphragmatic pleura 42
Endothoracic fascia 32,42
Cerebral arterial circle 114
Coronary vessels 46
Diaphysal ossification center 140
Endoturbinates 90
Cerebral cortex 112
Coronoid process 90
Diaphysis 140
Epicardium 42,44,187
Cerebral gyri 112 
 Corpora quadrigemina 110
Diastema 104
Epidermis 4, 180
Cerebral hemispheres 110, 112
Corpus callosum 110,112
 Diencephalon 110
Epididymal sinus 64
Cerebral rmeninges 110
Corpus cavernosum penis 68
Digestive apparatus 158
Epididymis 68, 194
Cerebral peduncle 110
Corpus luteum 152
Digital bones 76
Epiglottic carilage 100
Epidural anesthesia 202
Cerebral sinuses 204
Corpus medullare 110
Digital endorgans 6
Cerebral sulci 112
Corpus rigidum penis 68
Digital extensors 22
Epihyoid 88
Cerebral veins 116
Corpus spongiosum glandis 68
Dilator of the pharynx 102
Epimysium 146
Cerebral ventricles 116
Corpus spongiosus penis 68
Diploe 90
Epineuriurm 150,209
Cerebrospinal fluid 116, 204
Corpus striatum 112
 Discontinuous endothelium 154
Epiphyseal growth plate 206
Cerebrum 112,203
Corpus vesicae 64
 Disc-shaped nerve endings 122
 Ceruminous glands of the ear 180
Cortex of the ovary 66
 Distal infrapatellar bursa 86
Epiphysis 110,114,140,203
Cervical canal 66
Cortical areas 112
 Distal infrapatellar subtendinous bursa
Epiphysis cerebri 152
Cervical enlargement 108
Cortical bone substance 142
144
Epiploic foramen 52
Cervical reagion 12
Costae 8
 Distal interphalangeal joints of the
Epiploon 52
Cervical visceral structures 14
Costal pleura 42, 186
manus 26
Epithalamus 110
Cervicothoracic (stellate) ganglion 48,
Costal surface 16
 Distal mesorchium 64
Epitympanicum 120
188
Costocervical trunk 40
 Distal phalanx 16, 76
Eponychium 6
Cervix of the uterus 66, 193
Costochondral synchondrosis 10
Distal radioulnar joint 26
Erectile body 68
Cervix vesicae 64
Costodiaphragmatic recess 42, 186
Distal sesamoid bones 16, 76
Erection 194
Cheek tooth 201
Costomediastinal recess 42
Distal tibiofibular joint 86
Eruption 104
 Chest region 12
Costotransverse joints 10
Dorsal arch 8
Esophageal impression 58
Chiasmatic sulcus 90
Costotransverse ligaments 10
Dorsal border of the triangle 38
Esophagus 14,42,54,182
Choanae 88
Cranial2
 Dorsal buccal branch 92
Ethmoid bone 88, 90
Chondral ossification 140
Cranial abdominal region 50
 Dorsal caudal (Tail) organ 6, 180
 Ethmoidal foramina 88
Chondroclastic activity 206
Cranial border ofthe triangle 38
 Dorsal extrinsic muscles of the limbs 12
Ethmoidal fossae 90
Chondroclasts 140
Cranial cavity 88, 90
Dorsal funiculus 108
Exocrine glands 158
Chorda tympani 88
Cranial dorsaliliac spine 74
Dorsal horn 108
Exspiratory muscles 30,127,184
Chordae tendineae 44, 46
Cranial gubernaculum 64
Dorsal intermediate sulcus 108
 Extensor groove 76
Choroid 118
Cranial lobar bronchus 38
Dorsal lateral sulcus 108
 Extensor process 16, 76
Choroid plexuses 114, 116
Cranial margin of the tibia 76
 Dorsal longitudinal ligament 10
Extensors of the carpal joint 22
Ciliary body 118
Cranial mesenteric ganglion 150
Dorsal margin 16 
External acoustic meatus 102,120
Ciliary ganglion 98
Cranial nerves 136, 150
 Dorsal mesogastrium 50, 52
External acoustic pore 88
Ciliary processes 118
Cranial nerves of the vagus group 102
Dorsal muscles connecting the trunk
External auditory canal 205
Cingulum membri pelvini 74
Craniolateral and caudal tibial muscles
124
External auditory meatus 200
Circular folds 158
196
 Dorsal nasal concha 90
External carotid foramen 88
Circumanal glands 180, 190
Craniolateral crural (leg) muscles 82
 Dorsal nasal meatus 100
External circumferential lamellae 142
Cisterna chyli 52
Craniolateral forearrm muscles 22
 Dorsal nerve of the penis 72
External ear 120
Claustrum 112
Craniolateral leg (crural) muscles 130
Dorsal root 108,150
External fascia of the trunk 32, 36
Clavicular intersection 14
Craniolateral muscles of the forearm
 Dorsal sacral foramina 8
External front crest 88
Claw 6,180
126
 Dorsal sagittal sinus 116
External genital organs 66, 68
Clitoris 66,193
Cranium 88,197
Dorsal sesamoid 16
External iliac fascia 36
Club-shaped corpuscles 122
Crest of the greater tubercle 16
 Dorsal transverse diameter 74
External inguinal ring 34,36
Coccygeus and levator ani muscles 128
Crest of the lesser tubercle 16
Dorsal vagal trunk 42, 48, 108
External jugular vein 182
Cochlea 120
Cricoarytenoid joint 106
Dorsal vertebral muscles 126
External lamina 90
Cochlear joint 144
Cricoid cartilage 100
Dorsum
External muscles of mastication 94, 132
Coils of the smallintestine 50
Cricothyroid joint 106
dermale 6
External nasal region 98
Collagen fibrils 146
Cricothyroid ligament 106
linguae 104
External nose 98
Collagenous fibers 142
Cricotracheal ligament 106
nasi 98
 External occipital protuberance 88
Collateral arteries 154
 Cross-section ofthe spinal cord 108
of the manus 24
 External perimysium 146
Colliculus seminalis 194
Cross-stration 146
of the pes 84
External sagittal crest 88
Colon 56, 190 
Cross-striated skeletal musculature 146
External spermatic fascia 32, 36
Columnae uretericae 64
Croup 84
Ductus choledochus 54, 58
External tunic 154
Columnar epithelium 158
Croup muscles 78, 129
Ductus deferens 68
External urethral ostium 66,68
Columnar pseudostratified epithelium
Crown of the tooth 104
Duodenum 50, 54
External uterine ostiurm 66
158
Crural interosseous space 76
 Dura mater 108, 110,202
Extrapyramidal system
1114
Commissural fibers of the fornix 112
Crus cerebri 110
Extrinsic muscles of the tongue 133
Common bile duct 54
Crus penis 68
E
Eye 118
Common calcanean tendon 82, 196
Cubital joint 26
Ear 120
Eye muscles 98
Common dorsal mesentery 52
Cutaneous muscles 12, 148
Eccrine glands 158
 Common integument 4
Cutaneous nerves 12
Echography 166
F
Common nasal meatus 100
Cutaneous pouch 120
Ectomeninx 108,110
Face 88
Common papillary duct 62
Cystic duct 58
Ectoturbinates 90
Facial bones 90
 Compact bone substance 142
Efferent lymphatic vessels 156
Facial canal 90 
Complex joint 144
D
 Efferent nerve fibers 150
Facial muscles 94
Composite joint 144
Deep antebrachial vessels 24
Efferent neurons 108, 150
Facial paralysis 198
Composition 144, 158
Deep digital flexor tendon 82
Elastic arteries 154
Facies aspera 76
Computed Tomography 176
Deep inguinal ring 36
Elastic auricular cartilage 120
Facies auricularis 74
Concha auriculae 120
Dee muscles of the hip joint 78, 129
Elastic cartilage 142
Facies serrata 16
Falciform ligament 50, 52, 58
apocrine sweat 6
Hounsfield Unit 177
Interspinous ligament 10
False joint 208
ceruminal 6
Humeral condyle 16
Interstitial larmellae 142
Falx cerebri 110
circumanal 6
Humeral crest 16
Interthalamic adhesion 110
Fascia 146,148
cutaneous 6
Humeral joint 26
Intertubercular groove 16
Fascia lata 32
Jacrimal 98
Hurmerus 16, 183
Interventricular foramen 116
Fascial and muscular suspensory
mammary 6,32
Hyaline cartilage 142
Interventricular septum 44, 187
apparatus 32
mandibular 104
Hyoepiglottic ligament 106
Intervertbral discs144,18108
Fasciculus cuneatus 108, 114
merocrine sweat 6
Hyperdense 176
Intervertebral foramen 8, 108
Fasciculus gracilis 108, 114
monostomatic sublingual 104
Hyoid apparatus 88, 106, 197
Intervertebral symphysis 10
Fermale genital organs 66
91opo
Hyoid bone 88, 106
Intestinal crypts 158
Fermine urethra 66
of the eyelids 6
Hyoid muscles 104
Intestinal lymph 189
Femoral bone 76
of the wall of the paranal sinus 6
Hypodense 176
Intestinal villi 158 
 Femoral canal 36,80
parathyroid 152, 182
Hypoglossal canal 88
 Intralumenal macrophages 156
Femoral muscles 130
Hyponychium laterale 6
Intramural nervous systern
150
Fermoral ring 36,185
pineal152
Hyponychium terminale 6
Intrasinusal reticular fibers 156
 Fermoral space 36, 80
polystomatic sublingual 104
Hypophyseal fossa 90
Intrinsic muscles of the larynx 133
Femoral trigone 36
salivary 104
Hypophysis 100, 152
Intrinsic tongue muscles 201
Fermoral trochlea 76
sebaceous 6
Hypothalamic-hypophysial system 152
Iridocorneal angle 118
Fenestrated endothelial cells 154
sudoriferous 6
Hypothalamus 110, 152,203
Iris 118
Fiber-tracts 114
superficial of the third eyelid 98, 198
Hypotympanicum 120
Irregular bones 142
Fibrae reflexae 34
sweat 6
Ischiadic arch 74
Fibrocartilaginous discs 144
thyroid 152,182
Ischiadic bone 74
Fibrous capsule 62
zygomatic 104
Ileal ostium 56
Ischiadic spine 74
Fibrous joints 144
Glans penis 68
Ileocecal fold 54
Ischiadic table 74
Fibrous layer 144,148,150
Glenoid cavity 16
Iliac bone 74
Ischiadic tuber 74
Fibrous pericardium 42
Gliding joint 144
Iliac crest 74
Ischial musculature 195
Fibrous rings 46
Globe of the eye 118
Iliac fascia 36
Ischiorectal fossa 72
Fibrous tunic 118
Globus pallidus 112
Iliac lamina 36
Ischium 74
Fibular articular surface 76
 Glomerular arteriovenous anastomoses
Iliac surface 74
Isthrmus of the uterine tube 66
Field of the lung 185
154
Iliopubic cartilage 34
Fila olfactoria 114 
Glossopharyngeal and vagal nerves 200
Iliopubic eminence 34, 74
Filiform papillae 104
Glottis 100, 199
Ilium  74
Jejunum 50, 54
Filum terminale 108
Gluteal fascia 78
Image formation and recording 160
Joint, Joints
Fixation fibers 156
Gluteal surface 74
Incisive bone 90
capsule 208
Flat bones 142
Gluteal tuberosity 76
Incisive duct 122
fluid 144
Flexor retinaculum 82
Goblet cells 158
Incisive papilla 100, 122
ligaments 144
Flexor tubercle 16, 76
Gomphoses 144
Incisor teeth 104
receptors 122
Flexor tuberosity 16,76
Gonadal ligaments 64
Incisors 201
of the digits 86
Fold of the deferent duct 64
Gonads 152
Incus 120
of the head 106
Foliate papillae 104, 122
 Great auricular nerve 12
Inferior palpebrae 118
of the manus 26
Foot 84
 Greater ischiadic notch 74.
Infraglenoid tubercle 16
of the thoracic limb 26
Foot plate 120
Greater omentum 50, 52, 189
Infraorbital foramen 90
Jugular foramen 88
 Foramen magnum 88
Greater palatine foramen 88
Infraspinous fossa 16
Jugular process 88
Foramen ovale 88
Greater trochanter 76
Infundibulum 66
Juxtaglomerular complex 152
Foramen rotundum 88
Greater tubercle 16
Inguinal canal 36
Foramen venae cavae 30
Grey communicating rami 48, 108, 150
Inguinal hernia 185
K
Forearm muscles 22
Grey substance 108, 122, 150
Inguinal ligament 34, 36
Kidneys 62, 152, 191
Forrm of muscles 146,148
Groove of the brachialis muscle 16
Inguinal region 36
Knee joint 86, 197
Form of the joint 144
Growth plate 206
Inguinal space 36
Forrm of the lungs 38
Gustatory
Innervation of skeletal muscle 209
L
Form of the secretory end-pieces 158
bud 122
Insertion of the tendon on bone 146
Labeling radiographs 166
Fornix 112
cells 122
Inspiratory muscles 30, 127, 184
Labia pudendi 66
Fossa of the lacrimal sac 90
organ 122
Insulin 210
Labyrinthitis 206
Fossa ovalis 44, 187
papillae 104, 122
Inner urethral ostium 64
 Lacrimal apparatus 98
Fourth ventricle 116
pore 122
Interalveolar septa 88
Lacrimal bone 90
Fovea capitis 76
sense 122
Interatrial septum 44
Lacrimal canal 90
Fractures of the olecranon 183
Intercapital ligament 10
Lacrimal gland 198
Frenulum 104
H
Intercavernous sinus 116
 Lacrimal groove 90
Frontal bone 88
Hair 4 
Intercellular apertures 154
 Lactation period 32
Frontal lobe 112
Harmate process 16
Intercondylar eminence 76
Lactiferous ducts 32
Frontal process 90
Hammer 120
Intercondylar fossa 76
Lactiferous sinus 32
Frontal sinuses 88
Hamstring muscles 78
Intercostal nerves 32
Lamellar corpuscles 122
Fundus nasi 100
Hamulus 90
Intercrural cistern 110
Lamina cribrosa 90
Fungiform papille 104, 122
Hard palate 199
Intercrural fossa 110
Lamina interna 90
Funiculus nuchae 10
Head
Interganglionic branches 48
Lamina muscularis mucosae 158
Funiculus spermaticus 64
of the femur 76,195
Interior of the eye 118
Lamina propria mucosae 158
of the humerus 16
Interlobar fissures 38
Lamina tecti quadrigemina 110
G
of the malleus 120
Intermandibular articulation 106
Laminectomy 181
Galea calcanea 82
of the radius 16
Intermandibular suture 106
LANGERHANS islets 54
Gallbladder 50, 58,191
 of the ulna 16
Intermandibular symphysis 106,202
Laryngeal cartilages 100,199
Ganglia 48
Heart 44
Intermandibular synchondrosis 106
 Laryngeal fibroelastic membrane 106
Ganglia of the sympathetic nerve trunk
valves 46
Intermediate olfactory tract 114
Laryngeal mucosa 100, 199
150
vessels 46
Intermediate sacral crest 8
Laryngeal muscles 100, 133, 199
Ganglion
Helicotrema 120
Intermediate sinuses 156
Laryngeal ventricle 100
 caudal mesenteric 60
Hemal arch 8
Intermediate zone 142
Laryngopharynx 100
celiac 60
Hemilaminectomy 181
Internal acoustic pore 90
Larynx 100
cranial cervical 102
Hemivertebrae 180
Internal carotid foramen 88
Lateral coronoid process 16
cranial mesenteric 60
Hepatic ducts 58
Internal circumferential lamellae 142
Lateral epicondyle 16, 76 
Gaster 54
Hepatic portal circulation 154
Internal ear 120
Lateral fermoral condyle 76
Gastric mucous membrane 54, 189
Hepatoduodenal ligament 52
Internal fascia of the trunk 32, 36
Lateral frontal sinus 90
Gastrointestinal endocrine cells 152
Hepatogastric ligament 52
Internal iliac fascia 36
Lateral funiculus 108
Gastrolienal ligament 52
Hepatorenal ligament 58
Internal inguinal ring 36
Lateral geniculate body 110,114
Gastrosplenic ligament 52
Hilus lienis 52
Internal meninges 110
Lateral horn 108
Gastrotomy 190
Hip joint 78, 86, 196
Internal muscles of mastication 96, 132
Lateral ligament 10, 106
Genital organs 62, 64, 68
Hippocampus 112,114
Internal perimysium 146
Lateral olfactory tract 114
Genu costae 30
Hock joint 86
Internal smooth muscle of the eyeball
Lateral recess 116
Genual joint 86
Holocrine glands 158
132
Lateral sacral crest 8
Gingiva 104,202
Horizontal lamina 90
 Internal spermatic fascia 32, 36
Lateral shoulder and arm muscles
Ginglymus 144
Hormonal glands 158
Internal structure of a muscle 209
20,125
Gland, Glands
Horn of the claws 4
Internal urethral ostium 68
Lateral styloid process 16
 accessory genital 66
Horn, solear 6
Internal uterine ostium 66
Lateral supracondylar tuberosity 76
adrenal 62,152
Horn, terminal 6
Interparietal bone 88
Lateral ventricles 114, 116, 199
214
Lateral vertebral foramen 8
caudal mesenteric 135
Mesotendineum 148
external anal sphincter 56, 72
Layer thickness 176
celiac 135
Mesothelium 158
external obturator 78, 80
Left atrium 44
cranial mesenteric 135
Mesotympanicum 120
flexor carpi radialis 22, 125
Left cardiac notch 38
deep cervical 134
Mesovarium 64
flexor carpi ulnaris 22,125,184
Left lung 38
dorsal thoracic 134
Metacarpal bones 16
flexor digitalis profundus 125, 130
Left ventricle 44
iliosacral 135
Metacarpophalangeal joint 26
flexor digitalis superficialis 22, 82,
Leg 76
lumbar 135
Metaphysis 140
125,130
Lens 118
mediastinal 134
Metatarsal bones 76
frontoscutularis 94, 131
Lenticular bone 120
popliteal 135
Metra 66
gastrocnemic 82, 130
Lentiform nucleus 112
retropharyngeal 134
Microvilli 158
gemelli 78,129
Leptomeninx 108,110
superficial cervical 134
Midbrain 203
genioglossus 104,133
 Lesser ischiadic notch 74
superficial inguinal 135
Middle ear 120, 206
geniohyoideus 104
Lesser omentum 50, 52
ventral thoracic 134
Middle pharyngeal constrictor 133
gluteus medius 129
Lesser palatine foramina 88
Lymphocytes 156, 210
Middle transverse diameter 74
gluteus profundus 129
Lesser trochanter 76
Lymphoreticular tssue 156
Minor duodenal papilla 54
guteus superficialis78,129
Lesser tubercle 16
Lyssa 104
Minor trochanter 76
gracilis 80, 130, 196
Lien 52
Mitral valve 187
great papillary 44
 Ligament, Ligamentum, Ligaments 10,
M
Mixed glands 158
hyoglossus 104, 133
102
Macula sacculi 120
Modified cells of the tunica media 152
hyopharyngeus 102, 133
arteriosum 44, 186
Macula utriculi 120
Modiolus 120
iliacus 60,128
inguinale ovari 64
Major duodenal papilla 54
Molar teeth 104
iliocostalis 28,126
inguinale testis 64
 Male genital organs 68
Motor end plates 150,209
iliopsoas 36
latum uteri 64
Malleus 120
Motor neurons 108
infraspinatus 20,125,183
of the gonads 64
Mammae 32
Motor pathways 114
intercostales externi 30,127
of the larynx 106
Mammary branches 40
Mucous glands 158
intercostales interni 30, 127
of the tail of the epididymis 64
Mammary gland 184
Mucous membrane
 jnternal anal sphincter 56
 of the vertebral column 10
Mammilary body 110, 114
of the intestine 158
internal obturator 78
teres uteri 64
Mandibula 90, 198
of the genital tract 158
interscutularis 94,131
Limbic system 112
Mandibular foramen 90
of the urinary bladder 192
interspinales 10, 28,126
Limbus of the cornea 118
Mandibular fossa 88
of the urinary tract 158
intertransversari 28,126
Limen pharyngoesophageum 100
Mandibular muscles 94, 132
Multiaxial joint 144
jschiocavermosus 72, 128
Line of the triceps muscle 16
Manica flexoria 22
Multicellular glands 158
Jateral digital flexor 82
Linea alba 34, 185
Manubrium 8,120
Multipennate muscle 146
latissimus dorsi 12, 124
Lines of pressure and tension 142
Manus 24
Muscie and tendon spindles 206
levator anguli oculi medialis 94, 131
Lingual branch 102
Marginal papillae 104
Muscle tears 209
levator ani 72, 128
Lingual muscles 104
Masculine urethra 68
Muscle, Muscles, Musculus (i)
levator labi superioris 94, 131
Liver 50, 58,191
Masseteric fossa 90
abductor cruris caudalis 129
levator nasolabialis 94,131
Lobar bronchi 38
Mastoid process 88, 90
abductor pollicis longus 126
levator palpebrae superioris 98, 132
Long bones 142
Maxilla 90, 198
adductor brevis 130
levator veli palatini 102,133
Long crus 120
Maxillary foramen 90
adductor magnus 80, 130
levatores costarum 30, 127
Long hyoid muscles 124
Maxillary recess 90
anconeus 20, 125
lingualis proprius 104, 133
Long thoracic nerve 14
Mechanical papillae 104
arrector pili 4
Jong abductor of digit I 22
Lumbar aortic lymph nodes 68
Medial coronoid process 16
arytenoideus transversus 133
longissimus 28, 126
Lumbar enlargement 108
 Medial epicondyle 16, 76
biceps brachii 18,125,183
Jongus capitis 28, 127
Lumbar plexus 60,191
Medial femoral condyle 76
biceps fermoris 78, 129
longus coli 28, 127, 184
Lumbar splanchnic nerves 60
Medial frontal sinus 90
biventer cervicis 28
malaris 94, 131
Lumbar sympathetic trunk 60
Medial geniculate body 110, 114
brachialis 18 
mandibuloauricularis 131
 Lumbosacral articulation 181
Medial iliac lymph nodes 68
brachiocephalicus 14, 124
masseter 94,132
Lumbosacral space 8
Medial malleolus 76
brachioradialis 22, 126
medial digital flexor 82
Lumbosacral trunk 70, 194
 Medial shoulder and arrm muscles 18,
buccinator 94, 131
middle gluteal 78
Lunate surface 74
125
bulbospongiosus 72,128
multifidi 28,126
Lung 38, 185
Medial styloid process 16
caninus 94, 131
mylohyoideus 94,132
Lymph capillaries 156, 158
Medial supracondylar tuberosity 76
cardiac sphincter 54
obliqus capitis caudalis 28, 127
Lymph drainage 24, 54
Medial thigh muscles 130
 caudal crural abductor 78
obliquus capitis cranialis 28, 127
Lymph nodes 52, 134, 156,210
Medial tibial condyle 76
caudal tibial 82
obliquus dorsalis 98, 132
Lymph vascular systerm 156
Medial trochlea 16
cervicoauricularis 131
obliquus externus abdominis 34, 36,
Lymph vessels 32
Medial veins of the thoracic limb 18
 cervicoauricularis supericialis 94
128
Lymphangion 156
Median crista galli 90
cervicoscutularis 94, 131
obliquus internus abdominis 34, 36,
Lymphatic organs 156
Median ligament of the urinary bladder
ciliaris 118,132
128
Lymphatic syste 4,14,156
52
cleidobrachial 14, 20
obliquus ventralis 98, 132
Lymphnode, Lymphnodes, Lymphon-
Median sacral crest 8
cleidocervicalis 12, 14,124
obturator externus 129
odus (i)
Mediastinum 42,186
cleidomastoid 14
obturator internus 129
accessory axillary 18,24
Mediastinum testis 68
coccygeus 72, 128
occipitalis 94, 131
axillary 18,24
Medulla 112
common digital extensor 22
of facial expression 131
caudal mesenteric 52
Medulla oblongata 110
complexus 28
of mastication 96,198
colic 52
Medullary body 110
constrictor vestibuli 66,72, 128
of the cheek 94,131
 cranial mediastinal 40
Medullary cavitiy 142
constrictor vulvae 72, 128
of the eye 98, 132
cranial sternal 40 
Medullary chords 156
coracobrachialis 18, 125
of the eyelids 94, 131
gastric 52
Medullary impression 90
cranial preputial 32
of the hip joint 129
hepatic 52
Medullary roots 114
cranial supramammary 32
of the lips 94, 131
intercostal  40
Medullary sinuses 156
cranial tibial 82
of the nose 94, 131
jejunal52
Medullary spaces 142
cremaster (externus) 36
of the soft palate 133
lienal 52
MEISSNER'S tactile discs 4
cricoarytenoideus dorsalis 133
of the tongue and hyoid apparatus
lumbar aortic 62,68
Membranous labyrinth 120
cricoarytenoideus lateralis 133
133
mandibular 92,134
Membranous ossification 140
cricopharyngeus 102,133
of the vertebral column 28, 126, 127
medial iliac 62, 68,194
Meningeal coverings 110
cricothyroideus 133
omotransversarius 12, 124
medial retropharyngeal 14, 92
Meninges 108
cutaneus faciei 94
orbicularis 148
parotid 92,134
Mental forarmina 90
cutaneus trunci 12
orbicularis oculi 94
portal 52
Mental nerves 198
deep digital flexor 22, 82
orbicularis oris 94, 131
Mesencephalic aqueduct 110, 116
deep gluteal  78
palatopharyngeus 102,133
Mesencephalon 110
deltoid 14,20, 124,125
papillares parvi 44
sacral iliac 68
Mesenchymal cells 140
digastricus 94, 132, 148
papilaris magnus 4
splenic 52
Mesentery 158
dilatator pupillae 118, 132
papillary 46
sternal 186
Mesepididymis 64
extensor carpi radialis 22
parotidoauricularis 94,131
supericial cervical 14,24, 182
Mesocolon 52
extensor carpi ulnaris 22, 126
pectinati 44
superficial inguinal 32, 68
Mesoductus deferens 64
extensor digitalis brevis 82, 130
pectineus (and adductor longus) 34,
superficial popliteal 84
Mesofuniculus 64
 extensor digitalis communis 126
80,130,196
superficial scrotal 68
Mesogastrium 50
extensor digitalis lateralis 22, 82,
pectorales superficiales 14, 124
tracheobronchial 40
Mesometrium 64
126,130
pectoralis descendens 14
 Lymphocenter, Lymphocentrum 134
Mesonychium 6
extensor digitalis longus 82, 130, 196
 pectoralis profundus 124
axillary 135
Mesorectum 52
extensor digiti I 22, 82, 126, 130
pectoralis transversus 14
bronchial 134
Mesosalpinx 64
extensor ulnaris lateralis 22
perineal 72,128
peroneus (fibularis) brevis 82,130
Muscular tunic 54
Jeft recurrent laryngeal 48
Organ of Corti 120
peroneus (fibularis) longus 130
Musculature 146
lesser palatine 96, 136
Oropharynx 100
piriformis 78, 129
Musculature of the urinary bladder 192
lingual 96,136
Os costae 8
popliteus 82,130,196
Myelin formation 209
Jong ciliary 98, 136
Os fernoris 76
pronator quadratus 22,125
Myelinated nerve fiber 150
long thoracic 18
Os penis 68, 194
pronator teres 22,125
Myencephalon 110
major splanchnic 48, 108
Osseous extermal acoustic meatus 120
psoas major 60, 128
Myenteric plexus 108
mandibular 96, 136
Osseous labyrinth 120
psoas minor 60, 128
Mylohyoid line 90
masticatorius 96, 136
Osseous matrix 140
pterygoideus 96, 132
Myocardium 44, 187
maxillary 96, 136
Osseous semicircular canals 120
pterygopharyngeus 102,133
Myogenesis 208
medial cutaneous antebrachial 18
Osseous spiral larmina 120
pyloric sphincter 54
Myoid intimal cushions 154
medial plantar 82
Osseous tentorium cerebelli 90
quadratus femoris 78, 129
Myology 124,146,148
median 18,22
Osseous tissue 142
quadratus lumborum 60, 128
Myotendinous junction 146
minor splanchnic 108
Osseus pelvic girdle 195
quadriceps femoris 80, 130
musculocutaneous 18
Ossification 140
rectococcygeus 74, 128
N
mylohyoid 96,136
Osteoblastic function 206
rectus abdominis 34, 36,128
Nasal bone 90 
nasociliary 98,136
Osteofibrotic sites 209
rectus capitis dorsalis major 28, 127
Nasal cavity 100,198
obturator 60, 80
Osteogenic layer 142
rectus capitis dorsalis minor 28, 127
 Nasal meatuses 100
oculomotor 98,114,136
Osteology 140, 142
rectus dorsalis 98, 132
Nasal plane 6 
of the eye 98, 136
Ostium of the ovarian bursa 66
rectus lateralis 98, 132
Nasal process 90
of the vessels 154
Ostium ureteris 64
rectus medialis 98, 132
Nasal vestibule 100
olfactory 100,114,136
Ovarian bursa 64, 66
rectus thoracis 30, 127
Nasolacrimal duct 198
ophthalmic 98, 136
Ovarian interstitial cells 152
rectus ventralis 132
 Nasolacrimal ostiurm 98
optic 88,98,110,118,136
Ovarian medulla 66
retractor anguli oculi lateralis 94, 131
Nasopharynx 100
phrenic 30
Ovary 50,66,152,192
retractor bulbi 132
Nearthrosis 208
pterygopalatine 96, 136
Ovary, proper ligament 64
retractor clitoridis 74, 128
Neck
pudendal 70, 72
retractor costae 30,127
of the femur 76,195
radial 18,20, 22,183
retractor penis 74, 128
of the humerus 16
recurrent laryngeal 14,182,188
Pads 6, 180
rhomboideus 12,124
of the malleus 120
saphenous 36, 80
Palatine bone 90
 sacrocaudalis (-coccygeus) dors. lat.
of the mandible 90
sciatic 195
Palatine fissures 88
28,126
of the radius 16
splenic 52
Palatine process 90
sacrocaudalis (-coccygeus) dors. med.
Neck region 12
sublingual 96
Palatine raphe 100
126
Neopallium 112
subscapular 18
Palatine rugae 100
sartorius 80, 130
Nerve cells 150
suprascapular 18,20,183
Palatine tonsil 100
scaleni 28, 127
Nerve fiber 150
thoracodorsal 18 
Palatopharyngeal arch 100
scutuloauricularis superficialis 94,
Nerve regeneration 209
tibial 78,82
Paleopallium 112
131, 198
Nerve supply 4
trigeminal 96,114
Pallidum 112
sermimermbranosus 78, 129
Nerve supply of the cervi
ica]platys
trochlear 98, 114, 136
Palpebrae 118
semispinalis capitis 28,126
12
ulnar 18,22,183
PALS 52
semitendinosus 78,129
Nerve terminals 4
vagus 48,102,114
Pampiniform plexus 68
serratus dorsalis caudalis 30, 127
Nerve, Nerves, Nervus (ij)
ventral lumbar cutaneous 28
Pancreas 50, 54,190
serratus dorsalis cranialis 30, 127
abducens 98,114,136
vertebral  48
Pancreatic islets 54, 152
serratus ventralis 14, 124
accessory 14, 102,108,114, 138
vestibulocochlear 114, 120,206
Papilla mammae 32
small papillary 44
accessory axillary 14,18
vomeronasal 122
Papillae 6
sphincter ani externus 128
auriculopalpebral 92
zygomatic 96
Papillary duct 32
sphincter ani internus 128
auriculotemporal 96
Nervi vasorum 156
Papillary layer 4
sphincter colli profundus 131
axillary 14, 18,20
Nervous systerm 150
Papillry ostium 32
sphincter collisuperficialis 94, 131
brachiocephalic 14, 18
Neurite 150
Paraconal interventricular groove 44
sphincter pupillae 118, 132
buccal 96
Neuroglia 209
Paracortex 156
spinalis cervicis 28
caudal auricular 92
Neurohypophysis 152
Paradontium 202
spinalis et semispinalis cervicis et
 caudal cutaneous antebrachial 18
Neurolemmal cell 150
Paralysis of the mandibular nerve 198
thoracis 28,126
caudal cutaneous femoral 70,72
Neuromuscular spindles 122
Parametrium 64 
spinalis thoracis 28
caudal cutaneous sural 82
Neuromuscular lacuna 36
Paranal sinuses 56, 180
splenius 28, 126
caudal gluteal 70,78
Neurons 150
Paranasal sinuses 90, 197
stapedius 120
caudal iliohypogastric
28,32,34,60
Neurotendinous spindles 122
Parasympathetic fibers 46, 102
sternocleidomastoid 14, 124
caudal laryngeal 102
Neurothelium 150
Parasympathetic nerve supply 104
sternohyoid 14,124
caudal nasal 96
Nerve plexuses 150
Parasympathetic nervous systerm 48
sternomastoid 14
caudal rectal 72
Nodes of Ranvier 209
Parasympathetic neurons 108
 sterno-occipital 14
cochlear 120, 138
Nose 100
Parasympathetic systemf the sacral
sternothyroid 14,124
common peroneal (fibular) 78, 82,
Nostrils 198
spinal cord 60
styloglossus 104, 133
196
Nuchal crest 88
Parathyroid gland 14,152,182
stylopharyngeus caudalis 102, 133
 cranial cutaneous antebrachial 20
Nuchal ligament 10, 28
Paraunguicula 76
subarterial papillary 44
cranial gluteal 70,78,84
Parietal bone 88
subauricular papillary 44
cranial jioyogatric 28323460
0
Parietal cusp 44
subcostales 30,127
cranial laryngeal 102,138
 Obturator foramen 74
Parietal lobe 112
subscapular 18, 125
cranial lateral cutaneous brachial 20
Occipital bone 88
Parietal peritoneum 50, 52, 158
superfildigitalxor
deep perineal 72
Occipital condyle 88
Parietal pleura 42
 superficial gluteal 78
deep temporal 96, 136
Occipital lobe 112
Parietal vaginal tunic 64
supinator 22, 126
dorsal clitoris 72
Occluding veins 154
Parotid duct 104
supraspinatus 20, 125
dorsal common digital 22
Olecranon 16
 Parotid gland 201
termporalis 94, 132
dorsal lumbar cutaneous 28
Olfactory bulb 114
Pars laryngea pharyngis 100
tensor fasciae antebrachii 18,125
ethmoidal 98,136
Olfactory organ 100,122
Pars nasalis pharyngis 100
tensor fasciae latae 78,129
facial 92,114
Olfactory peduncle 114
Patella 76, 197
tensor tympani 120
femoral 36, 60, 80
Olfactory trigone 114
Patellar ligament 80
tensor velipalatini 102, 133
frontal 98, 136
Olive 114
Pecten ossis pubis 74
teres major 125
genitofemoral 32, 36,60,150
 Omentum majus 52
Pectoral girdle 16
teres minor 125
glossopharyngeal 102,114,138
Open junctions 156, 210
Pelvic cavity 70
thyreohyoideus 104
greater palatine 96, 136
Ophthalmic nerve 98
Pelvic diameters 74
thyroarytenoideus 133
hypogastric 60
Ophthalmic plexus 116
Pelvic diaphragrm
 72,128
thyrohyoideus 133
hypoglossal 104,114,201
Optic canal 88, 90
Pelvic fascia 32
thyropharyngeus 102, 133
ilioinguinal 28, 34,60
Optic chiasm 114
Pelvic limb 76, 84
tibialis caudalis 130
inferior alveolar 96, 136
Optic disc 118
Pelvic outlet 72
tibialis cranialis 130
infraorbital 96,198 
Optic nerve 98
Pelvic resesses 62
transversus abdominis 30, 34, 36,
infratrochlear 98,136
Optic part of the retina 118
Pelvic symphysis 74, 195
128
intermediofacial 92, 138
Optic tract 114
Pelvic tendon 34
transversus thoracis 30, 127
ischiadic 70, 78
Ora serrata 118
Pelvis 62
trapezius 12,124
lacrimal 98
Oral cavity 100
Pelvis nerves 70
triceps brachi 20, 125, 184
lateral cutaneous femoral 28, 60
Oral vestibule 199
Penis 68
ulnaris lateralis 126
lateral cutaneous sural 82
Orbiculus ciliaris 118
Penis, suspensory ligament of the 32
urethralis 68
lateral lumbar cutaneous 28
Orbit 88
Perianal glands 180
zygomaticus 94, 131
lateral plantar 82
Orbital fissure 88
 Pericardiac pleura 42
Muscular arteries 154
lateral thoracic 18
Orchis 68
Pericardial cavity 42, 186
216
Perichondral ossification 206
Pulmo 38
Saddle joint 144
Perilymph 120
Pulmonary
Sagittal  2
Stomach 50, 54
Perimetrium 64
circulation 154
Salivary glands 201
Stomach functions 189
Perineum 195
ligament 42
Salpinx 66
Straight fold 100
Perineurium 150,209
pleura 42
Scala tympani 120
Straight sinus 116
Periosteum 108,110,140,142,207
trunk 40
Scala vestibuli 120
 Stratified squamous epithelium 158
 Peripheral nervous systerm 150
Pulp cavity 104
Scan images 178
 Stratum corneum 4, 180
Peritoneal cavity 50, 52
Pupil 118
Scapula 16
 Stratum germinativurm 4
Peritoneal folds 64
Putarmen 112
Scattering 166
 Stratum granulosum 4
Peritoneum 36, 50, 52,158
Pylorus 54, 189
Schwann cell 150
 Stratum lucidum 4
Perpendicular lamina 90
Pyramid 114
Sclera 118, 205
Striate body 112
 Petro-occipital fissure 90
 Pyramidal decussation 114
Scrotal ligament 64
 Striated skeletal musculature 146
Petrotympanic fissure 88, 90
Pyramidal system 114
Scutiform cartilage 94
Stylohyoid 88
Petrous part of the temporal bone 90
Sebaceous gland 4, 180 
Stylomastoid foramen 88, 90
Pharyngeal muscles 102, 133,200
R
Secondary osfication center 140
Stylomastoid process 88
Pharyngeal ostia of the auditory tubes
Radiography 160
Secondary sensory cells 122
Subarachnoid space 108, 110, 202
100
Absorption 160
Secretion 158
Subcapsular sinus 156
 Pharyngeal tubercle 88
Laws of projection 161
Sectorial tooth 104
Subcutaneous olecranon bursa 26, 184
Pharynx 100
Protection 166
Sella turcica 88, 90,197
Subcutaneous synovial bursa 148
Philtrum 98
Quality of radiographs 163
Sellar joint 144
Subcutis 4, 180
 Phrenicopericardiac igarment 42
Superpositioning 161
Semicircular ducts 120
Sublingual glands 201
Physial cartilage 140
 Radial carpal bone 16
Semilunar trochlear notch 16
Sublumbar muscles 60,128
 Physiological diameter 146
Radial fossa 16
Sermilunar valves 44, 46
Submucosal plexus 108
Pia mater 108, 110
Radial notch 16
Seminal colliculus 64, 68
Subpapillary network 4
Pineal body 110
Radial tuberosity 16
Sense of taste 122
Subscapular fossa 16
Pineal gland 152
Radius 16 
Sense organs 118
Subserosal layer 158
Piriform fossae 90
 Radix linguae 104
Sensibility 122
Subserosal plexus 108
Piriform lobe 112,114
Ramus colli 92
Sensory fibers 150
Subsinual interventricular groove 44
Placenta 152
Ramus of the mandible 90
Sensory innervation 32,158
Subtendinous bursae 26
Plane joint 144
Ranvier's nodes 150
Sensory neurons 108,150
 Subtendinous calcanean bursa 82, 86
Planum nasale 98
Rapidity of movement 122
Septal cartilage 46
Subtendinous synovial bursa 148
Platysma 12, 131
Reconstruction algorithms 177
Septal cusp  44
Sulcus of the transverse sinus 90
Pleura 42,186
Rectal ampulla 56
Septal groove 90
Superficial digital flexor tendon 82
Plexus nerves 150
Rectogenital pouch 52
Septal part of the rhinencephalon 114
Superficial fascia 78
Plica
Rectum 56
Septomarginal trabeculae 44
Superficial hair cuticle 4
ductus deferentis 64
Rectus sheat 34
Septum pellucidum 112
Superficial inguinal ring 36
vasculosa 64
Red splenic pulp 52
Serous cavities 42, 158
Superficial sensibility 122
venae cavae 42
Relationship of the fasciae 32
Serous tunic 54
Superficial trunk fascia 32
Pollex muscles 22
Ren 62
Sesamoid bones 16,76, 142,208
Superior conjunctival fornix 98
Polydontia 201
Renin 210
Sexual maturity 32
Superior palpebrae 118
Pons 110, 114
Reserve zone 140
Shape of bones 142
Supracondylar crest 16
Pontine impression 90
Resorption 158
Sharpness or blurring 163
Supraglenoid tubercle 16
Porta hepatis 58
Respiratory muscles 30, 127
Short bones 142
Supraspinous fossa 16
Portal vein 56
Respiratory tract 158
Shoulder girdle 16
Supraspinous igament 10
 Portal venous system 190
Rete capillare I +II 152
Shoulder joint 26, 184
Supratrochlear foramen 16
Postcapillry lymph vessels 156
Rete lymphocapillare 156
Sigmoid sinus 116
Surginal approach to the peritoneal
Postcapillary venules 154
Reticular cells 156
Simple columnar epithelium 158
cavity188
 Posterior chamber of the eye 118
Reticular fibers 146, 156
Simple joint 144
Suspensory ligarment
 Postganglionic unmyelinated fibers 150
Reticular formation 108, 203
Sinoatrial node 46
of the testis 64
 Preganglionic myelinated fibers 150
Reticular layer 4
Sinus hair 4
of the ovary 192
Pregnancy 32
Retina 118,205
Sustentacular cells 122
Premolar tooth 104
Retinacula 148 
Sinus venosus 44
Sustentaculurm tali 76
Prepubic tendon 34
Retinal blood vessels 118
 Sinuses of the dura mater 110, 116
Sutures 144
Prepuce, Preputium 32
Retroarticular foramen 90
 Skeletal musculature 146,148
Sutures of the upper jaw 106
Preputial ostium (orifice) 32, 184
Retroarticular process 88
Skin 4, 36
Sympathetic fibers 46
Presphenoid bone 88
Retroperitoneal space 50, 62
Skin, modifications of the 6
Sympathetic nervous system 48
Primal ossification center 140
Rhinencephalon 110,114
Skull 88, 90
 Primary medullary cavity 140
Rhombencephalon 110
Sleeve of trabecular bone 140
Sympathetic part 200
 Primary muscle fiber bundle 146
Rib 8,10
Small intestine 54
Sympathetic trunk 102,108
Primary osseous trabeculae 140
Right atrium 44
Small pelvic association 129
Symphysial branch of the ischium74
 Primary trabeculae of woven bone 140
Right cardiac notch 38
Smooth rmuscle cells 146
Symphysial tendon 80
Primordial cranium 197
Right lung 38
Soft meninges 110
Symphysis 144
Process
Right ventricle 44
Soft tissues of bone 142
Synchondrosis 144
accessory 8
Ring of fibrocartilage 120
Solar plexus 150
Syndesmoses 144
caudal articular 8
Root canal 104
Solitary lymph nodules 189
Synostosis 144
costal8
Root
Somatic nervous systerm 150
Synovial bursae 26, 144, 148
cranial articular 8
of the nose 98
Somatotopic division 112
Synovial membrane 148
hemal 8 
of the penis 68
Spermatic cord 64, 68
Synovial sheaths 26, 86,144,148
lateral  8
of the tongue 200
Sphenoid bone 88
 Systemic circulation 154
mammilary 8
of the tooth 104
Spheroid joint 144
8 snouds
 of the spinal nerves 108
Sphincter muscle of the cardia 189
1
transverse 8
Rostral alar foramen 88
Spinal cord 108,203
Tactile hair 4
Projection fibers 112
Rostral auricular branches 92
Spinal ganglion 108, 150
Tactile menisci 122
Promontory 8
Rostral cerebellar peduncle 114
Spinal nerves 18, 150
Tall collumnar epithelium 158
Pronator muscles 22
Rostral colliculus 110
Spinal roots 114
Talus 76
Proper ligament of the testis 64
Rostral commissure 110, 112
Spine of the scapula 16
Tapetum cellulosum 118
Prostate 68, 194
Rostral frontal sinus 90
Spinous layer 4
Tapetum lucidum 118
Prostatic utricle 193
Rostral pharyngeal constrictors 133
Spiral ganglion 120
Tarsal bones 76
Proximal rmesorchium 64
Spiral joint 144
Tarsal joint 86, 197
Proximal phalanx 16, 76
Spiral ligament of the cochlea 120
Taste bud 122
Proximal sesamoid bones 16, 76
Sacculus 120
Spiral membrane 120
Taste receptors 201
 Proximal tibiofibular joint 86
Sacral
Spiral organ 120
Teat 32
Pseudoarthrosis 208
lymph nodes 68
Spleen 50, 52
Tectum 110
Pseudostratified ciliated colurmnar
plexus 70
Splenic function 189
Tegmentum of the mesencephalon 110,
 epithelium 158
spinal chords 70
Spongiosa 90
i14
 Psoas minor tubercle 74
tuber 74
Spongy substance 142
Tela submucosa 158
Pterygoid crest 88
wing 8
Stapes 120
Telencephalic septum 112
Pterygoid fossa 90
Sacrocaudal space 8
Sternal synchondroses 10
Telencephalon 110, 112
Pterygopalatine fossa 88
Sacrococcygeal space 8
Sternebrae 8
Temporal bone 88
Pubic bone 74
Sacroilliac joint 10, 86
Sternocostal joint 10
Temporal lobe 112
 Pubovesical pouch 52
Sacropelvic surface 74
Sternurm8
Temporal process 90
 Pudendoepigastric trunk 70
Sacrum 8
Stifle joint 86
Temporal sinus 116
Temporohyoid articulation 106
 Doppler echography 168
cordis minimae 46
Ventricles of the brain 116
Temporomandibular joint 106,202
Heart 169
costocervical 42
Ventriculus 54
Tendinous intersections 34, 148
Kidney 173
cranial circumflex humeral 18, 24
Venules 154
Tendons 146,209
Liver 172
cranial gluteal 70
Vertebra, Vertebrae 8, 180, 181
Tentorial processes 90
Membrum pelvinum 175
cranial mesenteric 56
Vertex 64
Tentoriurm cerebelli membranaceum
Orientation 168
deep brachial 24
Vertical diameter 74
110
Ovary 173
deep facial 92
Vesicogenital pouch 52
Tentorium cerebelli osseum 110
Pelvic limb 175
diploic 116
Vessels of bone 142
Terminal arteries 154
Pregnancy 175
dorsal cerebral 116
Vestibular
Terminal division of the aorta 70
Prostate 174
dorsal nasal 92
apparatus 120
Terminal division of the caudal vena
Reflection 166
 dorsal perineal 70
bulb 66 
cava 70
Refraction 166
extermal jugulary 14,42, 92
folds 100
Terminal line 74
Resolution 167
external pudendal 32,36
ganglia 120
Testicle 68
Stomach 172
external thoracic 18, 24
ligament 106
Testicular bursa 64
Testis 174
facial  92
membrane 120
Testicular interstitial cells 152
 Transducer-dependent form 167
gastric 54
window 120
Testicular tunics 192
Urinary bladder 174
Vestibule
Testis 68, 152, 193
Uterine horns 174
great cardiac 46
of the larynx 100
Thalamus 110,203
Wave propagation velocity 166
great cerebral 116
 of the ormental bursa 52
Third eyelid 118, 205
Umbilical hernia 185
hepatic 58
Visceral bones 142
Third ventricle 110, 116
Umbilical region 50
hypophysial portal vein 152
Visceral peritoneum
50,52,158
Thoracal region 12
Umbilical ring 34
iliolumbar 70
Visceral pleura 42
Thoracic cavity 38, 42
Unfenestrated endothelial cells 154
inferior labial 92
Visceral sensibility 122
Thoracic duct 14. 42
Unguicula 6, 16,76
internal iliac 70
Visceral sensory neurons 150
Thoracic wall 28
Uniaxial joint 144
internal jugular 14,42,116
Visceral vaginal tunic 64
Thoracodorsal nerve 12
Unicellular glands 158
internal pudendal 70, 72
Viscerosensory innervation 185
Thoracolumbar fascia 12, 32, 34
 Unipennate muscle 146
internal thoracic 32,42
Visual centers 118
Thorax 8,10
Unmyelinated nerve fiber 150
Jast parietal  70
Visual pathways 118
Thymus 40, 186
Upper and lower eyelids 204
Jateral coccygeal 70
Vitreous body 118
Thyroepiglottic ligament 106
Ureter 62,158, 192
lateral nasal 92
Vitreous chamber of the eye 118
Thyrohyoid 88
Urethra 64,192
lateral saphenous 82,196
Vocal apparatus 100
Thyrohyoid membrane 106
Urethral orifice 193
Jateral superficial cutaneous 20
Vocal ligament 106, 199
Thyroid cartilage 100
Urinary bladder 50, 62,64
lateral thoracic 18, 24, 32
Volkmann's canals 142
Thyroid gland 14,152,182,210
Uterine papilla 66
left brachiocephalic 42
Vomer 90
Tibial cochlea 76
Uterine tube 66, 158, 193
lingua192
Vomeronasal organ 100, 122
Tibial tuberosity 76, 195
Uterus 50, 64,66,193
linguofacial 14, 92
Vulva 66
Tip of the tongue 201
Uterus masculinus 193
maxillary 14, 92, 116
Tomograms 176
Utriculus 120
medial saphenous 80
W
Uvea 205
median 18,24
Wall of the cranium 197
Tongue 104
median cubiti 18, 20
Wall of the skull 90
Tonsils 100,200
V
median sacral 70
Weakened profile 176
Tooth structure 104
Vagina 64,66
middle cardiac 46
White communicating rami 108, 150
Torsion of the stomach 189
Vagina synovialis intertubercularis 26
minimal cardiac 46
White splenic pulp 52
Trabeculae carneae 44
Vagina synovialis m. coracobrachialis
 of the wall of the craniurm 116
White substance 108, 112, 150
Trachea 14,42,158
26
omobrachial 14, 20
Window technique 177
Tracheal bifurcation 38
Vaginal process of the peritoneum 36,
ovarian 66
Wing of the iliun 74
Tracheal stenosis 182
64
periosteal 142
Wing of the nostril 98
Tractus tori 6
Vaginal ring 36, 52, 64,68
portal 58, 191
Wolf's tooth 104
Transitional epithelium 158
Vaginal tunic 68
pulmonary 40,44
Wolf's claw 76
Transudation 158
Vaginal tunic in the male 36
radial  24 
Wool hair 180
Transversalis fascia 32, 36
Vagosymphathetic trunk 14
right azygos 42
Transverse arytenoid ligament 106
Vagus group 102
right brachiocephalic 42
X
Transverse atlantal ligarment 10
Vallate papillae 104, 122
rostral auricular 92
Xiphoid region 50
Transverse cervical nerve 12
Vallum 6
splenic 56
x-rays 160
Transverse folds 158
Valva aortae 46
subclavian 42
Transverse forarmina 8
Valva trunci pulmonalis 46
sublingua1 92, 198
Transverse sinus 116
Valve of the pulmonary trunk 187
subrnental 92
Zona resorbens 140
Trapezoid body 114
Valves of the lymph vessels 156
 subscapular 18, 24
Zonular fibers 118
Tricuspid insufficiency 187
Valvular apparatus 46
superficial brachial 18, 24
Zygomatic bone 88
Tricuspid valve 46
Vasa lymphatica myotypica 156
superficial cervical 14
Zygomatic process 88, 90
Trochanteric fossa 76
Vasa lymphytica fibrotypica 156
superficial epigastric 32
 Zygomaticofacial ramus 96
Trochlea 76,98
Vasa vasorum 154, 156
superficial temporal 92
 Zygomaticotemporal ramus 96
Trochlea of the radius 16
Vascular fold 64
superior labial 92
Trochoid joint 144
Vascular lacuna 36
testicular 68
True joint 144
Vascular tunic 118
thoracodorsal 18, 24
Trunk-limb muscles 12, 14
VATER-PACINIAN lamellar corpus
scles
transverse cubital 24
Tubal fimbriae 66
4
ulnar 24
Tuber calcanei 76
Vegetative nervous system 48, 150
uterine 66
Tuber coxae 74
Vein, Veins, Vena (ae) 18, 210
ventral labial 32
Tuber ischiadicum 74
accessory cephalic 20
ventral scrotal 32
Tuber olecrani 16
angular of the eye 92
velar part of the greater omentum  52
Tubular glands 158
angular of the mouth 92
Velum omentale 50, 52
Tunica
axillary 18,24
Venous plexuses 154
adventitia 156, 158
axillobrachial 14, 20
Venous portal system 152
externa 154,156
bicipital  24
Ventral abdominal muscles 128
interna 156
brachial 18, 24
Ventral horn 108
intima 154, 156
brachiocephalic 42
Ventral internal vertebral plexus 108,
media 154,156
caudal auricular 92
116
mucosa 158
caudal circumflex humeral 18, 24
 Ventral longitudinal ligament 10
muscularis 158
caudal gluteal 70 
Ventral mesogastrium 50, 52
serosa 158
caudal mesenteric 56
Ventral nasal concha 90
vaginalis parietalis 64
caudal superficial epigastric 32, 36
Ventral nasal conchal bone 90
vaginalis visceralis 64
cava caudal 42, 58,60,70
Ventral nasal meatus 100,199
Tympanic bulla 120
cava cranial 42
Ventral petrosal sinus 116
Tympanic cavity 120
cephalic 14,20,183
Ventral pubic tubercle 74
Tympanic membrane 120
collateral ulnar 24
Ventral root 108, 150
88 pioxyouedu
common iliac 70
Verntral sacral forarmina 8
cormmon interosseus 18, 24
Ventral system of dural venous sinuses
U
common mesenteric 56
116
Una 16
cordis dextrae 44, 46
Ventral transverse diarmeter 74.
Unar epiphyseal suture 183
 cordis magna 46
Ventral vagal trunk 42, 48,108
Ultrasound 166
cordis media 46
Ventral vertebral muscles 127
218
The present volume of Anatomy of the Dog is based on the 8th
edition of the highly successful German text-atlas of canine
anatomy.
Fully illustrated with color line diagrams, including unique
three-dimensional cross-sectional anatomy, together with
radiographs and ultrasound scans
Includes topographic and surface anatomy
- Tabular appendices of relational and functional anatomy
"A region with which I was very familiar from a surgical standpoint
thus became more comprehensible. [..] Showing the clinical rele.
e
vance of anatomy in such a way is a powerful tool for stimulating
students interest. [...] In addition to putting anatomical structures
into clinical perspective, the text provides a brief but effective
 guide to dissection."
The Veterinary Record
"The present book-atlas offers the students clear ilustrative mate-
rial and at the same time an abbreviated textbook for anatomical
 study and for clinical coordinated study of applied anatomy
Therefore, it provides students with an excellent working know-
ledge and understanding of the anatomy of the dog. Beyond this
the illustrated text will help in reviewing and in the preparation
for examinations. For the practising veterinarians, the book-atlas
remains a current quick source of reference for anatomical infor
mation on the dog at the preclinical, diagnostic, clinical and
 surgical levels."
 Acta Veterinaria Hungarica
ISBN 978-3-89993-018-4
9783899930184
vet