SECONDEDITION
VETERINARY
HEMATOLOGY
AND CLINICAL
CHEMISTRY
MARYANNATHRALL,GLADEWEISER
ROBINW.ALLISON,ANDTERRYW.CAMPBELL
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Veterinary Hematology and clinical Chemistry
Second Edition
Veterinary
Hematology and
Clinical Chemistry
Second edition
EDITORS
Mary Anna Thrall, DVM, Ms, DAcVP
Professor and Section Chief, Department of Pathobiology
Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine
Basseterre, St. Kitts, West Indies
Glade Weiser, DVM, DAcVP
Professor, Special Appointment and Clinical Pathologist
Department of Microbiology, Immunology. Pathology
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences 
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA
Robin W. Allison, DVM, PhD, DACVP
Associate Professor, Clinical Pathology
Department of Veterinary Pathobiology
Center for Veterinary Health Sciences
Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, Oklahoma, USA
Terry W. Campbell, DVM, PhD
Professor, Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons. Inc.
First Edition @ 2005 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global
Scientific. Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editorial offces: 2121 State Avenue. Ames. Iowa 50014-8300. USA
The Atrium. Southern Gate, Chichester. West Sussex. PO19 SSQ. UK
9600 Garsington Road. Oxford. OX4 2DQ. UK
 For details of our global edlitorial offices. for custommer services and for information about how to
apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.
wiley.corm/wiley-blackwell
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use. or the internal or personal use of
specific lients. is granted by Blackwell Publishing. provided that the base fee is paid direatly to the
Copyright Clearance Center. 222 Rosewood Drive. Danvers. MA 01923. For those organizations that
have been granted a photocopy license by Ccc. a separate system of payments has been arranged.
The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13:
978-0-8138-1027-0/20 12.
 Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All
brand names and product names used in this book are trade mames. service marks. trademarks or
registered trademarks of their respective owmers. The publisher is not asociated with any product
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the
publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert
assistance is required. the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataioging-in-Publication Data
Veterinary hematology and clinical chemistry / edited by Mary Anna Thrall
. [et al.]. - 2nd ed.
p. : cm.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1027-0 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary hematology. 2. Veterinary
clinical chemistry. I. Thrall. Mary Anna.
[DNLM: I. Hematologic Diseases-veterinary. 2. Clinical Chemistry Tests-methods.
3. Clinical Laboratory Techniques-veterinary. 4. Hematologic Diseases-diagnosis. SF 769.5]
SF769.5.V48 2012
636.089'60756-dc23
2012004866
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Bnitish Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in ele ctronic books.
p eipaad ias-iaa ueddoi Aq waiiaw id zi/ wl 1as
12012
The authors wish to dedicate this book to their mentors, the pioneers in veteri-
nary clinical pathology. In particular, the book is dedicated to Drs. Maxine
Benjamin, Oscar Schalm, and J.J. Kaneko for their respective first-generation
 discovery and textbooks addressing veterinary clinical pathology, hematology.
and clinical chemistry and for their inspiration to the many subsequent careers
in veterinary clinical pathology.
 Dr. Mary Anna Thrall wishes to thank and remember Dr. Maxine Benjamin
for her generosity. patience, and friendship. The authors acknowledge and
remember Dr. E. Duane Lassen for his important contributions to the first
edition of this textbook. He has since lost a hard-fought battle with cancer. He
was an outstanding teacher, excellent clinical pathologist, and dear friend across
much of the veterinary clinical pathology community.
Contents
Contributors, ix
10 Introduction to Leukocytes and the Leukogram, 118
Preface, x
Glade Weiser
11 Neutrophil Production, Trafficking. and
Preface to the First Edition, xii
Kinetics, 123
Giade Weiser
Section I General Principles of Laboratory
12 Interpretation of Leukocyte Responses in Disease, 127
 Testing and Diagnosis, 1
Glade Weiser
13 Molecular Diagnostics of Hematologic
 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine, 3
Malignancies, 140
Giade Weiser
Anne Avery
 2 Sample Collection, Processing. and Analysis of
14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow, 150
Laboratory Service Options, 34
Mary Anna Thrall and Glade Weiser
Glade Weiser
15 Lymphoproliferative Disorders and Myeloid
 3 Perspectives in Laboratory Data Interpretation and
 Neoplasms, 166
Disease Diagnosis, 40
Mary Anna Thrall
Glade Weiser and Robin W. Allison
16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis, 185
4 Immunodiagnostics: Current Use and Future Trends in
Dale C. Baker
Veterinary Medicine, 51
Wayne A.Jensen
17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and
Crossmatching. 205
Diane Brown and Linda M.Vap
Section Il Hematology of Common Domestic
Species, 59
Section Ill Hematology of Common
 5 Erythrocyte Morphology. 61
 Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles,
Mary Anna Thrall
Fish, and Amphibians, 223
6 Classification of and Diagnostic Approach
to Anemia, 75
18 Mammalian Hematology: Laboratory Animals and
Mary Anna Thrall
Miscellaneous Species, 225
Terry W. Campbell
 7 Nonregenerative Anemia, 81
Mary Anna Thrall
19 Hematology of Birds, 238
Terry W. Campbell
8 Regenerative Anemia, 87
Mary Anna Thrall
20 Hematology of Reptiles, 277
 9 Classification of and Diagnostic Approach to
Terry W. Campbell
Polycythemia, 114
21 Hematology of Fish, 298
Mary Anna Thrall
Terry W. Campbell
vii
Contents
22 Hematology of Amphibians, 313
32 Laboratory Evaluation of the Thyroid, Adrenal, and
Terry W. Campbell
Pituitary Glands, 497
Donaid Meuten
33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus
Section IV Clinical chemistry of Common
Metabolic Pathology. 545
Domestic Species, 321
Donaid Meuten
23 Laboratory Evaluation and Interpretation of the
Urinary System, 323
Section V clinical chemistry of Common
Donald Meuten
Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish,
24 Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes, 378
and Amphibians, 569
Andrea A.Bohn
34 Chemical Chemistry of Mammals: Laboratory Animals
 25 Laboratory Evaluation of Acid-Base Disorders, 393
and Miscellaneous Species, 571
Giade Weiser
Terry W. Campbell
26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver, 401
35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds, 582
Robin W. Allison
Terry W. Campbell
 27 Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas and Glucose
36 Clinical Chemistry of Reptiles, 599
Metabolism, 425
Terry W. Campbell
Robin W. Allison
37 Clinical Chemistry of Fish and Amphibians, 607
28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal
Terry W. Campbell
Absorption, 441
Dawn Seddon
29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and
Section Vl clinical Case Presentations, 615
Serum Proteins, 460
Robin W.Allison
This section includes 74 cases with clinicopathologic
data accompanied by an interpretive discussion and
30 Laboratory Detection of Muscle Injury. 476
diagnostic summary.
Robin W.Allison
31 Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids. 480
M.Judith Radin
Index, 750
Extra PowerPoint presentations available online at www.wiley.com/go/thrall.
vili
Contributors
Anne Avery. vMD, PhD
Diane Brown, DvM, PhD, DACVP
M. Judith Radin, DVM, PhD, DACVP
Associate Professor and Director
Assistant Professor of Pathology
Professor
Clinical Immunology Laboratory
Harvard Medical School
 Department of Veterinary Biosciences
Department of Microbiology. Immunology.
Assistant Pathologist. Department of Pathology
College of Veterinary Medicine
and Pathology
Laboratory Director. Center for Comparative
The Ohio State University
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Medicine
Columbus, Ohio, USA
Sciences
Massachusetts General Hospital
 Colorado State University
Boston. Massachusetts. USA
Dawn Seddon, Bvsc, Bvsc, Msc vet
 Fort Collins. Colorado, USA
Path, DACVP, ND Microbiology
Wayne A. Jensen, DvM, PhD, MBA
Clinical Pathologist
Dale C. Baker, DvM, PhD
Chief Scientific Officer
Gribbles Veterinary
Diplomate ACVP. ABT
Mornis Animal Foundation
 Hamilton, New Zealand 
Director of Pathology and Toxicology
Denver, Colorado, USA
 Portola Pharmaceuticals. Inc.
Linda M. Vap, DVM, DACVP
 South San Prancisco, California. USA
Donald Meuten, DvM, PhD, DAcVP
 mstructor and Clinical Pathology Laboratory
Professor
Coordinator
Andrea A. Bohn, DvM, PhD, DAcVP
Population Health and Pathobiology Department
 Department of Microbiology. Immunology. and
Associate Professor
 North Carolina State University
Pathology
 Department of Microbiology. Immunology. and
Raleigh. North Carolina. USA
Collge of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Pathology
Sciences
 Collge of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Colorado State University
Sciences
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA
Colorado State University
Font Collins. Colorado. USA
ix
Preface
On behalf of the contributing authors and Wiley-Blackwell
or complete blood count, bone marrow, hemostasis, and
we are pleased to introduce the Second Edition of Veterinary
transfusion medicine.
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Our goal is to provide an
● III: presents hematology of common nondomestic species
image-rich, readable resource addressing routine laboratory
encountered in veterinary pra ctice.
diagnostics in veterinary practice. The theme of the presen-
● IV: presents clinical chemistry of common domestic species
tation is applied clinical pathology for veterinary students
and is organized primarily by organ system.
and veterinary health professional teams in the practice
· V: presents clinical chemistry of common nondomestic
setting. We aimed to maintain our intended target audience
species.
and original organizational structure.
● VI: is a compilation of clinical cases. Each case includes a
signalment, brief history, and pertinent physical examina-
tion findings. Then, relevant laboratory data are presented
Audience
 in tables followed by a narrative interpretation of the data.
A continuing trend in frontline veterinary medicine is the
movement of laboratory diagnostics into the veterinary facil-
Revisions and additions
ity. Evolving technological advancements in point-of-care
diagnostic capability drives this trend, which increases the
Some of the more important revisions and additions include
need for education in veterinary clinical pathology. Although
the following.
this book was written primarily for veterinary students and
The overview of laboratory technology has been updated
practitioners, it has applications for a broader audience.
to reflect continued advances in and adoption of in-clinic
serving as a useful adjunct for the educational and reference
diagnostic instrumentation and capabilities. Some of the his-
needs of a variety of other users. The following audiences
torical laboratory procedures that are no longer used have
may benefit from this resource:
been removed. Next, we comment on data interpretation
· students in professional veterinary medical education
skills. Our experience indicates that veterinarians are rea.
programs;
sonably adept at understanding how laboratory tests relate
· health professional teams in veterinary care facilities;
to pathophysiology. but then don't think probabilistically
● clinical pathologists and clinical pathologists in training:
about the magnitude of data abnormalities and often strug-
· product development groups utilizing veterinary clinical
gle interpreting complex data sets. Rules for interpreting
pathology.
diagnostic tests assume homogeneity of pathophysiologic
responses, or that our animal friends have "read the book":
as imagined in Figure P.l.
Organization
However, we know that there are many variables that
 create considerable biologic variability in expected responses.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry is organized into
Chapter 3, Perspectives in Data Interpretation, has been
six sections, arranged as follows:
revised to provide introductory guidance to build the skill
set required for adroit interpretation of laboratory data. This
procedures used in veterinary laboratories to generate labo-
involves development of flexible, probabilistic thinking skills
ratory results. It also presents perspectives on how labora-
when solving the complex puzzle formed by the array of
tory data interpretation is used in diagnosis and overall
clinical findings and laboratory data.
clinical case management.
Extensive revision and some additions have been made
● II: presents hematology and hemopathology of common
possible for selected chapters by incorporation of content
 domestic species. This includes all aspects of the hemogram
from new authors. Examples include:
Preface
· Robin Allison, Oklahoma State University. has made
extensive revision of laboratory dia gnostics related to pathol-
ogy involving liver, pancreas, blood proteins, and muscle.
· Andrea Bohn and Glade Weiser, Colorado State Univer-
sity, have revised the often-dreaded subjects of electrolyte
[o aduis on nduae ue ya ouid aseq-ie pue
understanding of these laboratory tests.
● Judy Radin, The Ohio State University, has provided a
new chapter covering lipid pathology.
● Last, but not least, Don Meuten, North Carolina State
University. brings his extensive experience and expertise
cultivated from too many years in both anatomical and clini-
cal pathology. He contributes new treatment of renal, endo-
crine, and calcium metabolic pathologies.
The Clinical Case Presentations were a separately bound
supplement to the 1st Edition. In the 2nd Edition, the Clini-
VETERINARY
cal Case Presentations are incorporated into this single-
bound textbook. These presentations are intended to provide 
RY
students "practice" to develop interpretive slkills by seeing
d od  n ar  a  sd
cesses and how pathologic processes may culminate in a
diagnostic scenario. The original cases are retained because
their classical usefulness does not change. In addition. a
Figure P.1 Dogs caught 'reading the book' in an attempt to make their
 number of new cases have been added by some of the new
disease responses preclictable. Not all will read the book. (Courtesy of 
con tribu ting authors.
Dr. Sara Hill.)
 It is our wish that readers not only learn principles and
skills from this work, but also enjoy interacting with it. As
·Wayne Jensen, Morris Animal Foundation, provides an
veterinarians and specialists in bioanalytical pathology. we
update of the rapidly evolving area of immunodiagnostics.
share our passion for the art and science of laboratory diag-
● Advances have continued to be made in the diagnosis and
nostics applied to animal health.
 classification of hematopoietic cell neoplasia. A new chapter 
Respectfully submitted,
from Anne Avery. Colorado State University. provides an
overview of evolving molecular and flow cytometric diagnos-
tics applied to hematopoietic neoplasia. This complements the
Mary Anna Thrall
other chapters detailing leukocyte responses, bone marrow
Robin Allison
evaluation, and hematopoietic proliferative disorders.
Terry Campbell
xi
Preface to the First Edition
The publication of Veterinary Hematology and Clinical
· Part IV presents clinical chemistry of common domestic
Chemistry marks a new and unique contribution to veteri-
 species and is organized primarily by organ system
nary clinical pathology. The product of a collaborative effort
· Part V presents clinical chemistry of common nondomes-
by a team of experts in the field, this text combines critical
tic species.
information about performing diagnostic tests, viewing per
 o   d h r
with an innovative approach to incorporating color visual
Unique art program
content.
Many aspects of veterinary clinical pathology are highly
visual. The most unique feature of this book is the quantity
Audience
and quality of color artwork. This was facilitated by digital
image acquisition and processing performed by the authors.
A current trend in the field is the movement of laboratory
Optimization and standardization of images was performed
diagnostics into the veterinary facility, enabled by techno-
by digital image engineering techniques to achieve an
logical advancements in point-of-care diagnostic capability.
improvement in imagery over what is possible with conven-
This movement to in-house testing increases the need for
tional photomicrography. Our goal was to bring a new level
education in veterinary clinical pathology. Although this
of realism to the visual communication of concepts pertain-
book was written primarily for veterinary students and prac-
ing to microscopy. In some instances, visual content has
titioners, it has applications for a much broader audience.
been amplified by combining images from multiple micro-
serving as a useful adjunct for the educa tional and reference
scopic fields into a single figure or showing different levels
needs of a variety of other users. The following audiences
of magnification within the same figure. Digital image engi-
will benefit from this resource:
neering also allows for image manipulation; an example is
· Students in professional veterinary medical education
arrangement of cells that are randomized on a microscope
programs
field into a specific order to convey a concept such as cell
● Veterinary health professional teams in veterinary care
 maturation. We believe that the fidelity of visual imagery.
facilities
as well as its liberal integration with text content, makes this
● Veterinary clinical pathologists and clinical pathologists in
work the first of its kind.
training
· Research and product development groups utilizing vet-
erinary clinical pathology
Author team
Contributing content and expertise to this project are a
Organization
 number of recognized authorities in the field of veterinary
clinical pathology. These individuals have helped shape the
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry is organized
existing curriculum, train the existing faculty, and create the
into six parts, arranged as follows:
 disciplines of comparative laboratory medicine and diagnos-
● Part I presents principles of laboratory technology and test
tic cytology as we know them today. It is through the com-
procedures used in veterinary labs to generate laboratory
bined efforts of so many experts in the field that this book
results.
 was made possible.
· Part II presents hematology and hemopathology of
We hope you find this publication to be an excellent
common domestic species. This includes all aspects of the
resource in the clinical laboratory and for laboratory data
hemogram or complete blood count, bone marrow, hemo-
interpretation.
stasis, and transfusion medicine.
· Part III presents hematology of common nondomestic
M.G.Weiser and M. A. Thrall
species encountered in veterinary practice.
Fort Collins, Colorado
xill
General Principles of
Laboratory Testing and
Diagnosis
Laboratory Technology for
Veterinary Medicine
Glade Weiser
Colorado State University
This chapter presents an overview of the laboratory technol.
thoroughly mixed. Cellular components may settle rapidly
ogy used to generate data for hematology and clinical bio-
while the tube sits on a counter or in a tube rack (Fig. 1.1).
As a result, failure to mix the sample before removing an
employed within veterinary hospitals, general instructions
aliquot for hematologic measurement may result in a serious
and descriptions provide a review of the principles previ-
error. Mixing can be performed by manually tipping the
ously learned in laboratory courses. This, in conjunction
tube back and forth a minimum of 10-l5 times (Fig. 1.1).
with the instructions accompanying different devices and
Alternatively, the tube may be placed on a rotating wheel
consumables, should enable users to reproduce the proce-
or tilting rack designed specifically to mix blood (Fig. 1.2).
dures to a satisfactory performance standard. For technolo-
gies more likely to be used only in large commercial or
Packed cell volume
research laboratories, the overview provides familiarity with
The packed cell volume value is the percentage of whole
the basic principles.
blood composed of erythrocytes. It is measured in a column
of blood after centrifugation that results in maximal packing
of the erythrocytes. Tools for performing the packed cell
Hematologic techniques
volume include 75xl.5-mm tubes (i.e., microhematocrit
tubes). tube sealant, a microhematocrit centrifuge, and a
 Basic techniques applicable for any veterinary
tube-reading device.
hospital
The procedure is performed using the following steps.
The procedures outlined here are most appropriate for the
First, the microhematocrit tube is filled via capillary action
in-house veterinary laboratory in most practice settings.
by holding it horizontally or slightly downward and then
These procedures, with the exception of a cell counting
touching the upper end to the blood of the opened EDTA
hematology system, require minimal investment in instru-
tube (Fig. 1.3).
mentation and technical training. These basic hematologic
Next, allow the tube to fill to approximately 70-90% of
procedures include:
its length. Hold the tube horizontally to prevent blood from
● Blood mixing—for all hematologic measurements
dripping out of the tube, and seal one end by pressing the
· Packed cell volume or hematocrit by centrifugation
tube into the tube sealant once or twice (Fig. l.4). Note that
● Plasma protein estimation by refractometry
air may be present between the sealant and the blood (Fig.
· Cell counting instrumentation
1.4). This is not a problem, however, because the trapped
● Preparation of blood films
air is removed during centrifugation.
● Differential leukocyte count and blood film examination
The tube is then loaded into the microhematocrit centri-
fuge according to the manufacturer's instructions (Figs. 1.5
Blood mixing
and l.6). The microhematocrit centrifuge is designed to spin
The blood sample is assumed to have been freshly and prop-
the lightweight tube at very high speeds to generate suffi-
erly collected  into  an  ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
cient centrifugal force to completely pack the red cells within
(EDTA) tube (as described in Chapter 2). When performing
2-3 minutes. With such centrifugal force, most (or all) of
any hematologic procedure, it is important that the blood is 
the plasma is removed from the layers of packed cells.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Figure 1.1 Left. Gravity sedirmentation of whole blood. Right. A gentle.
Figure 1.3 Proper technique for filling a microhermatocrit tube. The
repetitive, back-and-forth tube inversion technique used to manually mix 
tube should be positioned horizontally or tilted slightly downward to
blood before removing aliquots for hermatologic procedures
facilitate filling by capillary action. Capillary action is established by 
touching the upper end of the tube to the blood (arrow).
10OOTUBEWORKSTATION
JOOOINBEMOHK
Figure 1.2 Representative mechanical blood-mixing table. The surface
holds several tubes on a ribbed rubber surface and tilts back and forth at 
Figure 1.4 A microhematocrit tube is sealed by pressing two to three
the rate of 20-30 oscillations per minute.
times into the clay sealant (arrow). Note that a small arnount of air
 trapped between the blood and white clay is not a problern (arrowhead 
in the insety.
Three distinct layers may be observed in the tube after
removal from the centrifuge: the plasma column at the top.
the packed erythrocytes at the bottom, and a small, middle
plasma column that suggests hyperbilirubinemia; the mag-
white band known as the buffy coat (Fig. 1.7). The buffy
nitude of this hyperbilirubinemia should be confirmed by a
coat consists of nucleated cells (predominantly leukocytes)
biochemical determina tion of serum bilirubin concentration
and platelets, and it may be discolored red when the nucle-
(see Chapter 26). The observation of an icteric coloration to
ated erythrocyte concentration is prominently increased.
the plasma is diagnostically useful in small animals. It is not
Observations of any abnormalities in the plasma column
reliable in large animal species, however, because their
above the red cells should be recorded. Common abnormali-
serum usually has a yellow coloration from the normal caro-
ties such as icterus, lipemia, and hemolysis are shown in
tene pigments associated with their herbivorous diet.
      e  i 
Lipemia is a white, opaque coloration of the plasma column
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
中
A13
Figure 1.5 Representative microhematocrit centrifuge. The head and
Figure 1.7 Normal and abnormal spun microhematocrit tubes (4 tubes
motor are designed to spin the tubes at very high speeds to achieve
in midle panel). The tube on the left is normal. Note the packed
maximal erythrocyte packing.
erythrocytes at the bottom, plasma layer at the top. and buffy coat in the
middle (arrow; enlarged at left). The second tube illustrates lipemnia, the 
third hernolysis, and the fourth icterus. Note also that the hermatocrit is
considerably decreased in the fourth tube. Two additional tubes illustrate
buffy-coat abnormalities (enlarged at right). The first of these tubes has 
an increased buffy coat that correlates with an increased leukocyte
concentration. The second (right is from a sheep with leukemia and ha5
a drammatically increased buffy coat. The leukocyte concentration was
greater than 400,000 cells/μl. There is also severe anemmia. With such
pe saoa po uoeedas uoeuanuan lan u saeouge o
leukocytes is not complete, and division mmay be blurred. What is 
Aa patepui s! uunjon aouyrua aul jo ,dot, ayn buiag se pataidiau!
the arrowhead. The red discoloration of the buffy coat may be caused by
a prominent increase in nucleated erythrocytes.
rise to observable hemolysis in the plasma fraction, which
also is known as hemoglobinemia (see Chapter 8). This will
typically also be associated with hemoglobinuria.
The packed cell volume is measured on a reading device,
Figure 1.6 Placerment of microhematocrit tubes on a mnicrohematocrit
such as a microhematocrit card reader (Fig. 1.8). The proce-
centrifuge head. Note the proper orientation of two microhematocrit
dure is performed by positioning the erythrocyte-clay inter-
tubes, with the clay-sealed end positioned at the outer ring of the
face on the 0 line and the top of the plasma column on the
centrifuge head (double arrow).
100 line. The position of the top of the erythrocyte column
is then read on the scale as the packed cell volume.
beca use of the presence of chylomicrons. Lipemia most com-
 Plasma proteins by refractometry
monly is associated with the postprandial collection of blood.
After measurement and observation of the microhematocrit
but it also may be associated with disorders involving lipid
tube, the plasma column may be used to estimate the plasma
metabolism (see Chapter 31). Hemolysis is a red discolor-
protein concentration on the refractometer (Fig. 1.9). This
ation of the plasma column, which usually results from
instrument may be used to estimate the concentration of
artifactual lysis of red cells induced during the collection of
any solute in fluid according to the principle that the solute
blood. A small quantity of lysed erythrocytes is sufficient to
refracts (or bends) light passing through the fluid to a degree
impart visual hemolysis. Therefore, if the hematocrit is
that is proportional to the solute concentration. The prin-
normal, one may assume it is an artifact. Less commonly.
ciple or property being measured is the refractive index rela-
causes of anemia that result in intravascular hemolysis give
tive to distilled water. The scale for a particular solute can
5
       i oii
100+
46
F0
Figure 1.8 Determination of packed cell volume on a microhematocrit 
Figure 1.10 Preparation of the microhematocrit tube for measuring
 tube card reader using two tubes of blood from the sarme patient sarmple.
 plasma protein concentration. The tube is broken just above the buffy
Note that the scale allows the tube to be read over a considlerable range
 coat to yield a colurnn of plasrma (arrow).
of filling levels. The steps are to line up the erythrocyte-clay interface
with the 0 line, line up the top of the plasma column with the 100 line.
and then read the top of the erythrocyte column on the scale. The
 positions of these steps are indicated by the arrows. Note in this example
that the packed cell volume is 46%.
Figure 1.11 Loading plasma from the microhematocrit tube to the
refractormeter. To wick plasmma onto the refractometer, capillary action is5
established by touching the end of the plasma tube at the notch of the
 prism cover (arrowhead). Flow should establish a thin layer of plasma 
 under the plastic cover to fill the area delineated by arrows. After
Figure 1.9 Refractormeters. The lower refractometer is more rugged,
reading. the plastic cover is flipped back and wiped clean with a
because it is encased in rubber. It is known as a veterinary refractormeter.
laboratory tissue.
and it has a canine and feline urine specific gravity scale that calibrates
for minor dlifferences between species dluring this dletermination.
coat layer (Fig. 1.l0), and the portion of the tube containing
the plasma is used to load the refractometer (Fig. 1.ll). The
be developed from refractive index measurements calibrated
instrument then is held so that an ambient light source can 
to solutions with known solute concentrations. In clinical
pass through the prism wetted with plasma, and the light
diagnostics, refractometry is used to estimate the plasma
refraction is read on a scale through an eyepiece (Fig. 1.12).
protein concentration and urine specific gravity.
The protein measurement is regarded as being an estimate
Plasma protein is measured using the plasma column in
based on calibration, assuming that other solutes in the
the microhematocrit tube. The tube is broken above the buffy
serum are present in normal concentrations. The measure-
5
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
320
310
15
300
290
14
280
13
270
260
三
12
250
240
11
230
220
SERUM OR PLASMA
10
210
PROTEIN
GMS/100 ml
200
9
190
T/C
180
PR/N RATIO 6.54
170
三
160
三
150
140 
REFRACTION
1.035
130
[n-no] x104
一
120
T/C
1.030
110
100
1.025
90
URINE
80
SPECIFIC GRAVITY
1.020
70
T/C
1.015
60
50
1.010
40
三
30
1.005
20
10
1.000
Figure 1.12 Representative refractormeter scale as seen through the eyepiece. Light refraction creates a shadow-bright area interface that is read on
the appropriate scale.
ment may be influenced by alterations in other solutes. Most
ated erythrocytes typically are included in this count. In
notably. lipemia may artificially increase the protein esti-
most cases the concentration of NRBC is negligible, but on
mate by as much as 2 g/dL. Other alterations of solutes such
rare occasion they may make up an appreciable fraction of
as urea and glucose influence the protein estimate to a much
the total nucleated cell concentration.
lesser, and usually negligible, degree.
A variety of electronic cell counters operate by enumerat-
ing nuclear particles in an isotonic dilution in which a deter-
Determination of total leukocyte concentration
gent is used to lyse the erythrocytes. These systems must be
Two general approaches are available to determine the leu-
 engineered for animal blood, however, to generate accurate
kocyte concentration. Historically, cell concentrations were
measurements of cell concentrations. There are also contin-
measured manually using a blood dilution placed onto a
ued advances in these hematology systems for performing
hemocytometer and counted while observing by micros-
leukocyte differentiation. Three-, four-, and five-part dif-
copy. This procedure, and associated consumables.
is
ferential systems exist. The differential capability works best
regarded as obsolete for the veterinary practice setting. Over
with normal blood, but there are individual exceptions. All 
the past 30 years this procedure has been progressively
systems may produce questionable results when there is
replaced by automated cell counting hematology systems or
leukocyte pathology and none properly detects abnormali-
alternatively expanded buffy coat analysis technology in
ties such as left shift, toxic change, and cell types outside the
which cellular estimates are made from layers in a special-
routine five normal cell types (see Chapters 10 and 12). (For
ized hematocrit tube. The total leukocyte count is the con-
principles of hematology system operation, see the discus-
centration of nucleated cells, because the techniques detect
sion of advanced hematologic procedures later in this
all the nuclei in solutions from which erythrocytes have
chapter.) The quantitative buffy coat analysis system (QBC.
been removed by lysis or centrifugation. Therefore, nucle-
Becton Dickinson) estimates the leukocyte concentration by
7
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
measurement of the buffy coat layer in a specialized micro-
procedure is known as the wedge or push technique and
hematocrit tube, in which a float is present to expand the
uses two glass microscope slides. A drop of blood is placed
buffy coat region for optical scanning.
near one end of the first slide supported on the counter. The
 In isolation, the total leukocyte count is not particularly
second slide is placed on the first in a way that forms a
"wedge" consisting of a 30-45° angle in front of the drop of
to determine the concentration of various leukocyte types
blood. The second slide, which is known as the pusher slide.
that make up the differential count. The concentration of
then is backed into the drop of blood and advanced forward
individual leukocytes is the most useful value for the inter-
to the end. This should be accomplished in one rapid motion
pretation of disease processes. This information is deter-
that involves a fip of the wrist holding the pusher slide.
mined by evaluating the stained blood film (discussed
 Downward pressure on the pusher slide should be minimal.
below). Because of the limitations in automated leukocyte
differentiation described above, it is important to utilize
blood film examination in conjunction with automated
hematology systems. This is essential not only for leukocyte
characterization, but also for evaluation of erythrocytes in
cases of anemia and platelets when the instrument produces
a decreased platelet concentration value.
Preparation of blood flms
 The stained blood flm is an essential tool for determining
the concentrations of individual leukocyte types (i.e., dif-
ferential count) and for evaluating important pathologic
abnormalities involving leukocytes, erythrocytes, and plate-
lets. Successful derivation of information from the blood film
requires a proper technique, which both creates a monolayer
of individually dispersed cells and a minimal disturbance of
relative cell distributions that reflect the cell concentrations
in mixed blood. A poorly prepared film presents confusing
artifacts and may result in cell distributions on the slide that
Figure 1.14 Blood film preparation. The pusher slide is backed into the
lead to serious errors in the differential count.
drop of blood with a directional movement (arrow).
Preparation of a good-quality blood film requires mastery
of a specific technique (Figs. 1.13-1.15). The most common
Figure 1.15 Blood film preparation. The pusher slide is pushed forward 
with a rapid directional movement (arrow). It is irnportant that the
Figure 1.13 Blood filr preparation. The blood slide is held on a firm
 movements shown in Figures 1.13 through 1.15 are a single, rapid
surface, and a drop of blood is placed near the end (arrow). The pusher
 procedure involving a flip of the wrist. Considerable practice is required
slide then is placed on the blood slide in front of the drop of blood to
to develop this skill The result should be a uniform film of blood that 
form an angle of approxirmately 30°
gets progressively thinner (see Fig. 1.17).
8
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
Learning this technique in the presence of someone experi-
Expertise for examination of blood films
enced with making good films is helpful, and considerable
Once stained, the anatomy of a blood film must be known
practice is advised. A common poor technique is to push the
to properly orient the slide for microscopic viewing (Fig.
pusher slide too slowly, thereby creating a film that is to0
1.17). The largest part of the film is the thick area or body.
thin. This results in very poor distribution of leukocytes at
in which cells are superimposed and leukocytes are rounded
the end of the film and artifacts in the evaluation of eryth-
up. thereby maling microscopic evaluation of all compo-
rocytes. In blood with reduced viscosity, such as that from
nents difficult. The feathered edge occurs at the end of the
patients with severe anemia, increasing the angle to avoid a
film. Artifacts in this area include broken leukocytes and
slide that is too thin is useful.
the inability to evaluate the erythrocyte central pallor. The
counting area is a small area between the thick portion and
Staining
the feathered edge, and it consists of a monolayer of cells in
After preparation, the blood film is usually stained within
which microscopy is optimal. Leukocytes are flattened out
minutes. However, it may be stained within hours to days
so that the internal detail is most evident.
if it is being sent to a diagnostic laboratory. The staining
The amount of interpretive disease relevance that can be
system used for microscopic evaluation of cellular elements
gained from examination of the blood film is proportional
is the Wright stain, or a Wright stain modified by the addi-
to the expertise available for the examination. Success in
tion of Giemsa. This is a relatively complex procedure that
dealing with all components of such examination depends 
requires care and maintenance, thus often being limited to
on the quality of film making. stain maintenance, ability to
larger laboratory facilities. Quick-stain procedures that
look in the correct place, ability to differentiate preparation
mimic the classical wright stain are available, however, and
artifacts from morphologic abnormalities, and experience
for convenience, these are the most commonly used stains
with interpretive blood film pathology. To the extent that
in the veterinary practice setting. The best-known stain kit
the user cannot make these distinctions, abnormal blood
is Diff-Quick (Dade Behring Inc., Newark, DE). Quick stains
films should be referred to a specialist for examination and/
may result in nuclear overstaining and blurring of chromatin
or second opinion.
detail, but they provide sufficient quality for differential
 It is important to examine the gross appearance of blood
leukocyte counting and screening for morphologic abnor-
films as a correlate to artifact recognition. Improper prepara-
 malities. Examples of manual to automated staining systems
tion can be recognized, thereby alerting the observer to
are shown in Figure l.16.
Counting
Area
Feathered
Edge
Body
Figure 1.17 Anatomy of a stained blood film. Note the feathered edge
Figure 1.16 Blood film and cytology staining apparatus. Top. Manual
(thin arrow) and the thick area or body of the slide (thick arrow). The
woy panouu Aienuew ane sapis uiers ynino-hla buuieiuon siel buiens
counting area containing a mmonolayer of cells is present in a relatively
one jar to the next according to the manufacturer's instructions. Bottom.
small area, which is delineated approximately by the lines across the slide.
An automated stainer used for higher-throughput situations. Note the
This gross exammination of the slide is very helpful in orienting the
mechanical arm that rmoves a rack of slides (not shown) through the
observer before placing the slide on the microscope stage. This facilitates
sequence of staining procedure baths (arrow). The stainer may be 
alignment of the optics over the proper area of the slide, making it easier
prograrnmed to control the tirning in each bath. Most such machines
and faster to perform low-magnification observations and to find the
provide the ability to stain as many as 20-25 slicdes per cycle.
counting area
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
H9L9/
85_56 21
45
Figure 1.18 Gross appearance of blood films. All three of these films
Figure 1.19 Low-magnification appearance of the feathered edge. Note
 are oriented the same way. The drop of blood was placed near the
the reticulated pattern of erythrocyte distribution. Artifactual loss of
bottom of the picture, and the filrn was made by pushing in the direction
central pallor makes evaluation of erythrocyte morphology dlifficult, and
 of the arrow. The midlle film has a normal appearance and intensity of
false interpretation of pathologic abnormalities is likely to occur in this 
color. The appearance is hommogeneous but gets progressively thinner a5 
area.
one approaches the feathered edge. The film on the left is very pale; this
is the appearance when severe anemmia is present. With severe anemia.
blood viscosity is reduced, resulting in a much thinner film. The filrm on
the right is made irmproperly and does not yield accurate information.
The pusher slide was pushed too slowly, making a thin filrn with streak5.
Note the streaking and irregularity over most of the slide. Blood was still
present at the end of the slide as well, resulting in a line of densely
concentrated cells (arrowhead). It is not possible to find a good 
monolayer for evaluation of erythrocyte morphology on this slicle. In 
addition, the leukocytes are disproportionately concentrated at the end of
the slide, which ordinarily has a feathered edge. Performning a dlifferential
count will be dlifficult in this case—and likely not accurate. A thin slide a5
a result of pushing too slowly is the most common problem in technique
found at veterin ary facilities.
artifacts that can be avoided and preventing any associated,
errant interpretations. Common abnormalities that may be
recognized grossly are presented in Figure 1.18. The most
thin, which can be recognized by streaks progressing toward
Figure 1.20 Large items pushed to the feathered edge. Left
the feathered edge. This results in a leukocyte distribution
 Microfilaria (arrow) in an animal with heartworm dlisease. Right. A large
that presents major errors in the differential count. In addi-
clurmp of platelets with trapped leukocytes. Several hundred platelets are
tion, there is not an area adequate for the evaluation of
 contained in this microclot.
erythrocyte abnormalities.
The observer should locate the counting area using the
10x objective. The feathered edge is recognized by a loss of
observer moves further into the thick area of the slide. In
very thick areas, the evaluation of cells is severely compro-
rocyte distribution on the film (Fig. 1.19). Quick, low-power
mised (Fig. l.2l). The counting area is recognized by a
examination of the feathered edge is useful for the detection
monolayer of evenly dispersed cells (Figs 1.22 and 1.23).
and identification of abnormalities such as microfilaria.
Once the counting area is located, the experienced
platelet clumps, and unusual, large cells that are preferen-
observer can estimate the leukocyte concentration on a
tially deposited here (Fig. 1.20). The thick area is recognized
well-prepared blood film. This is useful as a gross quality-
by a progressive superimposition of erythrocytes as the
control measure, and it is recommended that the observer
10
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
0.0
Figure 1.21 High-magnification appearance of clls in the thick area or
Figure 1.23 Low-magnification appearance of the counting area. Note
body of slide. Note the superirnposition of erythrocytes, thus making
the evenly dispersed cells and the ability to visualie the erythrocyte
evaluation of erythrocyte morphology difficult.In addition, specifically
central pallor. The density of leukocytes (arrow) is that expected with a
identifying leukocytes (arrows) is dlifficult to irnpossible. In this area,
leukocyte concentration in the normal range.
leukocytes are spherical or rounded-up rather than flattened. It is not
 possible to see intracellular detail or even the delineation between the
cytoplasm and the nucleus.
Figure 1.24 Low-magnification appearance of the counting area with a
marked decrease in the leukocyte concentration. A rare leukocyte per
field is present (arrow).
Figure 1.22 High-magnification appearance of cells in the counting 
area or monolayer. Note the minimal superimposition of erythrocytes.
which facilitates evaluation of erythrocyte morphology (arrowhead).
Procedures using the 1oox, oil-immersion
Leukocytes (arrow) are flattened on the slide, which makes it possible to
objective
see details of the cytoplasr and nucleus. Note that the nuclear borders 
Once the counting area is located and these assessments are
are sharply delineated from the surrounding cytoplasm.
completed the microscope should be adjusted for oil immer-
sion, high magnification observation. The observer will then
gain experience at this by repetitive comparison of leukocyte
perform a systematic evaluation of the three major cell lines.
density on well-prepared blood films with total leukocyte
This includes a differential count for leukocytes with nota-
counts from a cell counter. The low-power appearances of
tion about any abnormal cells, evaluation of erythrocyte
 a leukocyte count in the normal range, marked leukopenia.
 morphology, and evaluation of platelets.
a        
Within the counting area, the observer will move across fields
and 1.25, respectively.
and obtain the differential leukocyte count by classifying a
11
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Mono
Baso
Figure 1.25 Low-magnification appearance of the counting area with a
Figure 1.26 Basic leukocytes encountered in the differential count.
marked increase in leukocyte concentration. The clensity of leukocytes is
Upper left. Neutrophils. Note the segmented neutrophil (arrow) and the 
2z'l ainbiy ui uaas jeyl ueyt lateann Aqenapisuon
constrictions in the nuclear contour. The band neutrophil (B) has smooth.
parall nuclear contours. Upper middle. Monocyte (Mono). The nucleus
may have any shape, from round to bean-shaped to ameboid and 
band-shaped, as in this exarmple. The cytoplasm is blue-gray and may
minimum of lo0 consecutively encountered cells. Cells are
variably contain vacuoles. Upper right. Two lyrnphocytes (L). Lower left.
classified into a minimum of five to six categories, with the
 An eosinophil (Eo). Note that granules stain similar to the surrounding
presence of abnormal cells being recorded into a category of
erythrocytes. Occasionally, granules may wash out in the staining
"other," in which a specification is made for the individual
 procedure, leaving vacuoles. Lower right. Basophil (B) with dark granules
sample. The common six categories of normal cells-
that stain similar to nuclear chromatin. Note the adjacent neutrophil
neutrophil, band neutrophil, lymphocyte, monocyte, eosin-
(arrowhead) and that neutrophils may have small, poorly staining
ophil, and basophil—are shown in Figure 1.26. (See Chapter
granules that are much smaller than those of eosinophils or basophils.
10 for additional visual details regarding leukocyte identifi-
cation that may be helpful in differential counts.)
Any abnormalities in leukocyte morphology also should
The result of counting lo0 cells is that the number of each
be noted. Important morphologic abnormalities are detailed
leukocyte type is a fraction of 1oo, or a percentage of the
in Chapter 12.
leukocyte population. Once cells are categorized into per-
 Erythrocyte morphology then is systematically evaluated.
centages, they must be converted to absolute numbers for
 The observer should note any important erythrocyte shape
interpretation purposes. This is done by multiplying the total
or color abnormalities; this is particularly important for eval-
leukocyte concentration by the percentage of each leukocyte
lating anemias. (See Chapter 5 for a review of morphologic
type, which yields the absolute number or concentration of 
erythrocyte abnormalities.)
each leukocyte in the blood sample. The following example
The presence of platelet adequacy may be interpreted
illustrates the conversion of percentages to absolute numbers:
from a properly prepared blood film. A minimum of 8-12
platelets per oil immersion high-power (loo0x) field may be
interpreted as adequate. The number seen may be consider-
ably greater than described, however, because of the wide
Example 1.1. Conversion of Percentage
range of normal platelet concentrations. This number is only
Counts to Absolute Concentrations
a guideline for most microscopes with a wide field of view.
 It should be adjusted downward when using a microscope
Total white-blood-cell count = 10,000/μL 
with a narrow field of view and upward if using one with a
 Differential white-blood-cell count:
superwide field of view. If the platelets appear to be
Percentages
Absolute Numbers/μL
decreased, a search for platelet clumps on a low-power
Neutrophils
60%
(6000)
setting at the feathered edge should be performed. The
Lymphocytes
30%
(3000)
ability to look for platelet clumps is also important when a
Monocytes
5%
(500)
cell counter produces a decreased platelet concentration
(500)
value; this is a frequent problem in cats. Morphology of
 Eosinophils 
5%
platelets also may be noted. Platelets that approach the
12
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
diameter of erythrocytes or larger are referred to as macro-
the patient. Because it is roughly equivalent to the packed
cell volume, however, it is not particularly useful for clinical
platelet regeneration, but this interpretation usually is not
interpretations. Most clinicians are more familiar or experi-
applied to macroplatelets in cats.
enced with interpreting packed cell volumes. The hemoglo-
bin value is always proportional to hematocrit and is a
Advanced hematologic techniques
separate, independent measurement. Therefore, the hemo-
Historically, these capabilities were limited to central labo-
globin value may serve as a quality-control adjunct for labo-
ratories. Over the past 20 years there has been rapid tech-
ratory personnel when used to calculate the MCHC.
nological evolution resulting in reduced cost and complexity
such that these capabilities are now available to the common
Mean cell hemoglobin
veterinary facility. Currently, the predominant differences of
The mean cell hemoglobin is calculated from the hemoglo-
the larger, more expensive systems used by commercial
bin concentration and erythrocyte concentration. It is
laboratories are higher throughput rate, automated tube
regarded as being redundant to other measurements and.
handling. and more sophisticated differential counting tech-
therefore, is not useful.
nology. (See Chapter 2 for additional discussion of equip-
ment and laboratories.) Hemograms performed on modern
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration
hematologic instrumentation provide the following addi-
The MCHC is calculated from the hemoglobin concentration
tional measurements.
Items determined
by spectrophotometry
hemoglobin (HGB) relative to the volume of packed eryth-
or
calculation:
rocytes (expressed as g/dL):
● Hemoglobin concentration of blood, g/dL
· Mean cell hemoglobin content, pg
HGB(g/dL)
×100 = MCHC (g/dL)
● Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), g/dL
PCV(%)
Items deterrmined by cell (particle) counting and
sizing:
where PCv is the packed cell volume. An example calcula.
· Erythrocyte concentration of blood, xlo° cells/μL
tion is
● Mean cell volume (the average size of erythrocytes; MCV). fL
● Hematocrit (equivalent to the packed cell volume). %
10 g/dL
×100 = 33.3 g/dL
● Platelet concentration of blood, xlo? cells/μL
30%
● Mean platelet volume (MPV), fL
· Total and differential leukocyte
concentrations,x103
 A universal relationship among mammalian species, other
cells/μL
than the camel family. is that the hemoglobin value nor-
● Reticulocyte concentration, xl0? cells/μL
mally is approximately one-third of the hematocrit value.
 The method and applicability for each of these measure-
Thus, from the relationship described, the MCHC for all
ments are now described.
     s ss 
dL. Because members of the camel family (camel, llama.
Items determined by spectrophotometry
alpaca, vicuna) have relatively more hemoglobin within
or calculation
their cells, their MCHCs are expected to range from 4l to
Hemoglobin concentration
45 g/dL.
This measurement of the quantity of hemoglobin per unit
The MCHC is not particularly useful for clinical interpreta-
volume, expressed as g/dL, is performed in conjunction with
tions: however, it is useful to laboratorians for monitoring
the total leukocyte count. Briefly, a blood sample is diluted,
instrument performance. The rationale is that the hemato-
and a chemical agent is added to rapidly lyse cells, thereby
crit and hemoglobin are determined on different blood ali-
liberating hemoglobin into the fluid phase. Nucleated cells
quots, which are diluted in two different subsystems of the
remain present in the form of a nucleus with organelles
instrument. A malfunction in either of these subsystems
collapsed around it. The absorbance of light at a specific
may result in a mismatch between the hemoglobin and the
wavelength then may be measured by spectrophotometry in
packed cell volume, which is reflected by a deviation from
a small flow cell known as a hemoglobinometer. The absor-
the reference interval. In addition, some abnormalities of
bance of light is proportional to the concentration of hemo-
blood can result in an artifactually increased MCHC, and
globin. The system is calibrated with material of known
these can include any factor that causes a false increase in
hemoglobin concentration using reference techniques.
the spectrophotometric determination of hemoglobin rela-
Interpretation of the hemoglobin concentration is the
tive to the hematocrit. Severe hemolysis in the sample is a
same as that of the packed cell volume, or hematocrit. It is
common cause of an increased MCHC. Alternatively.
an index of the red cell mass per unit volume of blood in
13
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
light transmittance are lipemia and a very large number of
Heinz bodies (see Chapter 8) in cats. Erythrocyte agglutina-
tion, as may occur in immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
may result in a false high MCHC. In this situation, the hemo.
globin measurement is accurate, but the hematocrit is falsely
low because the agglutinated erythrocytes are out of the
 ano nu a a pu s ua ss
sized in derivation of hematocrit.
 Two erythrocyte responses related to anemia may be asso-
ciated with a slightly decreased MCHC. The first is marked
regenerative anemia. Reticulocytes or polychromatophilic
cells are still synthesizing hemoglobin and, therefore, have
not yet attained the cellular hemoglobin concentration of
is required, however, such as greater than 20%, to develop
a detectable decrease in MCHC. The second is severe iron
deficiency. in which cells have a reduction in hemoglobin
Figure 1.27 Principle of electronic impedance cell counting. Left.
 Overview of the fluidic charmber. Cells (dots) are diluted in an isotonic
content because they are smaller (i.e., microcytic) but
fluid (wavy lines). Two electrodes (+ and -) are separated by a glass tube
also may have a minor reduction in cellular hemoglobin
Aa painpuon si juaunn jala ainjade io buuado leus e buuieuo
concentration. There are no causes of a dramatically
the isotonic fluid across the electrodes via the aperture. Vacuum is
decreased MCHC (<28g/dL} other than an analytic instru-
applied to move the fluid and cells through the aperture. Right.
ment error.
Magnified, diagrarnmatic view of the aperture. Cells flow through the 
aperture (arrows). The aperture is a cylindric shape with a volume called
Items determined by cell (particle) counting
the sensing zone. While occupying space within the aperture, cells
and sizing
transiently irmnpede the flow of current. Cell passages are counted a5
Cell counting and sizing technologies
dleflections in the current voltage.In adldition, the magnitude of voltage
A brief overview of cell counting and sizing technology
dleflection is proportional to the volume of the cell.
common to all of these measurements is appropriate. One
of two technologies is used by most hematology instrument
systems.
 The frst is light-scatter measurement of cells passing
current can be measured (Fig. 1.27). In addition, the size of
through a light source. Cells are passed through a flow cell
the cell is proportional to the resultant deflection in current.
that is intersected by a focused laser beam. The physical
This volumetric size discrimination may be used to measure
 properties of the cell scatter light to different degrees and at
the size distribution of erythrocytes, to discriminate platelets
different angles relative to the light source. Cell passages
from erythrocytes, and to partially differentiate leukocytes.
eliciting scatter events may be counted to derive the cell
Cells within a given population are counted and assigned to
concentration. The degree of scatter in the direction of the
a size distribution by particle-size analyzer circuitry (Fig.
light beam, which is known as forward-angle sca tter, is pro-
1.28). The particle-size analyzer assigns each cell to a size
portional to the size of the cell. In addition, measurement
scale that is divided into a large number of discrete size
"bins" of equal size. The size scale is calibrated with particles
cellular properties, which leads to the ability to differentiate
 of known size. By rapidly accumulating several thousand
nuclea ted cell types.
cells, a frequency distribution of the sizes of the cell popula-
The second is more common and incorporated into a
tion may be constructed (Fig. 1.29).
wider range of instrument designs and may also be used as
The size distribution curve is most useful for the evalua-
a second measuring principle in light-scatter systems. This is
tion of erythrocytes in the laboratory. It also may be used to
electronic cell counting. which is also known as impedance
derive leukocyte differential and platelet information.
technology or Coulter technology (after the original inven-
The following measurements derive from the described
tor). It is based on the principle that cells are suspended in
an electrolyte medium, such as saline, that is a good conduc-
able differences in erythrocyte and platelet sizes between
species, instrument systems require careful design and/or
poor conductors of electricity. Thus, these cells impede the
adjustment to accurately obtain the various measurements.
ability of the medium to conduct current in a sensing zone
For example, instruments manufactured for the analysis of
known as an aperture. By simultaneously passing current
human blood do not perform accurately for most animal
and cells through a small space or aperture, deflections in
species without modification.
14
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
Erythrocyte concentration
RELATIVE NUMBER
The erythrocyte concentration is measured directly by
counting the erythrocyte particles in an isotonic dilution of 
blood. This value is not useful for purposes of clinical inter-
pretation. It generally parallels the packed cell volume and
hemoglobin concentration, but the packed cell volume is the
preferred value for the interpretation of erythrocyte mass.
O
O
The erythrocyte concentration is used by the instrument to
R
calculate the packed cell volume (described later).
60
61
62
63
64
65
Mean cell volume, erythrocyte histogram,and red cell
distribution width
CELL VOLUME (fL)
As the erythrocytes are counted, their size distribution is
simultaneously constructed (Fig. l.29), and from this size
distribution, the MCV is easily calculated. The red cell dis-
tribution width (RDW) is a mathematic index describing the
relative width of the size distribution curve. It is the standard
deviation of most the erythrocytes divided by the MCv. The
tails of the erythrocyte distribution usually are excluded
from this mathematic treatment.
These values are useful for the evaluation of anemia. Iron
Figure 1.28 Cell volumes asigned to size bins. In the case of
deficiency results in the production of microcytic erythro-
erythrocytes, a cell volume 5cale of approximately 30 to 250 fL is dlividled 
 cytes, and accelerated erythrocyte regeneration results in the
into a large number of discrete size bins (e.g. 60-61 fL, 61-62 fL). A5
production of macrocytic erythrocytes. Early in these
the cells are counted, they are assigned to size bins (circles).
responses, a widening of the erythrocyte size distribution
Accurmulation of many cells allows the construction of a size distribution
histogram on the cel-volume scale (curve tracing at bottom). The
and RDW value may be observed (Fig. 1.29). As a larger
drawing of bins at the top would represent a srmall area of the total
 proportion of these cells accumulate during the response.
curve.
the curve shifts in the respective direction, and eventually.
the MCV may fall out of the reference interval. The RDW is
more useful in the laboratory. in conjunction with the
examination of blood films, whereas the laboratorian and
the clinician both may interpret the McV. Examples of inter-
MCV = 65 fL
species variation and representative reference intervals for
MCV are
 NUMBER
Humans
80-100 fL
Dogs
60-72fL
ELATIVE
Cats, horses, and cows
39-50 fL
Sheep
25-35fL
Llama
21-29fL
R
Goat
15-25 fL
For additional detail on microcytic and macrocytic anemias
RDW
CELL VOLUME (fL)
and other breed-specific information regarding erythrocyte
SD
size, see Chapter 6.
MCV
Figure 1.29 Histogram of erythrocyte size dlistribution. The x-axis is the
Hematocrit
cell volume, and the y-axis is the relative number of cells at each volume.
One of the advantages of hematology instrumentation is
 Only cells above a specified volume or threshold are included in the
that the hematocrit may be determined by calculation,
anjon ian ueauu aul (l) jeg lean ayl Aq patepui s! s!un sisAieue
thereby avoiding the need for microhematocrit centrifuga-
(MCV) is indicated by the large vertical bar. The RDW (red-cell distribution
tion. The instrument calculates hematocrit (HCT) using the
width) value, an index of volume heterogeneity, is the standard deviation
(SD) divided by the MCV, with the SD being that of the volumes of
erythrocyte concentration (RBC) and the MCV:
erythrocytes within the region indicated by the fine lines marked by the
cbuble arrow.
(MCV ×10-15 L)×(RBC×10'2 L}= HCT
15
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Or, simplified:
handled by using the blood film for comparison and the
visual differential count whenever an instrument analytic
MCV×RBC
=HCT
10
instrument performance by visual inspection of the histo-
gram or cytogram display for each sample to know when
Thus, for example:
analytic failure occurs. It is very difficult, if not impossible.
to determine this simply by monitoring numeric data from
MCV 70 fL x7.00 RBC
the instrument. Therefore, use of this technology requires
HCT49%
10
considerable training and expertise by the operator to
monitor the instrument performance and appropriately
Platelet concentration
 intervene with visual inspection of the blood film.
Platelets may be counted simultaneously with erythrocytes.
Because platelets are considerably smaller than erythrocytes.
 Summary of blood analysis by automated or
however, they are analyzed in a separate area of the particle.
semiautomated instrumentation
size analyzer scale. Most species have little or no overlap
The flow of dilutions, analysis, and calculations within an
between platelet and erythrocyte volume, thereby making
automated hematology instrument is summarized in Figure
such analysis both simple and accurate. Cats are an excep-
1.30. This flow has two main pathways. In one, an isotonic
tion, in that their platelets are approximately twice the
dilution of blood is made for erythrocyte and platelet analy-
volume of those in other domestic species. In addition, mac-
sis. In the other, a dilution is made, into which a lytic agent
is added; in this pathway. leukocytes and hemoglobin are
hematologic disturbances in cats. This response is not spe-
measured.
cific for any specific disease pattern, but it results in consid-
erable overlap between erythrocyte and platelet size
Reticulocyte concentration
distributions, thus making determination of accurate counts
Reticutocyteenumeration
difficult. Therefore, feline platelet counts should be regarded
The reticulocyte concentration is very useful in the evalua-
as being estimates only. Because large platelets tend to get
tion of anemias. The rate of release of reticulocytes from the
counted as erythrocytes, the platelet concentration fre-
bone marrow is the best assessment regarding the function
quently may be artifactually low. In general, if the platelet
of the erythroid component of bone marrow. (See Chapters
concentration falls in the reference interval, it may be
6-8 for a more detailed discussion of the anemias.)
regarded as being adequate. If the platelet concentration is
 The basis for the reticulocyte count involves the events in
decreased, however, the blood film should be examined by
 the maturation of erythroid cells. The developing erythroid
a laboratorian to confirm this finding.
   n  a   
(i.e., hemoglobin) synthesis. As it nears the final stages of
White blood cell and differential leukocyte concentrations
 To analyze leukocytes, a lytic agent is first added to a dilution
BLOOD
membranes, thereby malking the erythrocytes and platelets
"invisible" to the detection technologies. Only nuclear par-
DILUTIONS
ticles of nucleated cells remain, around which is found a
"collapse" or condensation of cytoskeletal elements and any
attached organelles. These particles are measured by one of
LYSE
ISOTONIC
the detection technologies previously described to obtain the
total leukocyte concentration. Using specially formulated
lytic reagents, the degree of collapse may be controlled to
WBC
HGB
RBC
MCV
PLT
MPV
different degrees in different leukocyte types. The result is a
differential size that can be measured by a particle-size ana-
lyzer or light-scatter technology. Automated differential leu-
MCHC -
HCT
kocyte counting is not as perfected in domestic animals as
paewoine ue ui shemued sisAleue pooig jo Aewuns oe'l aunoi
in humans; however, the procedure is reasonably accurate
instrument. Two major dilutions are made (see text). In the left pathway.
for normal blood and, therefore, is very useful in situations
 a lytic agent is acdded, and leukocytes are counted and the hemoglobin
such as safety assessment trials, in which most (or all) of the
concentration measured. In the right pathway, erythrocytes and platelets
blood samples to be analyzed are normal. when blood is
 are counted and sized. From the direct measurements, the hematocrit is 
abnormal, however, the frequency of analytic error in the
calculated. A cross-check between the two pathways is provicded by
differential count increases considerably. Analytic errors are
calculation of the mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
16
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
Retic-Set
NMB
Figure 1.31 Reticulocytes. Top. Representative reticulocyte (arrow) using
Figure 1.32 Examples of reticulocyte stains. Left. New methylene blue 
new methylene blue stain. Note the dark-staining, aggregated organelles
in a liquid dropper bottle. Right. Commercial preparation of brilliant cresyl 
in several reticulocytes. Bottorm. Blood film stained with Wright-Giermsa
blue. The stain is coated on the bottom of disposable tubes.
stain. Polychromatophilic cells (arrowheads) are roughly equivalent to
reticulocytes on the counterpart stain.
concentration (RBC) by the percentage of erythrocytes that
maturity. the nucleus undergoes degeneration and is
are reticulocytes:
extruded from the cell, and the organelles supporting the
synthetic and metabolic events are removed. After denucle-
RBC/μL x% Reticulocyte = Reticulocytes/μL
ation of the metarubricyte. the remaining erythrocyte
undergoes its final maturation, which involves the loss of
Some instrument systems are also capable of reticulocyte
ribosomes and mitochondria during a period of l-2 days. To
enumeration. The method involves staining erythrocytes
enumerate reticulocytes, a stain is applied to erythrocytes.
with a fluorescent dye that binds to residual RNA in the
thereby causing aggregation of these residual organelles.
reticulocyte that is not present in the mature erythrocyte.
This results in visible, clumped granular material that can be
RNA content, proportional to fluorochrome per cell, is mea-
seen microscopically (Fig. 1.3l). The aggregation is referred 
sured and gated to differentiate reticulocytes from mature
to as reticulum, hence the name reticulocyte. Reticulocytes
erythrocytes and other nonerythroid cell types. The percent
are equivalent to the polychromatophilic cells observed on
and absolute values are presented as described above.
the Wright-stained blood films (Fig. l.3l). Evaluation of
polychromatophilic cells on the Wright-stained blood film
Interpretationof the reticulocyte concentration
can provide an assessment of the bone marrow response to
The reticulocyte concentration is most useful in dogs and
anemia. The appearance of these cells, however, is more
cats, and it also has some application in cows. It is not used
subjective, and they are more difficult to quantitate than
in horses, however. Reticulocyte maturation is confined to
counting the corresponding cells on the reticulocyte stain.
the marrow space in the horse, and reticulocytes almost
Stains that can be used are new methylene blue (liquid)
never are released into their circulation. Reticulocyte con-
and brilliant cresyl blue, which is available in disposable
centration guidelines for domestic mammals are the concen-
tubes that facilitate the procedure (Fig. 1.32). First, several
trations to be expected when the hematocrit is normal:
drops of blood are added to the stain in a tube. The tube
then is mixed and incubated for l0 minutes. From this
Dogs and cats
0-60,000 cells/μL
mixture, a conventional blood film is made and air-dried. A
Cows
0 cells/μL
total of loo0 erythrocytes are counted and categorized as
Horses
 Do not release reticulocytes
either reticulocytes or normal cells. From this, the percent-
age of reticulocytes is derived. Interpretation of the percent-
When anemia is present, a greater degree of release from
 age reticulocytes is somewhat misleading, however, because
the marrow is to be expected if the marrow can respond
it does not account for the degree of anemia. Thus, for pur-
to the anemia. This gives rise to the following guidelines for
poses of interpretation, the absolute reticulocyte concentra-
the interpretation of reticulocyte concentrations with respect
tion should be calculated by multiplying the erythrocyte
to the type of anemia present:
17
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Nonregenerative anemia to
0-10,000 cells/μL
Reticulocyte maturation in cats also may be viewed as a
very poor regeneration
continuum (Fig. l.35). Aggregate reticulocytes mature to
 Nonregenerative to poorly
10,000-60,000 cells/μL
the punctate form in approximately 12 hours; the punctate
regenerative anemia
cells may continue to mature for another l0-l2 days.
 Regenerative anemia with
60,000-200,000 cells/μL
 Because of the short maturation time of aggregate reticulo-
mild to moderate output
cytes, these cells are the best indicator of active marrow
 Maximal regeneration
200,000-500,000 ce1ls/μL
release. Therefore, only aggregate cells are counted in cats,
and interpretive guidelines apply to this cell type only. Expe-
 rience is required to exclude punctate cells when perforrming
Reticulocyte mafuration
In dogs. reticulocyte maturation occurs in 24-48 hours.
the reticulocyte count.
Maturation involves a continuum of progressive loss of the
Organization of the complete blood count
visible 0rganelles (Fig. 1.33).
Cats are unique in that more than one kind of reticulocyte
(hemogram)
 may be present. These reticulocytes are of the aggregate and
It is useful to summarize the described basic and advanced
the punctate forms (Fig. l.34). The aggregate reticulocyte
determinations in a way that shows the organization of how
has a clumped reticulum that appears to be identical to that
they are performed and interpreted. This provides a mental
of other species. In the punctate reticulocyte, discrete dots
 framework for simplifying the complexity of this informa-
are seen without any clumping: other species do not have
  a   a   
this reticulocyte counterpart. Only aggregate reticulocytes
techniques for generating data may be organized conceptu-
ally as direct measurements, microscopic procedures, and
appear to be polychromatophilic with Wright stain. Punctate
reticulocytes are indistinguishable from normal, mature
calculations. The complete blood count may include:
Direct Measurements
erythrocytes with Wright stain.
● Packed cell volume (by microhematocrit centrifugation)
● Hemoglobin concentration
24 -48 HOURS
· Red cell concentration (RBC)
● Mean cell volume (MCV)
HATURE
● White cell concentration
CELL
● Plasma proteins (by refractometer)
METARUBRICYTE
Figure 1.33 Sequential erythroid maturation a5 related to the
aeanuap agneia aul shop ui paaidiaui pe us aaina
NRBC
12hr
10-12 days
on leaving the reticulocyte. Reticulum is progressively lost during a
M
24-48-hour period, resulting in a mature erythrocyte.
中
Figure 1.35 Feline reticulocyte maturation, progressing from left to
right. Top. Cells stained with new methylene blue. After denucleation of
the metarubricyte (NRBC), an aggregate reticulocyte is formed. This cell
matures to the punctate form in approximately 12 hours. The punctate
forms continue to mature by slow loss of punctate granules during a
Figure 1.34 Feline reticulocyte morphology with new methylene blue
10-12-day period. Mature cells (M) on the right have no granularity.
 stain. Three aggregate reticulocytes are in the field; note the 
Bottom. Corresponding cells stained with Wright-Giermsa stain. Note that
representative one (arrow). The remainder of the cells are punctate
polychromatophilic cells correspond to aggregate reticulocytes. Punctate 
reticulocytes; note the representative cells (arrowheads)
 and mature cells are indistinguishable with Wright-Giemsa stain.
18
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
· Platelet concentration
100
● Mean platelet volume (MPV)
Fragile
Microscopic Procedures
75
· Differential white cell count
· Red cell morphology
· Platelet morphology and assessment of adequacy
50
● Microscopic reticulocyte enumeration in patients with
anemia
25
Calculations
● Hematocrit, when instrument derived
● Erythrocyte indices (e.g., MCHC, MCH, and RDW)
0.9
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.10
● Absolute white blood cell differential values
SALINE CONCENTRATION (%)
●Absolute reticulocyte count
Figure 1.36 Erythrocyte fragility curve. Percentage hemolysis is plotted
These determinations are organized into a report form
against decreasing saline concentration. Note the normnal curve (arrow
that aids the clinician in efficiently interpreting the informa-
fo us e a pazuoan s Ae aoa pasail (e pae
tion. The best way for this information to be organized is
the curve to the left (arrow marked Fragile).
into banks of data that relate to the three major cell lines
(i.e., erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets). For each cell
line, all pieces of relevant information are organized in one
lent to a positive Coombs test. False-positive reactions also
place on the form.
may occur, but are less well documented because the test is
typically only performed when one suspects the disease.
Laboratory tests useful in the diagnosis of
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Saline fragility test
Coombs or antiglobulin test
Resistance of patient erythrocytes to hemolysis is measured
The Coombs or antiglobulin test is used as an aid in estab-
in decreasing concentrations of saline. This test is not com-
lishing the dia gnosis of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
monly used because of its complexity and labor intensity. It 
by detecting species-specific immunoglobulin that is adsorbed
remains a useful diagnostic aid, however, in occasional cases
or attached to the surface of erythrocytes. The test uses the
of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in which other hall-
Coombs reagent, which is a polyclonal serum (usually pre-
mark pieces of information are not clearly interpretable. An
pared in rabbits) to the immunoglobulins of the species of
equal aliquot of erythrocytes is added to a series of tubes
interest. Some reagent manufacturers claim their reagent
con taining decreasing concentrations of saline. After incuba-
 also detects complement. The procedure involves washing
tion, the tubes undergo centrifugation, and the hemoglobin
the erythrocytes in saline to remove plasma proteins and
concentration then is measured on the supernatant. A tube
immunoglobulin that may be nonspecifically associated
with distilled water serves as an index for loo% hemolysis.
  e s   n  s 
A plot of the percentage hemolysis and the concentration of
bated with the Coombs serum. If appreciable patient immu-
saline facilitates interpretation, as shown in Figure 1.36.
noglobulin is attached to the erythrocytes, the Coombs
These tests must not be used or interpreted in isolation.
serum induces erythrocyte agglutination. By means of two
They are to be used in conjunction with analysis of other
binding sites per molecule, the Coombs reagent immuno-
hematologic data and morphologic evaluation of the blood
globulin binds the patient immunoglobulin attached to the
film by the laboratorian. Because of the frequency of false-
erythrocytes. The two binding sites result in progresive
negative and -positive results with the Coombs test, inter-
bridging of erythrocytes, which is visualized as agglutina-
preting the results of this test in the light of the other
tion. The absence of agglutination is interpreted as being a
available hematologic information is important. (See Chapter
negative result, whereas the presence of agglutination is
 8 for a detailed discussion of the strategy for diagnosing
interpreted as being a positive result. Appropriate controls
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.)
are performed as well.
False-negative reactions are a common problem with the
Coombs test, likely because of the elution of pathologically
Chemistry techniques
adsorbed immunoglobulin or immune complexes during
washing of the erythrocytes in preparation for the test. The
A wide variety of techniques, which have been incorporated
best evidence for this is that prominent autoagglutination
-     rd 
clinical chemistry. No attempt is made here to discuss all of
firmed microscopically, may be interpreted as being equiva-
these techniques and instruments, but the basic information
19
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
on a variety of chemistry techniques used in analyzing
blood and urine osmolality or osmolarity. Protein electro-
samples from animals is provided. A complete understand-
phoresis is used to measure concentrations of the various
 ing of these techniques is not necessary for veterinarians
protein fractions comprising the total serum protein, espe-
who send clinical chemistry samples to a reference labora-
cially in samples with either decreased or increased protein
tory: however, an increasing number of chemistry instru-
concentrations. Light-scatter techniques that quantitate tur-
ments are being marketed to veterinarians for in-practice
bidity are used less commonly to measure the concentra-
lse. Therefore, an understanding of how these instruments
tions of substances such as large protein molecules.
work is important for understanding the advantages and
disadvantages of the various instruments, the laboratory
Photometry
techniques necessary for their use, the problems that might
Photometry is a general term used to describe an analytical
arise during their use, and the basic principles underlying
chemistry technique in which the concentrations of sub-
their variations in design.
stances and the activities of enzymes are determined by
 The chemistry techniques discussed in this chapter and
measuring the intensity of light passing through or emitted
the substances that may be measured with them are listed
from a test chamber. This test chamber contains the sub-
in Table 1.l. Absorbance or reflectance photometry is used
stance to be detected and, in most cases, reagents intended
to measure most of the substances in clinical chermistry pro-
to react with that substance to produce a color reaction.
files. Fluorometry also is used to measure certain analytes
Strictly speaking. the term spectrophotometry should be
in some clinical chemistry analyzers. Blood pH, partial pres-
applied when the instrument being used has the ability to
sures of carbon dioxide and oxygen, and concentrations of
 produce light of a variety of wavelengths through sorme type
electrolytes such as sodium, potassium, and chloride most
of light-fractionating device, such as filters, prisms, or dif-
commonly are measured by electrochemical methods.
fra ction gra tings.
Atomic absorption spectrophotometers are not commonly
used in clinical chemistry laboratories: rather, they are
Absorbance spectrophotometry
more common in laboratories testing for elements consid-
Absorbance spectrophotometry is an analytic technique in
ered nutrients and/or toxicants. Osmometers are common
which concentrations of substances are determined by
in clinical chemistry laboratories and are used to measure
directing a beam of light through a solution containing the
Table 1.1 Techniques in veterinary clinical chemistry and substances measured with those techniques.
Technique
 Substances Measured
Photometry
Absorbance photometry
Glucose, BUN, creatine, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, protein, albumin, bilirubin, bile
acids, ammmonia, cholesterol, bicarbonate, total CO2, enzymes
 Reflectance photometry
Similar to those measured by absorbance photometry
 Atomic absorption spectrophotometry 
Many elements including nutrients and toxicants (e.g. calcium,? magnesium,? lead, arsenic)
Fluorometry
Glucose, bilirubin, bile acids, calcium, magnesium, enzymes, antithrombin ll, heparin.
plasminogen, hormones, drugs 
 Light-scatter techniques
Turbidinetry
Immunoglobulins, antigen-antibody complexes, other large proteins, drug5
 Nephalometry 
 Immunoglobulins, antigen-antibody complexes, other large proteins, drug5
Electrochemical methods
 Potentiormetry
Blood pH, PCO2, sodium,b potassium,b chlorideb
Amperometry
PO2
Coulometry and conductometry
BUN
Osrmometry
 Osmolality or osmolarity
 Protein electrophoresis
Albumin, α-globulin. β-globulin, vglobulin
BUN, blood urea nitrogen
aMay be used to measure the concentration of these substances in solid tissues that have been ashed or digested. Absorbance photometry is more
commonly used to measure concentrations of these substances in serum or plasma.
bElectrodes used to measure concentrations of these electrolytes are called ion-selective electrodes.
cConductometry also is used to perform cell counts in some hematology analyzers.
20
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
substance to be detected (or a product of that substance) and
is that color because it reflects the green area of the visible
then measuring the amount of light that either of these
spectrum and has absorbed the other wavelengths of light
absorb. The principles described here are incorporated into
in that spectrum. Likewise, a green solution is green because
altomated and semiautomated processes on today's chem-
it allows light in the green area of the visible spectrum to be
istry analyzers. Automation, from sample and reagent addi-
transmitted through it and has absorbed the visible light of
tion management to calculation of test results to generation
other wavelengths. These same principles also apply to light
of a patient diagnostic report, is made possible by computer
outside the visible spectrum. Different substances absorb and
con trol and information processing integral to these systems.
   r    saa r 
To understand absorbance spectrophotometry, some basic
that substance. The pattern in which a substance absorbs
knowledge regarding light is necessary. Typically. light is
light at various wavelengths is known as its absorption spec-
classified by its wavelength, which is measured in nanome-
trum, and each substance has its own unique absorption
ters (nm). Light with the shortest wavelengths (<380nm) is
spectrum.
termed ultraviolet (UV) light (Table 1.2). Light in the visible
A basic absorbance spectrophotometer is diagrammed in
spectrum has wavelengths of 380-750nm. Light with the
Figure 1.37. Various sources of light can be used, with the
choice being based on the portion of the spectrum desired
light. The energy of light is inversely proportional to its
plus issues such as longevity of the bulb and the basic instru-
Wavelength; therefore, Uv light has the highest energy and
ment design. In the application of absorbance spectropho-
IR light the lowest.
tometry for measuring the concentration of a substance, a
The visible spectrum includes a variety of wavelengths
wavelength of light that is absorbed by that substance (or
that represent the colors with which we are familiar. It is
by a product of that substance) is used. This wavelength is
important to remember that color results from the transmit-
determined by examining the absorption spectrum of the
tance or reflectance of light. In other words, a green object
substance of interest. Usually, the wavelength chosen is the
one at which the maximum absorbance occurs. Occasion-
ally. however, some other wavelength may be chosen to
avoid interference with substances such as hemoglobin and
Table 1.2 Wavelengths resulting in ultraviolet light, various colors of
bilirubin, which may be present in serum samples secondary
visible light, and infrared light.
to hemolysis (in vitro or in vivo) or disease leading to high
bilirubin concentration. Hemoglobin and bilirubin have
Wavelength (nm)
their own absorption spectrums, and methods attempt to
avoid using the wavelengths that these substances strongly
<380
None (ultraviolet)
absorb.
380-440
Violet
 A monochromator is an optical device between the light
440-500
Blue
- an   l a  a  
500-580
Green
trum of light that passes to and through the cuvette. Mono-
580-600
Yellow
 chromators can be filters, prisms. or diffraction gratings.
600-620
Orange
620-750
When attempting to produce light of a specific wavelength.
Red
750-2000
None (infrared)
the actual range of wavelengths produced by a monochro-
mator is called the spectral bandwidth. Each type of mono-
chromator can produce rays of light at certain spectral
Light
Focusing  Monochromator  Focusing  Cuvette
Detector
Meter
Sourcc
Device
Device
Figure 1.37 Components of a simple
absorbance spectrophotormeter. Arrows
represent light.
21
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
bandwidths. Monochromators capable of producing light of
which requires splitting the light beam and then shining
a narrow spectral bandwidth have more spectral purity. The
each beam through either the test or the blank cuvette.
importance of spectral purity varies with the type of spec.
Photodetectors collect the light that has passed through
trophotometry, however, and with the substance being ana-
the cuvette (i.e., the light that has not been absorbed).
lyzed. Filters may be a thin layer of colored glass that
Several different technologies can be used in photodetectors.
transmits light at wavelengths corresponding to the filter's
 Factors such as cost, sensitivity, speed of response to changes 
color, or they may be more complex structures, with a layer
in light intensity, propensity to fatigue (i.e., decreased
of dielectric material sandwiched between two pieces of
response over time despite constant light intensity). and
glass coated with a thin layer of silver. The latter type of
heat sensitivity help to determine which technology is used
filter transmits light at wavelengths equal to or at multiples
in a given application. Regardless of the type of photodetec-
of the thickness of the dielectric layer. In some cases, mul-
tor, the underlying mechanism involves the production of
tiple filters may be placed in series to produce light of greater
electrons and, therefore, an electrical current in response to
spectral purity. Prisms separate the wavelengths of white
light striking the detector. This electrical current then is
light by refracting this light. As light passes through a prism,
transmitted to a readout device or meter.
shorter wavelengths are bent more than longer wavelengths.
Readout devices or meters measure the electrical current
thus separating them. The desired wavelength then can be
produced by the photodetector. This current can be read out
selected from this spectrum for transmission. Diffraction
directly. but more commonly. this information is converted
gratings are a metal or glass plate covered with a layer of
to a readout that gives either the absorbance or the actual
metal alloy into which multiple parallel grooves have been
etched. When the grating is illuminated, each groove sepa-
 sion usually requires some type of microprocessor, which
rates the light into a spectrum, and light of specific wave-
can store and use calibration information (discussed later)
lengths is produced as wavelengths that are in phase are
and also automatically adjust for the reading of the blank
reinforced and those that are not in phase are cancelled.
sample. The actual readout might be presented as some type
The focusing devices usually are lenses or slits that are
of digital display, but it more commonly is printed.
inserted before and/or after the monochromator. This place-
Modern readout devices also incorporate recorders for
ment varies with the instrument. Focusing devices are used
obtaining multiple absorbance readings on the same sample
to narrow the light beam, to produce parallel light rays, and/
over time. This is most useful in kinetic assays. In such
or to regulate the intensity of the light reaching the photo-
assays, a reaction is allowed to occur over a period of time.
detector. In some modern instruments, application of fiber
and the production or disappearance of the absorbing sub-
optics has eliminated some of the lens and slits used for nar-
stance is evaluated at multiple time points by measuring the
rowing and directing the light beams.
absorbance of light normally absorbed by that substance.
Cuvettes are also known as absorption cells. They have
The change in absorbance over the time period is propor-
constant dimensions for a given instrument, and they can
tional to the activity of an enzyme or to the concentration
be made of various materials (e.g. glass, quartz, or plastic)
 of a substance, depending on which is being assayed. Such
and be of various shapes (e.g., round, square, or rectangu-
an assay obviously requires a device that can record and use
lar) . The materials or shapes used depend on the instrument
data produced over time.
design and on the portion of the light spectrum being used.
 In addition to the basic instrumentation of absorbance
During analysis, a solution containing the absorbing sub-
stance is placed in the cuvette. and the light rays that
used in obtaining measurements via this technology also
have been produced pass through the cuvette walls and the
should be understood. When a light beam of a certain wave.
solution. If the correct wavelength has been chosen, the
length is projected through a solution containing a substance
substance absorbs this light in direct proportion to its con-
that absorbs light at that wavelength, the light is absorbed in
centration. In addition to the absorbing substance, the
direct proportion to the concentration of that substance. The
cuvette walls and the solution in which the substance is
intensity of the light leaving the solution, therefore, is less
suspended also absorb small amounts of light. It is, therefore,
than the intensity of the light entering the solution. If these
    '   
the effect of these other factors, and this typically is accom-
light (% T) can be calculated. For instance, if the intensity of
plished by taking an absorbance reading on a cuvette con-
light entering the cuvette is designated as I, and the intensity
taining only the solution in which the substance is suspended
of light leaving the cuvette as I. then %T is calculated as
(i.e., the solution contains none of the absorbing substance).
The absorbance reading of the instrument typically is set to
I2
%T=
zero while reading the absorbance of this "blank." Some
spectrophotometers are designed to read the absorbance of
The intensity of light entering the cuvette is measured by
the test solution and the blank solution simultaneously.
projecting light of the appropriate wavelength through a
22
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
Absurtancx
4bs
Concentration
Concentratlon
C1
C2C3
C4
Concentration
(l) anuesue aheaad yaamag sdushoeian aul se'l an
Figure 1.39 Use of calibrators to establish a calibration curve. In this
absorbance (Absorb), and concentration of a substance being measured.
case, four calibrators (C1, C2, C3, C4) were used. Note the linear
Note that as the concentration increases, %T decreases logarithmically or
relationship between concentration of the substance being mmeasured and
nonlinearly and absorbance increases linearly.
resulting absorbance.
cuvette containing the solution in which the substance to
centration of the substance in question. The concentration
be measured is suspended. In this case, however, the solu-
(c) then can be calculated as
tion contains none of the substance. Therefore, %Tis set at
100% for this "blank" solution. The solution containing the
Concentration =
substance to be measured is then placed in a similar cuvette.
ab
and the light is intensity measured, after which the % T can
be assessed.
For Beer's law to apply. a linear relationship must exist
 In the described situation, transmittance varies inversely
between concentration and absorbance. In some cases, this
and logarithmically with the concentration of the substance
might be true only up to certain concentrations or absor-
being measured. If %T versus the concentration of such a
bance levels. To assure that Beer's law applies to a given
substance is plotted, a curved line results (Fig. 1.38). Light
assay, calibration solutions (also known as calibrators),.
that is not transmitted is absorbed; therefore, transmittance
which contain known concentrations of the substance to be
and absorbance are inversely related, as described by the
measured, are used. The ranges of concentrations used as
formula:
calibrators should include those that might be measured in
samples from patients. Absorbance results for each calibrator
Absorbance = 2- log %T
are plotted against the concentrations of these calibrators to
establish a calibration curve. Ideally, this curve is a straight
Because of this relationship. absorbance of light increases
line rather than an actual curve, showing that a linear rela-
linearly with increasing concentration of the substance
tionship exists between absorbance and concentration (Fig.
being measured (Fig. 1.38). This linear relationship between
1.39). In most applications, one or more calibrators are
absorbance and concentration makes it more convenient to
included with each series of sample measurements. It is best,
deal with absorbance than with transmittance during spec-
however, to reestablish the calibration curve at frequent
trophotometric  analysis.  Modern   spectrophotometers
intervals (at least daily). because many slight day-to-day
measure transmittance, but then convert transmittance to
changes in the conditions of the test can affect this curve.
absorbance. In addition, microprocessors in most spectro-
These changes (e.g., light intensity, temperature, condition
photometers convert absorbance results to concentrations or
of reagents) can occur even in situations when instruments 
activities and then report these in a final diagnostic test
and reagents have been designed to minimize such varia-
result format
tion. If a linear relationship does exist between the concen-
The concentration of a substance can be calculated from
trations of the calibrators and the resulting absorbances, the
the absorbance by use of Beer's law:
solutions are said to obey Beer's law, and the calibrators can
be used to establish a calibration constant (K):
A = abc
Concentration of the calibration solution
K=
where A is the absorbance measured, a is the molar absorp-
 Absorbance of the calibration solution
tivity (also known as the proportionality constant). b is the
light path in centimeters (the diameter or width of the
If K is known, then the concentration of an unknown solul-
cuvette through which the light passes), and c is the con-
tion can be calculated as:
23
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Concentration of unknown = (Absorbance of unknown)× K
Note that the second portion of this formula is the calibra-
tion constant (K).
 Microprocessors in instruments can plot absorbance results
Kinetic assays typically have been used to measure enzyme
from calibrators, assure that a linear relationship exists, and
activities, but also have been adapted to measure the con-
calculate the calibration constant. These results are stored,
centrations of many analytes in blood. Typically, enzyme
and the concentrations of unknowns are calculated by mea-
concentrations are not measured directly in clinical chemis-
suring their absorbances and calibration constant.
try. Rather, the amount of enzyme in the serum usually is
A linear relationship between concentration and absor-
gauged indirectly. by the activity of that enzyme. Enzymes
bance over the possible range of unknown concentrations is
are proteins that catalyze (i.e., speed-up) chemical reactions.
highly desirable, but a nonlinear calibration curve also can
with the result that substrate is converted to product more
be used to derive unknown concentrations. In such a case,
quickly:
enough calibrators must be used to define the shape of the
calibration curve, and as with a linear calibration curve, the
Enzyme
range of calibrator concentrations should include the pos-
sible range of concentrations that might be found in samples
Substrate
Product
from patients.
 In absorbance spectrophotometry. two types of assay
To measure an enzyme's activity. the rate at which it con-
methods—endpoint or kinetic—may be used. In both types,
verts a substrate to a product must be assessed. The more
the same principles of spectrophotometry described earlier
apply. Endpoint assays usually are applied when measuring
assumed to be. To measure the rate of conversion from
the concentration of some preexisting substance in serum or
substrate to product, the rate at which the product is being
plasma. In such an assay, reagent(s) is added to a quantity
produced must be assessed, and this requires multiple mea-
of serum, and a chemical reaction occurs. The product
surements of the product concentration over time. Because
resulting from this reaction then is measured by spectropho-
this type of assay is a dynamic process, it is termed a kinetic
tometry. In other words, the solution in which the reaction
assay. In a kinetic assay of enzyme activity, a solution con-
has occurred is placed in a cuvette (or the reaction itself
taining the substrate of the enzyme of interest is added to
might have occurred in the cuvette), a light beam of a wave-
the sample serum in a cuvette that already is in a spectro-
length absorbed by the product is projected through a
photometer. When enzyme in this serum begins to convert
cuvette, and the absorbance is measured. By using a calibra-
substrate to product, absorbance is measured periodically by
tion curve and/or a calibration constant, the concentration
the same methods and using the same principles of spectro-
of the substance being measured then is calculated. An
photometry described previously (i.e., using a light beam of
 a wavelength absorbed by the product). In this process, the
concentra tion of serum calcium:
conversion rate of substrate to product is monitored. This
rate can be converted to enzyme activity by using a formula
calcium + o-cresolphthalein complexone
involving the rate of absorbance change and several con-
→ calcium-cresolphthalein complexone
stants related to the absorptivity of the product as well as to
test characteristics such as sample volume, total sample
volume, and light path.
In this assay, the substance of interest (i.e., calcium) is
An example of a kinetic enzyme assay is an assay of
complexed with cresolphthalein complexone, which has a
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity:
purple color and absorbs light at a wavelength of 570 nm.
This reaction is allowed to occur long enough to allow nearly
all of the calcium in the sample to be complexed. More
α-Ketogluterate + L-alanine
ALT
L-Glutamate + Pyruvate
calcium-cresolphthalein complexone results in more light
being absorbed, and a higher concentration of calcium
reported by the instrument. After the absorbance is deter-
LDH
Pyruvate + NADH + H+
L-Lactate + NAD+
mined, it is compared with the absorbance of a calibration
solution, and the absorbance of the unknown then is calcu-
where LDH is lactate dehydrogenase. In this assay. NADH is
lated as:
converted to NADt at a rate proportional to the activity of
ALT in the sample. The NADH absorbs light at 340 nm, and
Concentration of the
its rate of disappearance is measured by periodically assess-
Concentration of  Absorbance of
calibration solution
ing the absorbance of the reaction mixture. The rate of
the unknown
the unknown
 Absorbance of the
absorbance change in this mixture can be converted to units
calibration solution
of ALT activity.
24
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
As previously noted, kinetic assays also are used for mea-
duced. As a result, formulas are required to convert the
suring the concentrations of preexisting substances in the
reflectance results to concentrations. These formulas vary
blood. In these assays, the rate of appearance or disappear-
with the type of instrument being used.
ance of an absorbing substance is monitored by periodically
measuring the absorbance of the reaction mixture. An
Atomic absorption spectrophotometry
example of a kinetic assay for measuring the concentration
Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AA) is used for mea-
of a preexisting substance is an assay of the blood urea nitro-
suring the concentrations of many elements. Advantages of
 gen (BUN) concentration, which uses the chemical reaction
AA include its superior sensitivity (i.e., it can detect smaller
concentra tions) and its ability to measure the concentrations 
of various elements. AA is typically limited to toxicology
CO+2NH4+
laboratories for clinical purposes. Applications include mea-
surement of concentrations of elements such as lead, copper.
NH+ + α-Ketogluterate+ NADH -
→ L-Glutamate + NAD+ + H0
and selenium in fluids or tissues. As the name implies, AA
involves measuring absorption of energy by atoms. This
where GLDH is glutamate dehydrogenase. In this reaction.
technique involves heating a sample in a flame that is hot
the disappearance rate of NADH is monitored by periodically
enough to cause the element in question to dissociate from
assessing the absorbance of the reaction mixture at a wave-
its chemical bonds and form neutral atoms—but not hot 
length of 340 nm. The disappearance rate is proportional to
enough to cause large numbers of electrons to jump to the 
the urea nitrogen concentration in the serum being tested.
excited state. These atoms then are in a low-energy (i.e.,
The BUN concentration is calculated by relating the rate
ground) state and can absorb light of a narrow wavelength
of change in the absorbance of the sample with that of a
that is specific for that element. If a light of this wavelength
calibrator.
is projected through the flame, the amount of light absorbed
Enzyme activity also can be measured by endpoint
is proportional to the concentration of the element in the
methods, which involve mixing serum with reagent con-
sample. Measurement of the amount of light absorbed,
taining substrate for the enzyme and then allowing the
therefore, allows the concentration of that element in the
sample to be calculated. Focusing devices, photodetectors.
period of time. At the end of that period, the concentration
meters, and readout devices serve the same purposes in AA
of substrate or product is measured. The more substrate used
as in other types of spectrophotometry.
or product produced during the time period, the higher the
enzyme activity is assumed to be.
Fluorometry
Fluorometric techniques can be used in a wide variety of
Reflectance photometry
applications, ranging from measurement of the concentra-
The principle of reflectance photometry is used in a few
tions of substances to assessment of the numbers and other
large, automated clinical chemistry analyzers and in several
characteristics of larger particles, including cells. This section
 of the smaller clinical chemistry analyzers designed for in-
discusses use of these techniques in measuring concentra-
practice use. Most of these instruments use "dry chemistry"
tions of various substances in body fluids.
systems. in which the fluid to be analyzed is placed on a
Among the substances that can be measured by these
carrier that contains the reagents for the assay. This carrier
can take different forms, including a dry fiber pad or a mul-
chemistry analysis (e.g. bilirubin, bile acids, glucose,
tilayer of film. After the sample is applied, the chemical
calcium, magnesium, and various enzymes), substances
reaction occurs in this carrier, and a product is formed in a
related to coagulation (e.g., antithrombin Ill, heparin, and
concentration proportional to that of the substance being
plasminogen). drugs, and hormones. Some of these sub-
measured. The carrier then is illuminated with diffused light.
stances are fluorescent; in other cases, measurement of these
and the intensity of the light reflected from the carrier is
substances is possible by linking other fluorescent substances 
measured and compared with that of either the original
to the analyte of interest, either directly or indirectly. as the
illuminating light or the intensity of light reflected off a
result of a series of chemical reactions.
reference surface. Reflectance photometry. therefore, is
The basic principle underlying use of fluorometry is that
analogous to absorbance photometry in that the chemical
certain substances, when exposed to light of the proper
reaction occurring in the carrier results in a product that
wavelength, will fluoresce. Fluorescence results when a sub-
absorbs a portion of the illuminating light. The remaining
stance absorbs light at one wavelength and then emits light
light is reflected, analogous to transmittance in absorbance
at a longer (i.e., lower energy) wavelength. The ability to
spectrophotometry. to a photodetector that measures its
fluoresce varies with a compound's chemical structure;
intensity. The intensity of the reflected light is not related
therefore, not all compounds can be readily measured by
linearly to the concentration of the substance being pro-
fluorometry.
25
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Cuvctte
Exccss exciting light
Fluorescence
Focusing
Light
Focusing
Primary
Focusing
Device
MonochroniatorDevice
Device
Source
Secondary
Monochromator
Focusing
Devicc
Ietector
Readout
Dcvicc
Figure 1.40 The basic design of a
fluorometer. Arrows represent light.
The basic design of a fluorometer is shown in Figure 1.40.
Just as each fluorescent compound has an apparent excita-
Sq no s sa n 's i r  
tion spectrum of light in which optimum fluorescence
and lasers, can be used. Most fluorescent compounds absorb
occurs, each compound also has an emission spectrum,
light at 300-550 nm; therefore, light sources must produce
which is the spectrum of wavelengths in which most of the
light at these wavelengths. The primary monochromator
emitted fluorescent energy from that compound is found.
isolates light at the proper wavelength to produce fluores-
To develop a fluorescent assay, the emission spectrum of the
cence in the substance being analyzed. Each compound can
compound of interest must be determined. Then, the narrow
best be caused to fluoresce at specific wavelengths, and these
band of wavelengths in which maximum emission occurs is
isolated by the secondary monochromator. Light passing
of the compound. Of these wavelengths, a narrow band at
from the monochromator is collected by a photodetector.
which peak fluorescence is caused usually is chosen to be
measured, and processed in a manner similar to that
isolated by the primary monochromator and, from there.
described for spectrophotometry. Various lenses, slits and in
transmitted to the cuvette. When light strikes the solution
some cases, polarizing devices are included in fluorometers
in the cuvette, it produces fluorescence in the substance
to help direct and/or polarize light as well as to reduce stray
being measured. The detector of this fluorescent energy
light in the system.
usually is placed at a 90° angle from the projected (i.e., the
A wide variety of fluorometer designs are available. Strictly
exciting) light beam. This placement means that light from
speaking. fluorometers are instruments that can produce
the exciting light beam continues straight through the
light at only a few wavelengths, because their primary mono-
cuvette and does not need to be dealt with by the secondary
chromator is a filter. Many instruments that use fluorometry
monochromator or the detector. Because fluorescent energy
have primary monochromators that are diffraction gratings
is projected in all directions, this energy can be measured at
or prisms. These instruments can produce a spectrum of
90° without measuring the energy from the exciting light
excitation wavelengths and are known as spectrofluorome-
beam. Some fluorometers incorporated into absorbance
ters. Some fluorometers are designed to compensate for
spectrophotometers measure fluorescence directly in the
variations in the intensity of the light source and, therefore.
path of exciting light (i.e., an end-on design), because this
decrease the frequency with which calibration is required.
is the typical light path for absorbance spectrophotometers.
Fluorometers also might use a pulsed light source and
In such cases, mechanisms must be incorporated to exclude
measure fluorescence only during those periods of time when
the source is off. This technique, which is known as time-
The secondary monochromator excludes light from
resolved fluorometry, eliminates the effects of light scatter.
sources other than the fluorescence itself and allows only a
Interference by other molecules is a potential problem
narrow band of wavelengths to pass to the photodetector.
when biologic fluids are being analyzed by fluorometry. Some
26
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
of these molecules fluoresce (e.g., bilirubin and some pro-
tion, and the intensity of light leaving the solution (i.e., the
teins), whereas others scatter light (e.g. proteins and lipids).
transmitted light) is measured in a straight line from the
When developing assays on biologic fluids, adjustments must
transmitted light. The decrease in transmitted light intensity
be made to minimize the effects of these molecules
is proportional to the concentration of the analyte. A turbi-
Although the mechanism of measuring concentrations is
dimeter therefore, is similar in principle to an absorbance
different, the basic procedure for performing fluorometry is
spectrophotometer.
similar to that for absorbance spectrophotometry. Calibra-
 In nephelometry, a beam of light also is projected through
tors are used to establish a calibration curve, and blanks are
a solution containing the analyte, but the photodetector is 
l aeiae asoun u iauno siaa Aue aiu oi pan
placed at a 90° angle to the cuvette (Fig. 1.42). In addition,
the substance of interest. At low concentrations of fluoresc-
scattered rather than transmitted light is measured. The
ing substances (e.g., resulting in an absorbance of <2% of
intensity of the sca ttered light is proportional to the concen-
the exciting light), a direct, linear relationship usually exists 
tration of the analyte. Nephelometry, therefore, is analogous
between fluorescence and concentration. If the concentra-
to fluorometry in terms of configuration of the light path. If
tion of the fluorescing substance is high (e.g., >2% of the
exciting light is absorbed), the relationship between fluores-
better technique than turbidimetry.
cence and concentration might be nonlinear.
A direct relationship exists between the concentrations of
light-scattering molecules and the degree of light scattering.
Light-scatter techniques
A direct relationship also exists between the sizes of the
Light-scatter techniques can be used to measure the concen-
light-scattering molecules and the degree of light scattering.
trations of larger molecules in fluids. When light is projected
When developing light-scatter techniques, the size of the
through solutions containing large molecules such as immu-
particles being measured must be considered, because larger
noglobulins and other large proteins, antigen-antibody
particles (e.g.. immunoglobulin M, chylomicrons, and 
complexes, and some drugs, these molecules cause light to
scatter in all directions. These techniques, therefore, are
tion of scattered light. In some cases, the position of the
potentially useful in measuring the concentrations of these
photodetector must be altered to adjust for this. Large mol-
substances. With light scattering. the wavelength of the light 
ecules or particles other than those of interest can interfere
being scattered is the same as that of the light being pro-
with light-scatter techniques as well.
jected into the solution. By assessing the degree of light
With light-scatter techniques, the analytic procedures are
sca ttering. the concentration of the substance of interest can
similar to those of absorbance spectrophotometry. Calibra-
be measured. Two techniques, turbidimetry and nephelom-
tors are used to establish a calibration curve, and blanks are
etry. use the principles of light scattering to make such
used to negate the effects of reagents and other light-
measurements.
scattering molecules.
In turbidimetry, the decreased intensity of a light beam
 passing through a turbid solution is measured. The intensity
Electrochemical techniques
of light decreases, because a portion of it has been scattered
A variety of electrochemical techniques are used in clinical
by the large molecules of interest. A basic turbidimeter is
chemistry and most often are applied in measurements of
diagrammed in Figure 1.4l. In a turbidimeter, light rays are
electrolytes and acid-base status. This includes electrolytes 
projected through a cuvette containing the analyte in solu-
such as sodium (Nat), potassium (K), chloride, (Cl), ionized
Light scattering
Light
Focusing Monochromalor Cuvcte Focusing Monochromator Delector
Readout
SourceDevice
Device
Device
Figure 1.41  A basic turbidimeter. Arrows
represent light.
27
sEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Lightscattering
Cuvette
Light
Focusing Monochromator
Source  Device
Focusing
Device
Monochromator
Detector
Readout
Device
Figure 1.42 A basic nephalometer. Arrows
represent light.
calcium (Ca²), pH (H*), and partial pressures of oxygen
carbon dioxide and oxygen, and concentrations of electro-
(pOz) and carbon dioxide (pCOz) in whole blood. These tech-
lytes in whole blood or serum. In potentiometry, the electri-
niques also can be used to measure other substances if the
cal potential between two electrodes is measured thereby
chemical reactions used in the assay system result in produc
giving a value that can be used to calculate the concentra-
tion or consumption of an ion. For example, such reactions
tions of various electrolytes.
exist for determination of glucose, urea, and creatinine con-
Potentiometry involves the development and measure-
centrations. Basic electrochemical techniques and examples
ment of the potential difference between two electrodes.
of some of their applications are described in this section.
This technique is used to measure electrolyte concentrations
Electrochemical methods are applied through a wide variety
using ion-selective membrane electrodes, also known as
of electrode and instrument configurations. In recent years
ion-specific electrodes (ISE). The technique is used
to
several electrochemical systems have had complexity, cost,
measure ion concentrations in whole blood, plasma, serum,
and occasionally other body fluids. The ISE is the variable
These systems have rendered blood gas, electrolyte, and
electrode sensor immersed in the sample of measurement
selected chemistry capability both affordable and practical in
interest; see Figure 1.43. The ISE has a barrier or membrane
the typical veterinary facility. Some of these devices utilize
that isolates the internal electrode from the body fluid. Only
microfabricated disposable cartridges in which these mea-
the specific ion being measured is allowed to cross or interact
surements are made on whole blood. Other systems use
with the barrier, leading to accumulation of charge on the
small volumes of blood injected into a port leading to sample
internal electrode. At equilibrium, the potential in the ISE
flow-through fluidics within the analyzer. Regardless of
will vary depending on the concentration of ionic interac-
design, these instrument systems typically combine potenti-
tion with the sample. The second electrode is a reference
ometry, amperometry, and conductometry to provide acid-
electrode that has constant, fixed potential. The basic prin-
base and electrolyte panels, as described below.
ciple is that contact of the ion-selective membrane with the
body fluid results in ion selective passage or interaction with
Potentiometry
the ISE membrane leading to development of a potential
Potentiometry is commonly used for measurement of pH
difference from a reference electrode. A sensitive voltmeter
(i.e., hydrogen ion concentration). partial pressures of
is used to measure the potential difference when the ISE has
28
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
Voltmeter
rated from the blood sample by a thin membrane. The COz
diffuses through the membrane into the sodium bicarbonate
bn-specific
Reference
solution, and the following chemical reaction occurs:
Electrode
Electrode
CO+HO → HCO
HCO, →H++HCO
Nat
Test
Nat
K+
Sampie
The amount of CO, that diffuses through the membrane
Na+
K+ Cl- Nat
CI- Na+ Cl
affects the H+ concentration in the sodium bicarbonate solu-
Na
CF
K+
CT-
tion in direct proportion to the PCO. The remainder of this
Na
N
Na+
Nat
CI-
electrode is a pH electrode that senses the change in H+
Nat
Na
Na
CI-
Nat
K+
Na+
Na+
concentration of the sodium bicarbonate solution. These
Na+Cat
Nat
Na* K+ Nat
Na+ Ca
Expanded ISE
changes alter the electrical potential of this electrode, and
membrane view
Cl  Cl
the instrument then calculates the PCO, from these changes.
Figure 1.43 Schemmatic drawing of an ion-selective electrode (ISE) for
Amperometry
 potentiommetric measuremment; see text for further explanation. There is a
reference electrode, chernically saturated to have fixed potential. The test 
Amperometry is a technique that measures the electrical
sample contains differing concentrations of various ions. The ISE
current passing between two electrodes in a chemical cell
selectively allows mnoverment of the ion of interest (e.g. Nat) into or acro55
while a constant voltage is applied. This differentiates the
the memmbrane resulting in a potential difference between the two
electrodes (expanded view). The potential difference is proportional to the
flows and no voltage is applied. The most common applica-
concentration of specific analyte in being measured.
tion of amperometry in clinical chemistry is electrochemical
measurement of the partial pressure of oxygen (POz) in
blood.
The technique is most easily understood by considering
come to equilibrium with the sample. The potential differ-
how this electrochemical cell operates. A typical PO, elec-
ence that develops is due to the activity of the ion being
trode is diagrammed in Figure 1 .45. An electrical potential
measured. The potential difference is used to calculate the
of -0.65 V is applied to this electrode, and almost no current
concentration of ion in the sample. The ISE system is cali-
passes through this electrode if no oxygen is present. When
brated with solution containing known concentration of the
this electrode is submersed in blood, O, from the blood dif-
ion of interest.
fuses through the Oz-permeable membrane and comes into
ISEs are the core technology in most or all modern blood
contact with the tip of the platinum electrode. The O, then
 gas and electrolyte analyzers, including those recommended
is reduced by the reaction:
for in-clinic applications. The design and materials used to
manufacture these electrodes vary considerably. An impor-
O+ 2HO+4 electrons → 4 OH-
tant component of each electrode is a membrane that is
selective for the ion that the electrode measures. The mem-
This process consumes electrons and, therefore, produces
brane may be composed of thin glass specially formulated
an electrical current under these conditions. An ammeter is
to allow diffusion of a specific ion; glass is used in ISEs for
lsed to measure this current as amperage. The amount of
pH and Nat measurement. A second type of membrane
current produced is proportional to the PO, of the blood.
involves a water insoluble ion exchange chemistry coupled
 Calibration solutions are used to relate the amperage to the
with a barrier membrane matrix. This type of electrode may
PO, of the unknown.
be used to measure K', NHa*. and Ca?t. There are also solid-
state electrodes consisting of a single crystal of some ion-
Coulometry and conductometry
selective material or salt imbedded in an inert matrix
Coulometry and conductometry are two other electrochemi-
membrane. This type of electrode is typically used to measure
cal methods that occasionally are used to measure the con-
chloride (Cl-}.
cen trations of substances. Coulometry involves measurement
The partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCOz) in the blood
 of the amount of electrical energy passing between two
 also is measured by potentiometry. This method is used in
electrodes in an electrochemical cell. This electrical current 
blood-gas analyzers. Whereas CO, is not an ion, the CO
is produced by chemical reactions occurring at the surfaces
electrode is designed to produce an ion in proportion to the
of each of two electrodes, resulting in the loss or gain of
PCO, in the blood. The design of such an electrode is shown
electrons by these electrodes. The amount of electrical
in Figure l.44 as a modified pH electrode. In this electrode.
current produced is directly proportional to the concentra-
a chamber containing sodium bicarbonate solution is sepa-
tion of the substance being measured. This substance is
29
Potentiometer
 Out to extemal
reference electrode
Internal Reference Solution ( KCl)
Internal Reference Electrode (Ag/AgCl)
pH Sensitive Glass
Na HCO, Solution
CO,
 Gas Permeable Membrane
Blood
Figure 1.44 An electrode designed to mmeasure the partial pressure of carbon dlioxide in the blood.
-0.65 volts
Ammeler
Platinum wire
(electrode) in a
glass rod
Relerence tlect10de
(Ag/AgCl)
Buffer Solution
O, permeable
02
Blood
membrane
Figure 1.45 An electrochermical cell designed to measure the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood.
30
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
consumed in an electron-using or electron-producing
thawing. The osmolality or osmolarity of the fluid then is
process. Unlike potentiometry, the actual current rather
determined by comparing this temperature with those of 
than the potential between two electrodes is measured, and
various calibration fluids with known osmolality or
unlike amperometry, no outside voltage is applied to the
osmola rity.
system. This method has been applied to the measurement
Vapor pressure osmometers are less commonly used.
of serum chloride concentrations.
These instruments measure the osmolality or osmolarity of
Conductometry involves measurement of a fluid's ability
a fluid by determining the dew point (i.e., the temperature
to conduct an electrical current between two electrodes
at the point of equilibrium between vaporization and
when a voltage is applied to the sample in the system. This
condensation) of that fluid. The dew point is a gauge of
property, which is known as electrolytic conductance, occurs
vapor pressure: the higher the osmolality or osmolarity of a
via movement of ions in the fluid. The conductivity of an
d   n   i m a 
aqueous fluid depends on the concentration and ionic
osmometers are not considered to be as precise as freezing-
strength of the electrolytes in that fluid: the higher the elec-
point osmometers. In addition, volatile substances such as
trolyte concentration, the higher the conductivity. Conduc-
ethanol are not detected by vapor pressure osmometers.
tometry can be used to measure the production of ions by
whereas they are detected by the freezing-point depression
chemical reactions. Therefore, it is possible to measure the
technique.
concentration of a substance in a fluid if it is used in a chemi-
cal reaction producing ions in numbers proportional to the
Protein electrophoresis
substance of interest. The increased conductivity resulting
Electrophoresis is an analytic technique based on the move-
from the production of these ions would then be propor-
a r uo e  sad  p r
tional to the original concentration of the substance being
influence of an electrical field. In clinical chemistry, electro-
measured. It is also possible to measure hematocrit by con-
 n     sn n
ductometry on some clinical systems. The plasma fraction
and analyze serum proteins. When serum is placed on or in
readily conducts current while cellular mass acts as an insu-
a supporting substance that allows migration of these pro-
lator, impeding current. As the hematocrit increases, the
teins and can carry an electrical charge, these proteins move
ability of the sample to conduct current decreases. This mea-
through this material just as other charged particles do. The
surement can be calibrated. The calculation factors in elec-
movement of proteins through such a substance depends on
trolyte concentrations simultaneously measured in the same
the net charge on the protein molecule, the size and shape
sample.
of the protein molecule, the strength of the electrical field
applied, the type of supporting medium, and the tempera-
Osmometry
ture. In a given electrophoresis application, the latter three
Osmometry involves measurement of the concentrations of
items are held constant. Therefore, the migration of protein
particles in a fluid. The clinical significance of these concen-
molecules depends on the net charge and on the size and
shape of the molecules. As a result, different serum proteins
migrate at different rates and, possibly. in different directions
of solvent (osmol/L)). is discussed in Chapter 24. To under-
in the supporting substance.
stand osmometry. the changes that occur in a solution when
A simple electrophoresis chamber is demonstrated in
concentrations of particles (i.e., solute) dissolved in a fluid
Figure l.46. Small amounts of serum are placed in specific
(i.e., solvent) increase must be understood. These changes.
areas on the surface of the supporting substance or in small
which are known as colligative properties, are increased
depressions cut at one end. Supporting substances com-
osmotic pressure, decreased vapor pressure, increased
monly used include agarose gel and cellulose acetate. Starch
boiling point (because of decreased vapor pressure). and
 gel is less commonly used in clinical applications. Polyacryl-
decreased freezing point. Any of these colligative properties
amide gel also can be used for protein electrophoresis and
could be used to measure osmolality or osmolarity. Among
separates more serum protein fractions than the other sup-
those properties that actually are used to make these mea-
porting substances. Polyacrylamide electrophoresis does
surements are freezing point depression and decreased
produce interesting information, but the clinical applications
vapor pressure.
     n  s 
The freezing-point depression technique is the most com-
stood. The common supporting substances usually are in the
monly used. As the name implies, this type of osmometer
form of a sheet, and they either have buffer incorporated
measures the freezing point of a solution through a number
into them when they are produced or are soaked in buffer
of steps involving freezing. thawing. and freezing again. This
before use. The buffer determines the pH at which the
process is monitored by a thermistor, which measures tem-
process occurs, and the pH determines the type of charge as
 perature, and it determines the freezing point by determin-
well as the net charge on each type of protein molecule.
ing the temperature at equilibrium between freezing and
a ieuon ui a auisqns auodns aun po spua g
31
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Application point
Supporting substancc
Buffer solution
Cahode
Anode
Figure 1.46 A simple electrophoresis
chamber.
Figure 1.47 Typical electrophoretic
+
separation of serum proteins in a sheet of
supporting substance. The type and number
 of fractions actually separated depends on 
Albumin
Alpha 1
Alpha 2
Beta
Gamma
Application point
 the type of electrophoresis application and on 
globulin
globulin
globulin
globulin
 the species from which the serum was
 sampled.
buffer solution in an adjacent well. These buffer solutions
A typical distribution of serum protein fractions in a sheet
are not in contact with each other, however, or with the
of supporting substance after electrophoretic separation is
buffer solution in the center well. The electrical current is
shown in Figure 1.47. Albumin is the smallest of the serum
applied to the system by electrodes placed into each of these
proteins and has the highest net negative charge relative to
wells. A negatively charged cathode is placed in the well at
its size. Albumin, therefore, migrates faster than the other
 one end, and a positively charged anode is placed in the well
 proteins, and it advances further toward the anode during
at the other end. The serum sample typically is applied at
the time allowed for separation. The globulins are larger
the end near the cathode, because most proteins are nega-
than albumin and therefore do not migrate as far toward the
tively charged and migrate toward the anode. When an
anode. The relative migration distances of the globulins
electrical current is applied to this system, proteins migrate
 depend on the relationship of their size to their net negative
toward either the anode or the cathode, depending on
charge. The gamma globulins have the smallest net negative
whether they are negatively charged (i.e., toward the anode)
charge relative to their size and, therefore. migrate the
or positively charged (i.e., toward the cathode). As noted.
shortest distance toward the anode. In some techniques, the
the rate of this migration depends on both the net charge of
application point actually might lie in the gamma-globulin
the molecule and its size and shape, and because these vary
region, with some gamma globulins migrating to the cathode
with the different types of proteins, different proteins
side of this point. The number of fractions separated depends
migrate at different rates. If this migration is allowed to
 on the electrophoretic technique used and the species being
occur for a fixed period of time, various protein fractions are
analyzed. (These separations are discussed in more detail in
isolated along a straight line in the supporting substance.
Chapter 29.)
32
CHAPTER 1 Laboratory Technology for Veterinary Medicine
Once electrophoretic separation is completed, the protein
tor determines the width and density of each fraction.
fractions usually are identified and quantifed. Staining
Results are reported as a densitometer scan, which more
these fractions aids in this process. Various types of dye that
commonly is known as an electrophoretic pattern or elec-
stain protein can be used, including amido black, bromphe-
 q 5  i    e '
nol blue, Coomassie brilliant blue, nigrosin, and ponceau s.
percentage and an absolute value for each protein fraction.
After staining. it is possible, with experience, to visually
The absolute value for each fraction is calculated by the
identify the various proteins fractions based on their order
microprocessor in the instrument using the total protein
of migration. Visual examination also sometimes reveals
concentration, which is entered by the operator, and the
apparently increased quantities of some protein fractions.
percentage of each fraction as determined by the
This quantitation is more easily accomplished using a den-
densitometer:
sitometer to scan the protein pattern and calculate the per-
centages and absolute quantities of protein in each fraction.
Percentage of   Total serum
A densitometer measures the amount of protein in each
Absolute quantity
each fraction
protein
fraction by projecting light through these fractions as these
of each fraction
100
are mechanically passed over the light source. A photodetec-
Most densitometers automatically identify each fraction as
well as the boundaries between these fractions. The operator
can and should change these in some cases.
Once the absolute quantities in the various fractions are
determined, they can be compared with known reference
intervals for that species, and any abnormalities can be iden-
tified. Use of such data in clinical chemistry of proteins is
discussed in Chapter 29.
Suggested Reading
Hematology
Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ (eds.) (2010) Schalm's Veterinary Hematology.
6th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
βY
Chemistry
Albumin
Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, Bruns D (eds.) (2006) Tietz Textbook of
Figure 1.48 A densitometer 5can (electrophoretic scan) of a serum
Clinical Chemistry and Molecular Diagnostics, 4th ed. St. Louis, MO:
 protein electrophoresis separation.
Elsevier Health Sciences.
33
Sample Collection, Processing, and Analysis
of Laboratory Service Options
Glade Weiser
 Colorado State University
In the previous chapter, labora tory technology was reviewed.
drawing in the appropriate volume of blood. These tubes are
To take advantage of this technology and its medical diag-
commonly known as vacutainer tubes (after the trademark
nostic capability, however, samples for the respective proce-
of Becton-Dickinson). The following commonly used
dures must be properly collected and prepared. The
vacuum tubes are described in the approximate order of
veterinarian must make laboratory diagnostics choices from
         
a vast array of in-clinic and centralized service options.
their stopper color, which is used to identify the type of
While there is continual growth and improvement in in-
anticoagulation system the tube contains (Fig. 2.1).
clinic diagnostic instrumentation, this capability is not for all
facilities. The choices may be influenced by several factors.
Red-top or serum collection tube
The important factors include the type of practice (e.g.
The red-top or serum collection tube contains no anticoagu-
general, outpatient clinic, emergency facility, specialty refer-
lant. Blood that is placed in this tube is expected to clot so
ral center), geographic location, expertise of paraprofessional
that serum may be harvested. This tube is used to collect
employees, and practice style of the individuals involved.
serum for common biochemical determinations, such as
pue buissaooid aidues iadoid i sau suasaid iaideu s
those tests used in creating biochemical profiles.
guidelines for selecting laboratory diagnostics options.
Lavender-top tube
The lavender-top tube contains the anticoagulant ethylene-
Sample collection and processing
diaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) salt. This tube is used to
collect blood for hematologic determinations. The EDTA
anticoagulant results in the most consistent preservation of
nostic test, obtaining reliable results starts with proper collec-
cell volume and morphologic features on stained films. The
tion and handlingofthe sample. Sample collection, processing.
liquid tripotassium (K3) salt has the most commonly used
testing. and interpretation all must be properly performed as
form of EDTA. A newer formulation is dipotassium (K2) salt
a complete, sequential chain of events for a diagnostic result
that is spray dried into plastic tubes. The tubes are larger and
to have its intended value. For example, even the most reli-
have a recommended visual fill line. Either of these formula-
able test, performed in the most reliable facility and inter
tions is preferred for use in preservation of cell volumes as
preted by the most skilled diagnostician, cannot overcome
 a     
the error introduced by an inappropriate technique used in
K2 tubes may be more forgiving of underfilling. It is antici-
sample collection or handling. This section provides guide-
pated that plastic K2 tubes may eventually make the K3
lines for sample collection and handling that will ensure the
liquid in glass tubes obsolete. Powdered forms are not rec-
initial sequence of events are properly performed.
ommended because of slower, inconsistent mixing with
blood that is added to the tube.
Containers for sample collection
A variety of commercially available tubes are used for blood
Green-top or heparin tube
collection. These tubes contain the appropriate anticoagul-
The green-top tube contains lithium heparin. This antico-
lant for the various diagnostic procedures and a vacuum for
agulant is used for certain special biochemistry tests, particu-
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall. Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
34
CHAPTER 2 Sample Collection, Processing. and Analysis of Laboratory Service Options
A
C
D
E
DADGEIECT
G
Figure 2.1 Representative collection devices for blood sarmples subrmitted for dliagnostic tests. A: 3 mL glass lavender-top K3-EDTA tube, B: 2 mL plastic
lavender-top K2-EDTA tube, note subtle white filline indicated by arrow, C: a red-top tube without anticoagulant, D: a serum-separation tube, E: a 
lithium heparin green-top tube, F: a blue-top citrate tube, G: exarmple balanced heparin syringes with caps for electrochemmical diagnostic test collection.
larly those that require a whole-bloodaliquot fordetermination
does not occur. Use of these syringes will minimize sample
and that might be influenced by the presence of other chem-
handling errors for electrochemical measurements.
ical anticoagulation systems.
Some in-house systems also recommend use of lithium
Blue-top or citrate tube
heparin for all common clinical chemistry determinations.
The blue-top tube contains sodium citrate. It is used for
The advantage is that time is not required for clotting to
coa gulation biochemistry determinations.
completion to yield serum. The plasma may be separated
  io r shn n n r n
equivalent for serum and plasma. There are two exceptions.
Sure-sep tube
Total protein will be slightly higher for plasma because it
The Sure-Sep tube is a variation of the red-top tube contain-
includes fibrinogen. Potassium averages about 0.5 mmol/L
ing no anticoagulant. The stopper is red with black mottling.
higher for serum because of platelet release during clotting.
The tube contains a gel that separates packed cell fractions
Lithium heparin is also used for electrochemical determi-
from serum when it undergoes centrifugation. It is conve-
nations. A common sample handling error is overheparin-
nient for use in situations when centrifugation at the site
iza tion inherent in manual addition of heparin to collection
of collection and transport to the laboratory without the
syringes. The various heparin salts will cause errors to most
transfer of serum to a separate tube are desirable. The
electrochemical measurements including blood gases, elec-
gel physically separates cells from the serum fluid, thus
trolytes, and hematocrit by conductometry. Various in-house
preventing analyte metabolism from occurring at the cell/
electrochemical acid-base and electrolyte analyzers are
fluid interface.
now available. It is highly recommended that special collec-
Gray-top or fluoride tube
be used. These are manufactured to contain the minimal
The gray-top tube contains sodium fluoride. Fluoride is not
amount heparin. Heparin has the ability to weakly bind
an anticoagulant, however. Rather, it inhibits enzymes in
calcium and cause false low ionized calcium measurement.
the glycolytic pathway and prevents erythrocytes from
Balanced heparin is a formulation that has the binding sites
 metabolizing glucose while whole blood is transported to the
saturated with calcium so that binding in the patient sample
laboratory. It is not commonly used.
35
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Microtainers
sible. Recommended venipuncture sites for diagnostic
Very small volume tubes are available for special applications
screening procedures such as a hemogram and biochemical
such as very small laboratory animals. These may range
profile include: the jugular vein for small dogs, cats, horses.
from 0.25 to 1 mL. These should be avoided in general vet-
and cows; and the cephalic or jugular vein in medium to
erinary practice because of sample handling error potential.
large dogs. These procedures generally require 4 to 12 mL of
 For example, it is very difficult to achieve proper mixing of
blood depending on the laboratory and the complexity of
blood in a 0.5mL EDTA tube because of surface tension
the screening procedures.
within a very small tube.
General sample handling procedures
Tips for filling vacuum tubes
Hematologic procedures
A few simple habits must be developed for appropriately
Blood collected for a complete blood count (CBC) should be
filling tubes:
analyzed within l hour or be prepared in the proper way
1. The ratio of blood to anticoagulant volume is important
for analysis at a later time. If the blood is not analyzed within
for hematology and blood coagulation biochemistry tests:
1 hour, a blood film should be prepared and the tube refrig-
therefore, a tube with anticoagulant should be filled to the
erated. Morphologic features of cells may deteriorate rapidly
volume specified for that tube. The amount of vacuum in
on storage of blood in an EDTA tube; an air-dried blood film
the tube facilitates this, but the user should watch to ensure
preserves the morphology of such cells for later examina-
that this consistently occurs.
tion. Refrigeration of the blood tube also helps to preserve
2. Recommendations for the tube filling order after veni-
the cell components that are measured by automated cell-
puncture vary. Animal applications are different from the
counting systems. For example, cell swelling that could
human setting because of differences in collection. When
produce artifactual increases in mean cell volume (MCV)
collecting blood for several diagnostic procedures, fill the
and hematocrit occur as blood is stored in a tube at room or
tube(s) containing anticoagulant first and the tube contain-
     n e 
ing no anticoagulant last. The most commonly used combi
ferential capability, it is recommended by the laboratory that 
nation of tubes is an EDTA and clot/serum tube. The EDTA
blood be held at room temperature. Blood should never be
pue uonaige lanaieid ieul os isig paly aq pinous aqi
frozen, however, because this will result in lysis of the cells.
clot formation is minimized. This is unimportant in the tube
In addition, blood films should not be refrigerated, because
without anticoagulant because the blood is expected to clot
n a    a   
in that tube. This deviates from the recommendation for
morphology.
humans. When filling the EDTA tube first, there is potential
For hematologic measurements, the EDTA tube should be
to contaminate the blood remaining in the syringe with
filled to the specified volume, and tissue contamination
EDTA. This can severely alter chemistry measurements such
during venipuncture should be avoided. Underfilling the
as calcium and potassium. Therefore, it is critical when
EDTA tube results in excess EDTA, which osmotically shrinks
filling an EDTA tube to avoid backflow of blood from the
erythrocytes. In turn, this results in falsely decreased packed
tube to the needle or connected syringe.
cell volume and calculated McV when the microhematocrit
3. Vacuum tubes should be filled using minimal positive
procedure is used. Tissue contamination during venipunc
force, because forceful passage of blood through the needle
ture results in platelet aggregation (Fig. 2.2), and this arti-
 a    n n n ' s a
factually decreases the platelet concentration as determined
the biochemical measurements. Smaller-gauge needles are
by cell-counting systems and may contribute to fluidic
more likely to cause hemolysis. In particular, use of a 25-G
obstruction in hematology instruments.
needle, advocated by some, should be avoided because of
inherent slow draw and hemolysis in tube transfer. An 18-
Clinical biochemistry procedures
to 20-G needle is best for most collection procedures.
Blood collected in the red-top tube is allowed to clot for
4. Clean venipunctures with no tissue contamination are
15-30 minutes and then centrifuged to separate the cellular
important. Tissue contamination may result in unwanted
components from the resultant serum. The fluid phase of
platelet aggregation and clotting in samples collected using
the blood should be separated from the cellular elements.
anticoagulants. As a result, select venipuncture sites (e.g.
because cells metabolize certain chemical components in the
the jugular vein) that lilkely will yield the appropriate volume
serum. The most notable example is glucose. If left in contact
of blood needed for the diagnostic tests being ordered for a
with cellular elements, glucose is metabolized at a rate of
given patient.
approximately 10% per hour. After centrifugation, serum is
5. Select a venipuncture site that will yield the desired
harvested by a transfer pipette to a second tube or is dis-
amount of blood easily. This means being able to draw the
pensed directly to devices for biochemical determinations
blood with little or no collapse of the vein so that blood may
(Fig. 2.3). Harvested serum should be analyzed quickly: oth-
be transferred to the anticoagulant tubes as rapidly as pos-
erwise, it can be refrigerated for as long as 24-48 hours. If
36
enzyme activities should be determined within 24 hours of
collection. Long-term archival storage of samples for deter-
mination of serum enzyme activity is not advised. Data on 
the exact stability of serum enzyme activity under various
storage conditions is difficult to interpret. Knowledge regard-
puaisas Aue ul paiedn uaq iou seu ioalqns siun sui
way in recent years, and historical data were not collected
in any consistent manner. Thus, our current understanding
of enzyme stability during storage may be summarized as
follows: Commonly measured enzymes, including alanine
aminotransferase (ALT). aspartate aminotransferase, and
alkaline phosphatase, and amylase activities are satisfactorily
   
may result in considerably accelerated loss of ALT activity.
Creatine kinase activity should be measured as soon as pos-
sible. because considerable activity is lost after 24 hours
regardless of the storage conditions.
anssll wly pooa pauiers e uo paasgo uoeaiire ialaield z'z ani
contarmination may result in mmicroclots that consist of hundreds of
Special procedures
 platelets, which falsely decrease the platelet concentration. Microclots
Special laboratory diagnostic procedures are usually per-
Mol (moel atonal aeiuasaidau au ato satonal de Aeuu ose
magnification.
formed by centralized or commercial laboratories because of
the complexity or specialized instrumentation involved.
These procedures are performed less frequently, and they
are more dependent on unique requirements of the technol-
 For example, endocrine assays may vary in measuring prin-
ciple and reagents used resulting in considerable sample
handling and results interpretation differences. As a result,
the laboratory protocol for special procedures should be
rigorously followed rather than committing these require-
ments to memory.
Analysis of diagnostic service
implementation options
The veterinary facility has several options for obtaining labo-
ratory diagnostic data. These may be generally considered as
falling into three categories:
1. In-house (performed on the premises).
Figure 2.3 Serum preparation for biochemical tests. The tube on the
 2. Commercial veterinary laboratory.
left was allowed to clot and then centrifuged to pack the cells below the
3. Human laboratory or community hospital.
serum layer. A transfer pipette is used to transfer serum frorn the
Several factors should be considered when formulating a
centrifuged sarmple to the tube on the right.
strategy for using one (or more) of these options. The vet-
erinary facility should self-assess the following:
1. Type of practice (e.g.. general practice, outpatient clinic.
serum is to be held for longer than 24-48 hours, it should
emergency facility, specialty referral center).
be frozen, and serum that is to be held frozen indefinitely
2. Geogra phic location (proximity to reliable service options).
(e.g., for archival purposes) should be stored at -7o℃. Most
 3. Practice style of the individuals involved.
chemical constituents are stable under these conditions. If
 4. Willin gness to implement and evaluate quality-assurance
serum is frozen and then thawed for analysis, the thawed
programs.
 aliquot should be thoroughly mixed before testing.
 5. Willingness to invest the time to evaluate and trouble-
Serum enzymes require separate consideration regarding
shoot diagnostics systems that have varying degrees of
 storage. A general rule is that for best reliability, serum
complexity.
37
sEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
6. Willingness to invest in a good microscope and training
disadvantages, however, are considerable. The instrumenta-
 of personnel regarding basic clinical microscopy.
tion, particularly for hematology. is usually not modified fon
 7. Desired turnaround times.
animal-specific diagnostics, and knowledge about the con-
8. Ability to invest in instrumentation and training for the
sequences is often lacking. Animal-specific pathology
operators.
support is usually nonexistent or minimal. The technologists
do not have training in veterinary hematology. and nobody
Advantages and disadvantages of in-house
on site can provide that training. In addition, turnaround
laboratory testing
times for animal testing may not receive the appropriate
It is known that approximately 85% of veterinary facilities
priority relative to the primary purpose of the laboratory.
utilize instrumentation for hematology and clinical chemis-
try to some degree. The available instrumentation has been
rapidly evolving to increase sophistication and capability
Factors to consider when committing to
that approaches that of the central laboratory.' Modern
in-house testing
information management allows integration of diagnostic
system results into client reports as well as the electronic
Investment in instrumentation
medical record.
Acquiring diagnostic capability in chemistry and hematology
Advantages of in-house laboratory testing include rapid
 requires an investment of approximately $10,000-$25,000——
turnaround time and control over when testingis performed
or more. The cost of instrumentation has somewhat stabi-
relative to when samples are collected in a particular practice
lized in this range. but the technical capability for this
setting. In-house testing may also have economic advan-
investment continues to improve. For example, a diagnostic
tages in certain situations.
capability in hematology that cost in excess of $80,000
Disadvantages of in-house laboratory testing include the
during the 1980s may now be obtained for $10,000-$15,000.
issue of technical operator expertise for basic laboratory
The useful technical life span of most instrumentation
technology. which may not be available or affordable in
should be viewed as being from 5 to 7 years. Lease plans
many veterinary facilities. Attention to detail and quality
may facilitate the acquisition of instrumentation in ways
assurance also must be managed by someone on site, and
that involve planned replacement at 3- to 7-year intervals.
the investment in instrumentation is required. In addition,
These plans generally pay for themselves during use by their
access to a clinical pathologist to help with the characteriza-
flow of diagnostics revenue generation per month.
tion of abnormal screening tests, particularly blood film
analysis for hematology must be cultivated, and arrange-
Commitment to personnel
ments for specialized testing to supplement in-clinic diag-
nostic tests must be procured.
technologist who is capable of reliable performance in diag-
nostics. Essential elements include an understanding of the
Advantages and disadvantages of commercial
basic laboratory technology. an ability to perform these pro-
veterinary laboratories
cedures, a willingness to implement quality control, and a
The major advantages of commercial veterinary laboratories
mindset that allows the technologist to seek consultation
are the cost leveraging of automated instrumentation and
when he or she is confronted with uncertainty.
centralized testing volume, a complete menu of testing ser-
vices, professional oversight of technical performance, and
pathology support. Because the automated instrumentation
Commitment to quality assurance
is dedicated to animal-specific diagnostics, it is usually
A commitment to quality assurance involves a willingness
already adapted for the proper analysis of animal samples.
Quality-control programs are usually implemented as well.
for the personnel who perform these procedures as well as
but these may be variable.
in the oversight of a regular quality assurance program.? The
latter involves regular monitoring of instrumentation accul-
ratories include relatively fixed turnaround times, which are
racy and precision using commercial control materials with
dictated by local sample transportation logistics. In addition,
known target values. This may cost from $100 to $300 per
sample transportation is a major part of the cost of the
month for materials.
service.
Establishing a pathology consultation relationship
Advantages and disadvantages of human
A working relationship with a veterinary clinical pathologist
laboratory facilities
to provide help with data interpretations and morphologic
The advantage of human laboratory facilities is that they
assessments in difficult cases, as well as microscopy support,
may be the only available option in less populated areas. The
is highly desirable. A relationship with an anatomic patholo
38
CHAPTER 2 Sample Collection, Processing. and Analysis of Laboratory Service Options
gist is also required for interpretations of surgical biopsy
Sample pickup service
spe cimens.
Many veterinary laboratories offer once or twice daily
sample pickup service to facilitate the shortest possible time
The business plan
from sample collection to the return of results. The tradeoff
Veterinarians who are considering in-house testing must
is that courier services represent a considerable fraction of 
have a mindset that allows them to use diagnostics liberally
the cost of the laboratory service. Human laboratory facilities 
as part of their practice style. Instrument salespersons may
usually rely on users to transport samples to the facility.
make a compelling case for how one or two CBCs per day
will pay for the cost of an instrument system. The same
Appropriate turnaround time
occurs for chemistry as well. First and foremost, these
In general, the rate-limiting step is transporting the sample
schemes are profitable for the seller, but this may or may
to the laboratory. The trend toward consolidation of labora-
not be true for the buyer. One should not make this invest-
tory services, however, often results in very large transporta-
ment without first analyzing the costs of various alterna-
tion distances, thus extending the turnaround time. Once a
tives, such as the use of external laboratories. Veterinarians
sample arrives at the laboratory, most facilities perform the
better off using an external laboratory. Alternatively, diag-
analyses as rapidly as possible and then electronically report
the results. Laboratories that prioritize animal samples
nostics may be viewed as a source of revenue if the practice
behind a busy human diagnostics schedule may not provide
style calls for a combination of frequent diagnostic workups.
 pre-anesthetic testing. and wellness testing programs. Thus.
convenient timing for the delivery of results.
a business plan should be created that projects the number
of diagnostic tests to be performed across the practice case-
Species-specific ability
load. Multiplying these numbers by the projected internal
The laboratory should have the ability to recognize and
  e  n i     
interpret species-specific morphologic and pathologic abnor-
proposed in-house testing effort. Recommended target
malities. In addition, the laboratory should be able to provide
values are the charges for similar tests imposed by a veteri-
knowledgeable evaluation of abnormalities in data and mor-
nary commercial laboratory in the region. The projected
 phology on blood flms and cytology.
 gross revenue then should be compared with the projected
costs, including instrumentation amortization, consumable
Telephone consultation
supplies, personnel, training. quality assurance, and time for
supervision.
The veterinary user must be able to consult with laboratory
For chemistry, one must recognize that most of the cur-
staff and pathologists regarding abnormal or unusual data
rently available systems are not economically favorable for
generated by the laboratory.
performing complete biochemical profiles in-house. For
example, the cost of consumables per test with an in-house
Decision process
system may easily exceed $1-$3 per test, whereas a com-
The analysis of one's diagnostic options may be summarized
plete biochemical profile may be obtained from a laboratory
as follows: The decision process for implementing diagnostic
for approximately $l6. With these circumstances, one is
support is complex, and this complexity is enhanced by
paying a premium for the convenience of in-house profile
rapidly changing technologies and services. It is advisable to
results, often while the client waits. In-house chemistry is
run some experiments to facilitate this analysis. To maintain
more economically favorable for monitoring single tests or
flexibility when uncertainty exists, it is advisable to avoid
mini-panels after a diagnosis and treatment plan have been
e   d i 
implemented.
Factors to consider when selecting
References
external laboratory services
1. Weiser MG, Vap LM, Thrall, MA (2007) Perspectives and
Instrument adaptation
 n fa      e a
 Instrumentation must be suitably adjusted for animal blood
Small Animal Pracrice. Issue title: Clinical Pathology and Diagno5-
testing. This is particularly important regarding hematologic
tic Techniques. Vol. 37 (March), pp. 221-36.
analyses. Such adaptation is most likely to occur in veteri-
2. Weiser MG, Thrall, MA (2007) Quality control recommendations
  s  n   sn  
and procedures for in-clinic laboratories. In Vererinary Clinics of
be found in human hospital laboratories that analyze animal
North America: Small Animal Practice. Issue title: Clinical Pathology
samples as a secondary priority.
and Diagnostic Techniques. Vol. 37 (March), pp. 237-44.
6E
Perspectives in Laboratory Data
Interpretation and Disease Diagnosis
Glade Weiser' and Robin W. Allison2
'Colorado State University
²Oklahoma State University
The ability to interpret laboratory data is based on knowl-
here is to provide some basic background and perspective to
edge regarding the normal physiologic mechanisms underly-
facilitate that process. This includes an understanding of
ing each laboratory test and recognition of the effects of
reference intervals, sensitivity/specificity of laboratory tests.
diseases on these normal physiologic mechanisms and.
knowledge of factors that may introduce errors in laboratory
therefore, on the test results themselves. With these perspec-
results, the role of laboratory quality control, and a discus-
tives, one can assess possible explanations for an alteration
sion of how to develop a skilled approach to interpreting
in a laboratory test result, and one can sort through these
laboratory data.
possibilities to identify the most likely explanations. If per-
formed properly, laboratory testing and interpretation of
laboratory data can provide significant insights regarding
Reference interval background
diseases and respective therapeutic options. Most chapters
in this book discuss normal physiologic mechanisms and the
To recognize laboratory results as being abnormal, the values
effects of disease processes on these mechanisms as well as
expected to be obtained from healthy animals must be
on laboratory test results; this chapter provides basic infor-
known. These normal values are correctly termed reference
mation that applies to the interpretation of all types of labo-
intervals; although they may also be referred to as reference
ratory data.
intervals, this is technically incorrect since the term 'range'
refers to a single number describing the difference between
two values. A reference interval is typically defined as
 Introduction
values encompassing the median 95% of a tested population
of apparently healthy animals. Inherent in this definition
The typical laboratory diagnostic work-up may consist of
is that 2.5% of the healthy population will have values
30-50 different parameters or pieces of information. Labora-
 outside either side of the median 95%, suggesting they are
tory reports could be more simplified. For example, about
abnormal.
half of the values in a routine hematology report are
 When interpreting patient data, the first interpretive step
either redundant calculations or are used solely for calcula-
is to sort data into normal and abnormal values. Flagging
tion of more important parameters. These unimportant
each abnormal value on the laboratory report form often
values are not diagnostically useful and cause time consum-
starts this process. Information systems can do this by com-
ing clutter. However, both instrument manufacturers and
paring the value against the defined reference interval
laboratory service providers are reluctant to remove those
However, determination of abnormal is not as simple as it
parameters for fear of appearing to offer less information
may seem for a couple of reasons. First, reference intervals
than competitors.
are usually based on limited population testing and do not
 The busy clinician is faced with distilling this complex
account for variation within subpopulations defined by age.
body of information into a summary that, when combined
sex, breed, or other factors. Second, one must think proba-
with other historical and physical findings. may diagnose
bilistically about values that are near the reference limit. An
health or potential disease. The veterinary clinician in train-
abnormal flag does not necessarily mean the value is abnor-
ing often learns this process by trial and error. The purpose
mal for that animal.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
40
CHAPTER 3 Perspectives in Laboratory Data Interpretation and Disease Diagnosis
Different statistical methods can be used to establish refer-
12
ence intervals, but all of them begin with the sampling of
animals from an apparently healthy population. In most
cases, healthy animals are those that have no apparent
illness and have no detectable abnormality in cursory exam-
9
ination. Reference intervals must be established for each
Frequency
 species being tested, but such intervals would ideally also be
established for subdivisions within that species when some
characteristic of a subgroup results in significantly different
reference intervals compared with those for the species as a
whole. These subdivisions might occur on the basis of age.
breed, gender, pregnancy status, or type of husbandry.
0
Because establishing reference intervals is an expensive.
time-consuming task, intervals for such subdivisions are
(A)
Results
usually not established, and veterinarians generally use a
single reference interval for all animals of a given species.
When this is the case, it is important to consider variations
in those test results that could relate to the previously men-
12
tioned characteristics (e.g., age, breed, gender) and to con-
sider these characteristics when evaluating the possible
resu
causes of values falling outside the reference interval (espe-
8
cially mildly abnormal values). For example, the hematocrit
(HCT) reference interval for dogs is usually regarded to be
6
6
approximately 36-55%. However, it is known that some
small breeds, notably the poodle, typically have HCT values
uenc
in the 50s. A poodle dog with an HCT of 42 may be anemic.
Another example is the serum enzyme alkaline phospha-
ba.
tase. Because bone remodeling is a potential source for this
enzyme, serum alkaline phosphatase activity is considerably
greater in young growing animals than in adults of the same
 species. Many such interpretive nuances are developed from
(B)
Resuits
experience.  Refinement of population subset reference
Figure 3.1 Two distributions of values resulting from sampling a large
intervals may someday be performed in veterinary medi-
number of apparently healthy anirmals. A. Plotted by their frequency of
cine, but this will require compilation of a huge database.
occurrence, these values form a symnmetric, bell-shaped curve. This is 
Adequate numbers of normal animals must be sampled to
known a5 a normal or Gaussian distribution. B. Plotted by their frequency
develop intervals that are valid for healthy animals from the
of occurrence, these values form an asymnmetric dlistribution that is
defined population. In general, the more animals that are
e) uongusip leuou e tou s! siul sanjen layoiy aul puemol pamass
sampled, the more likely the reference intervals will truly
non-Gaussian distribution).
reflect the range of values to be expected from healthy
animals. Sampling large numbers of animals to make the
results most reflective of the healthy population is desirable.
results are not normally distributed (Fig. 3.lB). It is now
but practical constraints (e.g. availability of apparently
thought that most laboratory test data are not normally
healthy animals, costs of obtaining samples and of perform-
distributed. A simple solution is to derive reference intervals
ing large numbers of tests) dictate limits on the number of
using a nonparametric technique. With nonparametric
animals that can actually be tested. For best reliability. at
methods, all the test values are rank ordered, any outliers 
least 120 samples should be analyzed when establishing
are removed, and then the middle 95% of test results define
reference intervals. The minimum number of samples to
the reference interval. As an example, for a population of
establish a crude reference interval is generally considered
120 rank ordered results. the lowest 3 and highest 3
to be 40.
(2.5% x120 = 3) are removed and the remaining results
Several statistical methods exist for establishing reference
define the median 95% of the population. A few values from
intervals. The method of using mean ± 2SD was historically
the apparently healthy sample population might be mark-
used to define the median 95% of the tested population, but
edly higher or lower than most of the other values. These
this is only valid if the test results have a normal or Gaussian
extreme values are known as outliers and are likely indica-
distribution (Fig. 3.lA). This approach is flawed if the test
tive of occult disease. If outliers are included in the sampled
41
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
values when the intervals are calculated, they will widen
which uses the data as presented in Figure 3.2. As noted
the reference intervals, thus making the test less sensitive
earlier, one value (30mg/dL) has been eliminated as an
for the detection of unhealthy animals. One relatively simple
outlier; therefore, the range of the remaining ll9 values is
rule-of-thumb for defining an outlier is to calculate the dif-
55 to 100 mg/dL. Identifying and eliminating those values
ference between the highest (or lowest) value and the
in the lowest 2.5% and in the highest 2.5% then determines
second highest (or lowest) value. If this difference exceeds
the central 95% of these ranked values.
one-third of the range of all values, then consider the highest
(or lowest) value to be an outlier, and eliminate it when
calculating the reference intervals. Once this value has been
35
eliminated, the same test can be applied to the next highest
30-
(or lowest) value. For example, Figure 3.2 presents the
blood glucose values obtained from a population of 120
25
20
tion histogram. One value (30mg/dL) is obviously much
Jen
lower than the others. The difference between this value
15
and the next lowest value is 25mg/dL, and the range of
all values is 70mg/dL (100-30mg/dL). Because 25mg/dL
10-
is greater than one-third of the range of all values
5
(70 ÷ 3 = 23.3). the lowest value (30mg/dL) is eliminated
as an outlier. If this value is eliminated, the difference
+0
between the remaining lowest value (55mg/dL) and the
20
30
40
¥5０6０
7080
90100110
next lowest value is then l0 mg/dL. This is less than one-
Blood Glucose Concentration (mg/dL)
third of the range of all remaining values (45 ÷ 3 = 15) and.
Figure 3.2 Blood glucose values obtained from a population of 120
therefore, should not be eliminated as an outlier.
apparently healthy animals and plotted in a frequency distribution
An example of establishing a reference interval by the
1eun yrm saldues jo jaqunu lerot aut suasaidau Auanbay wehos!l
 blood glucose concentration.
Table 3.1 An exarmple of nonparametric determination of a reference interval.
Lowest 10 Values and Their Ranks
Value
OE
55
65
65
65
65
65
65
65
65
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
 Highest 10 Values and Their Ranks
Value
90
90
90
90
95
95
95
95
100
100
Rank
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
Highest value of the lower 2.5% = 0.025 x (number of values + 1)
Highest value of the lower 2.5% = 0.025 × (119 + 1) = 3
Lowest value of the upper 2.5% = 0.975 x (number of values + 1)
Lowest value of the upper 2.5% = 0.975 x (119 + 1) = 117
 Lower Values Eliminated from Reference Interval
Value
30
55
65
Rank
1
2
E
 Upper Values Eliminated from Reference Interval
Value
95
100
100
Rank
117
118
119
 Resulting reference interval = 65-95
a Blood glucose concentrations were obtained from 120 apparently healthy animmals, and one of these values was eliminated as an outlier (see Fig.
3.2). The method involves ranking values from lowest to highest, calculation of ranks representing the highest rank of the lower 2.5% of values and
the lowest rank of the upper 2.5% of values, and eliminating values corresponding to these ranks as well as values corresponding to lower and 
higher ranks, respectively. The remaining values are the central 95 % and are used as the reference interval.
42
i     i i   i
The statistical method just described is applicable when
lated with the patient history, clinical signs, or other labora-
the sampled population includes 40 or more animals. If
tory data to assess the likelihood that they represent disease.
fewer than 40 animals are sampled, the lower and upper
Test results that are markedly above or below the reference
2.5% of values cannot be reliably determined. In such a
limits, however, are more easily recognized as representing
case, the reference interval is considered to be the observed
disease.
range of values that remains after the outliers have been
An adjunct to population reference intervals is the indi-
eliminated. Such a reference interval is less reliable than
vidual health database. Ideally, a laboratory value database
those determined from a larger population.
is established for young adult companion animals or other
Limiting reference intervals to 95% rather than 100% of
animals of value. This data may serve to identify more pre-
values obtained from healthy animals is an attempt to maxi-
cisely where that animal's values reside relative to the more
mize detection of diseased animals. As defined by reference
broad range of the general species population. For example.
intervals, approximately 5% of healthy animals will have
a dog has an HCT value of 52% defined in its health data-
values considered to be abnormal for any given test. By
base. If sometime later the HCT is measured at 39%, there
extension, if many tests are performed on an individual
is a high probability of an underlying disease resulting in
animal (as is common in biochemical profiles), the likeli-
anemia, even though the laboratory report may not flag the
hood of that individual having at least one abnormal test
value as abnormal.
result increases dramatically. For example, in a 20-test bio-
chemical profile, approximately 64% of healthy animals will
Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive
have at least one abnormal value. It is also possible that
animals with disease may have respective laboratory values
values
just within the reference interval. One must recognize the
reality that healthy and unhealthy animals overlap at each
When interpreting laboratory abnormalities, the concepts of
end of the reference interval (Fig. 3.3). Thus, the concept of
sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values must be consid-
a black and white delineation between normal and abnor-
ered. Sensitivity is a measure of the frequency with which
mal does not exist. The clinician must learn to think proba-
the test result will be positive or abnormal in animals with
bilistically about laboratory data, particularly for values close
the respective disease process. The following formula is used
to reference limits. Therefore, laboratory values that are
to determine sensitivity:
close to the reference limits need to be more closely corre-
TP
Sensitivity (%) =
×100
TP + FN
[ Resull
where TP (true positive) is the total number of animals that
tested positive and actually have the disease process, and FN
(false negative) is the total number of animals that tested
negative but actually have the disease. For instance, if the
llealthy
Lnhealthy
sensitivity of a test for a disease is 99%, then 99 of 100
animals with that disease will have a positive (i.e., abnor-
mal) result. One percent of the animals with the disease
will have a negative (i.e., normal) result; that is, 1% of the
tests would have false-negative results. Specificity is a
95%of Hcalthy Population
woy painadxa aq uen peur sanen Aoteogel jo deuano aul e'e auini
negative or normal in animals without the disease one
healthy and unhealthy populations (populations with diseases that cause
wishes to detect. The following formula is used to determine
eun aon (sat uan e ioy sanea au u saseaiui lo saseaiap iaia
specificity:
defining the reference interval at 95% of the healthy population excludes
the values from some healthy animals, but it also excludes the values
TN
from most unhealthy ones (i.e., it allows one to recognize these animals
Specificity (%} =
x100
TN + FP
a5s being potentially unhealthy). If the reference interval were broadened
to include more of the potential values frorm healthy animals, it would 
also recognize more values from unhealthy animals as being normal (i.e.
where TN (true negative) is the total number of animals that
the unhealthy animal might not be detected). Using a reference interval
tested negative and actually do not have the disease, and FP
based on 95% of the healthy population is a compromise that increases
(false positive) is the total number of animals that tested
the sensitivity of the test for recognizing unhealthy animals while causing
positive but actually do not have the disease. For instance,
 only a few healthy anirnals to be recognized as being potentially
if the specificity of a test for a disease is 99 %, then 99 of 100
unhealthy.
nonaffected animals will have negative (i.e., normal) results.
43
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
One percent of nonaffected animals will have a positive (i.e..
where TN is the total number of animals that tested negative
abnormal) result; that is, l% of the tests would have false-
and actually do not have the disease, and FN is the total
positives results.
number of animals that tested negative but actually do have
Sensitivity and specificity are established by applying the
the disease. The higher the predictive value of a negative
test in question to animals with known disease status (i.e.,
test, the more likely it is that an animal with a negative test
animals known to have or not have the disease in question).
result does not have the disease in question. Tests with high
Another diagnostic procedure, often termed the "gold stan-
negative predictive values will produce few false negative
dard," is used to establish which animals do or do not have
results; thus confidence is high in a negative test result. As
the disease. This gold standard is often another laboratory
    s aa  
test known to be reliable for detecting the disease. Sensitiv-
combination of the sensitivity and specificity of the test and
ity and specificity, therefore, do not apply directly to animals
the veterinarian's pretest judgment regarding the likelihood
of unknown disease status, but they do provide information
of the disease in that animal. A rather complex formula to
regarding the reliability of the test in question for detecting
estimate predictive values based on these factors does exist,
that disease.
but the roles of sensitivity, speci ficity, and disease prevalence
 In practice, one needs to know the reliability of a test for
or likelihood in the interpretation of diagnostic test results
detecting a certain disease in animals with unknown disease
can be understood without it. The roles of these three factors
status. In other words, how reliable is an abnormal or a
are best understood by considering a hypothetic situation in
normal test result for predicting whether the animal does or
which an excellent diagnostic test is used to detect a specific
does not have the disease in question? In this situation,
disease. The heartworm antigen test is a good example of
predictive values define the chances that abnormal or
such a diagnostic for which there are abundant data. This
normal test results are reliable indicators of disease status.
test has a sensitivity of 99% (i.e., it will be positive or abnor-
Predictive values depend on the sensitivity and specificity of
mal in 99 of 100 animals with the disease) and specificity of 
a test, but the prevalence or likelihood of the disease in the
99% (i.e., it will be negative or normal in 99 of 100 animals
population being tested affects predictive values as well.
without the disease). This test has excellent performance
Such prevalence or likelihood of disease is established before
when applied in areas with reasonable prevalence of heart-
performing the test, based on the judgment of the veterinar-
worm infection. However, if this test is used for screening a
ian of the chance (expressed as a percentage) that the animal
population of animals in which you, as the veterinarian.
has the disease in question. This judgment can be based on
judge there is a l% chance of the disease being present, the
following predictive values result:
signs, other test results, and epidemiologic data. Both posi-
tive (i.e., abnormal) and negative (i.e., normal) test results
Predictive value of a positive test = 50 %
have predictive values. The predictive value of a positive test
(positive predictive value) is the probability that a positive
Predictive value of a negative test = l00 %
(abnormal) test result truly indicates the animal has the
disease:
In other words, a positive or abnormal test is correct 50%
of the time and incorrect 50% of the time. This is equivalent
TP
in reliability to flipping a coin, and it might lead one to ques-
Positive Predictive Value =
×100
TP +FP
tion the wisdom of performing such a test in a population
with a low likelihood of disease. In this situation, however.
where TP is the total number of animals that tested positive
a negative or normal test result is almost loo% reliable in
and actually have the disease, and FP is the total number of
ruling out the possibility that an animal has the disease (i.e.
animals that tested positive but actually do not have the
the predictive value of a negative test is approximately
disease. The higher the predictive value of a positive test,
100%). This combination of excellent test sensitivity and
the more likely it is that an animal with a positive (i.e.
specificity with low prevalence or lilkelihood of disease is
abnormal) test result actually has the disease in question.
quite common when using serologic tests to screen for
Tests with high positive predictive values will produce few
various infectious diseases.
false positive results; thus confidence is high in a positive
 Because most diagnostic tests have an inherent sensitivity
test result.
and specificity, the most easily altered factor that affects the
The predictive value of a negative test (negative predictive
predictive value is the pretest likelihood of the disease. Vet-
value) is the probability that a negative (normal) test result
erinarians can use this to enhance the predictive values. For
truly indicates the animal does not have the disease:
instance, in the previous example, a test with excellent sen-
sitivity and specificity was used to screen for a disease in a
TN
population with a low prevalence of that disease. This
Negative Predictive Value =
x100
TN + FN
resulted in a low positive predictive value. If, however, a
44
CHAPTER 3 Perspectives in Laboratory Data Interpretation and Disease Diagnosis
veterinarian were presented with an animal that had a
that disease as they would be had the disease been previ-
history. clinical signs, and other features suggesting that
ously suspected.
disease, such an animal would represent a different popula-
Most routine clinical pathology tests (i.e., hematology.
 tion, and the veterinarian would establish a different, higher
biochemistry, and urinalysis) have sensitivities and specifici-
pretest likelihood for that disease. In such a case, the veteri-
ties for detecting any given disease that are considerably less
narian would, perhaps, be 75% certain that the animal had
than the 99% in the previous example. This makes the
the disease in question. Therefore, the predictive value of a
pretest likelihood of disease an even more important factor
 positive test result would be nearly l00%, and the predictive
in this type of testing. For instance, both the sensitivity and
value of a negative test result would be approximately 97 %.
specificity of the pancreatic enzyme amylase for detecting
The test result in this scenario would, in fact, be very reliable
pancreatitis are quite low. Serum amylase activity is roul-
for predicting the presence or absence of the disease in
tinely measured on some biochemical profiles. Thus, an
question.
increased serum amylase activity on a biochemical screen
 In summary, the more likely that an animal has a certain
from a dog in which pancreatitis was not previously sus-
disease before the test is performed, the more reliable a posi-
pected would have a very low positive predictive value.
tive or abnormal test result suggesting the presence of that
because the sensitivity, specificity, and pretest likelihood of
disease will be. The effects of the pretest lilkelihood of disease
pancreatitis are all low. On the other hand, an increased
on the positive and negative predictive values of a test are
serum amylase activity on a biochemical profile from a dog
demonstrated in Figures 3.4 and 3.5. In practice, most vet-
with clinical signs that suggest pancreatitis would have a
erinarians incorporate this approach to diagnostic testing
much higher positive predictive value. This concept is
instinctively. If the test result is compatible with the disease
important to remember whenever unexpected abnormali-
the veterinarian suspected before conducting the test, this
ties are detected on any routine clinical pathology test.
result is considered to be supportive evidence that the
animal has the disease; if the result is not compatible with
the suspected disease, the veterinarian does not completely
Quality control
rule out that disease but does begin to consider other options
more seriously. Biochemical abnormalities that suggest a
 To obtain reliable laboratory test results, the quality of the
disease that was not strongly suspected before the profle
results being produced must be monitored so that they are
was completed will occasionally be detected, and in this situ-
both accurate and precise. Accuracy is a gauge of how close
ation, these abnormalities are not as reliable in predicting
the result is to the true value for that test, and precision is
100
100
Positive
94
06
%66
%66
80
Neg
95%
70
70
90%
95%
%
60
60
70%
50
S1
90%
TE
40
Predictive
A
3
redlctiv
20
70%
10
30
50
70
10
30
50
70
90
Estimated Prevalence (%)
Estimated Prevalence (%)
Figure 3.4 The effect of various pretest estimates of disease likelihood
Figure 3.5 The effect of various pretest estimates of disease likelihood
on the predictive value of a positive test. Each line represents a different
on the predictive value of a negative test. Each line represents a dlifferent
level of sensitivity and specificity (99 % = 99 % sensitivity and specificity.
level of sensitivity and specificity (99% = 99% sensitivity and specificity,
95 % = 95 % sensitivity and specificity, and so on). The predlictive value of
95% = 95% sensitivity and specificity, and so on). The predlictive value of
a positive test decreases as the pretest estimate of disease likelihood
a negative test increases as the pretest estimmate of disease likelihood
decreases.
decreases.
45
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
a gauge of how repeatable the result is when assaying the
same sample. A single result might be accurate, for instance.
but if a similar result cannot be obtained repeatedly using
Acceptable
the same sample (i.e., if the test is not precise), then the
range
results for that assay are not reliable. Conversely, one may
obtain the same result repeatedly using the same sample.
but if that result does not reflect the true value for the sub-
DAY
stance being measured (i.e., if the test is not accurate), then
ayn lotiuou ot pasn yeuo joruo Aenb e jo alduexa uy g'e aunai
the results again are not reliable.
accuracy and precision of a laboratory test. To produce this chart, a
 Reputable laboratories maintain quality-control programs
control sarmple was analyzed each day along with the patient sarnples.
to ensure the accuracy and precision of their results. This is
Daily results from the control sarmple are plotted (X). The dashed line
accomplished by assaying control samples at previously
(- - -) represents the expected mean value for this sample. Solid lines
determined intervals along with the samples from patients.
au woy uoeen aneau pue aisod algeidanne juasadan ( )
These intervals might be daily or several times per day.
mean value. Note that the result on Day 8 was outside the acceptable 
range of variation. This would trigger rejection of the results for the test
depending on the workload of the laboratory. The control
 on that day until completion of an assessment of the instrument,
samples are similar to those from patients (e.g. blood or
reagents, and operator to identify and correct the problem. The chart
serum) and are usually obtained from a commercial source.
indicates problem resolution on Day 9 with acceptable control
Control samples can be categorized as either assayed (i.e.
performance
the probable accurate value for the test in that control
sample has been previously determined) or unassayed (i.e.,
the probable accurate value for the test in that control
Common factors that introduce error in
sample has not been previously determined). If unassayed
laboratory values
con trol samples are obtained, the laboratory then establishes
the probable accurate value for that sample using methods
There are a number of factors that can cause laboratory test
similar to those summarized earlier for determining refer-
result errors that may affect interpretation of the patient
ence intervals. Because establishing such probable accurate
status. These should be considered whenever a laboratory
values is both time-consuming and expensive, most labora-
result(s) is either nonsensical or does not match the patient's
tories today use assayed control samples. Only assayed con-
condition. These factors can be classifed as pre-analytical,
trols are suitable for in-clinic quality control.
analytical, and postanalytical errors. Pre-analytical errors are
 During routine laboratory operation, the result from each
the most common, and may be introduced by a number of
control sample is compared with what is documented to be
 problems related to sample collection and handling. Analyti-
the accurate result for that sample. This tests the accuracy
cal errors occur at the level of the test methodology. and
of the assay. In addition, results obtained from the control
 may be due to either an interfering substance or phenom-
sample over time are analyzed to determine if the value
enon within the sample or a problem with the test method
obtained changes over time, thus establishing the precision
performance. The latter is now relatively rare, and is typi-
of the test. Both accuracy and precision usually are assessed
cally recognized and prevented with a quality control
by graphing the values obtained from the control sample on
program. Postanalytical errors may be due to transcription
a quality-control chart (Fig. 3.6). Some instrumentation will
or other errors related to report generation and distribution.
have on-board software for automated analysis and man-
Postanalytical errors are also relatively rare with the current
agement of quality control data. If the results obtained from
lse of automated laboratory information systems and report
the control sample are outside the previously established
generation.
acceptable range, which is also known as the control limit
(usually ± 2-3 SD from the mean). or if the results drift
Sample handling errors
either up or down over time, then a problem with the ana-
A number of pre-analytical factors may result in laboratory
lytic instrument, reagents, or operator may exist. Results
test errors. Improper handling of samples is the most
obtained from patient samples during these "out-of-control"
common cause of gross errors in laboratory test values.
periods are rejected, and the analytic methods used are care-
These are procedural errors that violate handling rules
fully reviewed to correct the problem.
related to sample stability or other processing variables.
Quality-control programs are common in large reference
 Some common sample handling errors in veterinary facili-
laboratories, but they are also important for in-clinic labo-
ties include:
ratories. Manufacturers may supply quality-control materi-
· Sample labeling and transcription errors, leading to data
als with laboratory instruments. These programs should be
assigned to the wrong patient
followed in detail to have some assurance that the results
· Use of wrong anticoagulant
produced by the in-clinic laboratory are reliable.
● Inappropriate anticoagulant contamination of the sample
46
i     i i   i
● Improper ratio of anticoagulant to sample
may interfere with assay results by color interference with
· Traumatic transfer of blood to tubes causing hemolysis
spectrophotometric assays. Less commonly. hemolysis may
(see below)
cause a false increase in analyte being measured as a result
● Improper storage conditions during transportation to a
of marlked differential concentrations or enzyme activities
laboratory
between serum and erythrocytes. For instance, horses and 
· Improper sample storage conditions before analysis
cattle have high concentrations of potassium within eryth-
· Lack of or insuffcient mixing of blood for hematology
measurements
not. Therefore, marked hemolysis may result in a falsely
There are specific sample handling procedures that must
increased serum potassium concentration in horses and
be followed to ensure sample quality, and these may vary
cattle, but not in most dogs or in cats.
depending upon the laboratory test being requested. Central
Lipemia causes visible turbidity of the serum, often making
laboratories provide these procedures for proper sample sub-
it opaque to transmitted light. It is expected to occur in small
mission. Suppliers of in-clinic diagnostic instrumentation
animals when they have not been fasted before blood col-
also provide these procedures. Failures related to these pro-
lection. It may also occur in hyperlipidemic syndromes. This
cedures occur because the person(s) involved are either not
interference with light transmission can interfere with spec-
aware of them or are not paying attention to detail. It is the
trophotometric assays. particularly in liquid or cuvette
responsibility of the veterinary facility to ensure that the
chemistry systems. It can also result in apparent dilution of
respective procedures be followed exactly in order to mini-
normal substances (e.g., electrolytes) in the aqueous com-
mize associated errors in laboratory results. The various per-
ponent of serum, resulting in falsely decreased concentra-
 sonnel in the veterinary facility often have limited training
tions (ion exclusion effect).
in laboratory technology. For this reason, it is recommended
Increased serum bilirubin concentrations result in a serum
that facilities designate a lead person or key laboratory oper-
with a darker-yellow color than normal for that species. This
ator to educate others about and monitor laboratory related
increased color can interfere with the results of spectropho-
procedures.
tometric assays.
The potential alterations in biochemistry results caused by
Interfering substances: Lipemia, hemolysis, and
hemolysis, lipemia, and hyperbilirubinemia vary with the
hyperbilirubinemia
substance being assayed and with the method being used for
An interfering substance is a common source of analytical
the assay itself. Reference laboratories usually can provide
error that is present in the sample. Hemolysis, lipemia, and
specific information regarding the effects of hemolysis.
increased serum bilirubin (Fig. 3.7) can potentially affect the
lipemia, or hyperbilirubinemia on test results. Likewise.
results of biochemical assays. Hemolysis refers to the lysis of
manufacturers may provide this information for in-house
erythrocytes and liberation of hemoglobin, and may occur
diagnostic laboratory instrumentation.
either in the circulating blood (in vivo) or during or after
 It is also conceivable that drugs and other chemicals may
blood collection (in vitro). Hemolysis in the sample is usually
alter laboratory test reactions. Known interferents are typi-
due to improper sample collection or handling. Hemolysis
cally outlined in reagent application sheets. This information
is usually available from the laboratory or in the form of
technical briefs from diagnostics suppliers.
Approach to interpreting laboratory data
Comments on general approach
It is important to appreciate that individual diagnostic test 
results are rarely interpretable into a clinical diagnosis.
Abnormal test results typically indicate a relatively nonspe-
cific pathologic process. Grouping of several abnormal results
may improve the specificity of the process or processes. It is
usually only after integration of history, physical findings.
and other diagnostic procedures with laboratory data abnor-
malities that a more defined clinical diagnosis is achieved. Most
laboratory abnormalities have multiple potential causes, and
Figure 3.7 Hemmolysis, lipemmia, and hyperbilirubinemia (left to right) in
the history and physical examination results should be used
serum samples. Lipemic serum here is tinged pink as a result of
to determine which of these potential causes is most likely.
concurrent hemolysis; it mmay appear white to red-tinged.
Using a combination of history, physical examination results.
SECTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
and the pattern of laboratory abnormalities, the veterinarian
ratory data. A common misconception is that the numbers
should attempt to summarize the likely operative pathologic
on a laboratory report are definitive numbers. The reality is
processes present. This summary can often be translated into
that if an individual test is repeated multiple times on the
a working clinical diagnosis or diagnoses. Patterns of abnor-
same sample by the same method in the same laboratory. a
 mal test results often suggest which tissue or organ systems
range of results will be obtained. If results are produced by
are affected, which pathologic processes are occurring. or
two different laboratory methods, even more variation may
both. For example, a combination of an increased concen-
be encountered. Actual reproducibility will vary, but some
tration of blood urea nitrogen (BUN; a test of kidney func-
guidelines for satisfactory analytical performance for a single
tion) with a urine specific gravity indicative of inadequate
method are:
urine concentration is very suggestive of renal failure.
● Most hematology results—±l0% of value
whereas an increased BUN with concentrated urine (high
● Platelets—±20% of value
specific gravity) is more suggestive of conditions such as
● Most clinical chemistry results—±l0% of value
dehydration or shock.
● Enzyme activities in clinical chemistry—±l5% of value
Of course, not every abnormality will fit neatly into one
When comparing results between labora tories or methods.
disease process, nor will every laboratory profile result in a
even greater variation should be expected.
specific diagnosis. In some cases, more than one disease
A practical understanding of the expected reproducibility
process may be occurring. thereby producing a confusing
results in the following interpretive guidelines:
combination of abnormalities. These are considered difficult
· Data must be interpreted with some latitude, especially
cases that may require analysis over time to unravel, and
when test results are near reference limits. This is discussed
may benefit from consultation or second opinion interaction
further under defining what is normal.
with associates.
● When two different laboratories or methods generate
Analysis of sequential changes in laboratory values over
results for the same sample, relatively large differences in
time is sometimes helpful in establishing a diagnosis and is
"numbers" may occur, but usually the interpretation of
important for monitoring progress of the disease or case
those numbers is the same. This often occurs when compar-
management. For instance, periodic determinations of BUN
ing in-house results with commercial laboratory results.
in an animal with renal failure may indicate whether treat-
· When a new sample is analyzed to evaluate patient
ment to reestablish renal function is succeeding (i.e., BUN
change, only relatively large change should be interpreted
should be decreasing) or not. Negative findings in the form
as conclusive change in the patient.
of normal test results also have value. These can rule out
tentative differential diagnoses that were considered on the
Magnitude of change associated with disease
basis of history or physical examination findings.
Considerable experience is required to understand the rela-
tionship between the magnifude of a given laboratory test
Expectations and skilled diagnostics interpretation
abnormality and the severitry of the associated disease condi-
Behind the scenes of the general approach described above.
tion. It is not practical to communicate detailed guidelines for
there are a number of nuances that may be described as
all laboratory tests in this chapter. Small numerical changes
expectations related to diagnostics. Sometimes clinicians are
or abnormalities indicate important or severe disease for
handicapped by unrealistic expectations for laboratory data.
some laboratory tests. Examples might include pH, potassium
The discussion here is aimed at clarifying some of the more
(K+), creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, albumin, and endo-
common expectations to aid the clinician-in-training to be
crine assays. For most other laboratory tests, it takes a con-
more adept at data interpretation. Important considerations
include the following:
important or severe disease. Examples include enzyme activi-
ties, BUN, glucose, and most hematologic measurements.
tion
The desired interpretive experience comes from repeated
● Magnitude of change associated with disease(s)
analysis of clinical case material. A starting point for
●Relationships or interdependency between diagnostic
veterinarians-in-training includes case discussions in various
tests
classes. This is narrated to some degree in various chapters
· Reference intervals and the elusive determination of what
in this textbook, and case presentations at the end of this
is normal vs. abnormal
textbook provide some representative examples. This knowl-
● Laboratory test results that are inconsistent with precon-
edge is then expanded upon with the clinical cases encoun-
ceived notions
tered during the first several years of practice.
Measurement reproducibility
Relationships between diagnostic tests
This is discussed first because it influences other expecta-
Laboratory tests are more meaningful when interpreted in
tions and is important for interpretation of sequential labo-
groupings that are interrelated with respect to pathophysiol-
48
CHAPTER 3 Perspectives in Laboratory Data Interpretation and Disease Diagnosis
ogy. For example, a moderately abnormal increased BUN
a probabilistic manner. When a laboratory test result is sus-
interpreted in isolation may define the relatively nonspecific
piciously abnormal, look for corroboration in other findings.
process of decreased glomerular filtration rate. However.
Also factor in possible age and known breed considerations
when grouped with hematocrit, total protein, creatinine.
for suspect values.
phosphorus, and urinalysis findings, the integrated interpre-
tation is likely to be much more specific as to the probable
Laboratory test results that are inconsistent with
cause of decreased glomerular filtration rate. In addition, the
preconceived notions
other values may corroborate each other when there is a
 question about the validity of a given value. Ideally, labora-
Occasionally the clinician is surprised by an unexpected lab
test value that is moderately or markedly abnormal. A
tory reports are organized in a way to provide some initial
common first reaction is to not believe the result is possible.
grouping that facilitates this relationship in interpretation.
A more appropriate reaction is to reanalyze the clinical situ-
This is often organized by organ system, realizing that some
ation. One should look for other laboratory values or unde-
analytes may have secondary relationships with more than
tected clinical abnormalities that may corroborate the
one organ system. However, chemistry. hematology. and
value(s) in question. The history and physical should be
urinalysis reports are almost always segregated. The user
reevaluated for findings that may corroborate the abnormal
must learn how to cross interpret sections of the report to
value; additional questions may need to be asked of the
achieve all the useful groupings. Table 3.2 shows one method
owner. Next, the possibility of a sample or sample handling
of grouping laboratory tests that achieves most of the
error should be considered. Lastly. if no corroboration or
primary relationships for integrated interpretation. This is a
errors can be found, it may be appropriate to repeat the test
place to start, realizing that secondary relationships will
in question.
become more apparent with experience.
Interpreting normal versus abnormal
Summary of interpretive considerations
As discussed in the above section "Reference Interval Back-
When interpreting laboratory data in conjunction with all
other clinical and physical findings. remain aware of the
table as normal or abnormal, particularly when values are
following interpretive factors. With practice, these become
near the limits of the reference interval. Laboratory reports
habit of the astute clinician.
may contain flags, usually H for high or L for low. This flag-
● Interpret laboratory values in related groups, organized by
organ system.
versus abnormal. Clinicians should be encouraged to inter-
● Interpret laboratory values probabilistically for abnormal-
pret borderline and mildly abnormal values more loosely. in
ity. particularly when values are borderline with respect to
the reference interval limits.
· Develop a sense of the expected magnitude of change in
a value that is associated with important disease.
Table 3.2 Grouping of laboratory tests for interpretation.
● Consider that analytical reproducibility is such that only
Hermatology is interpreted separately, but abnormalities may be
referable to chemical abnormalities in the groups below.
 of true change.
Kidney
 Metabolic
 Specialty
● When laboratory values initially do not seemingly fit the
Liver
clinical condition(s). evaluate for corroborating laboratory
BUN
 Bilirubin 
Glucose
CK
and clinical data.
Creatinine
ALT
Calcium 
Amylase
· Train staff to prevent improper sample handling and inter-
Phosphorus
AST
 Total Protein
Lipase
Aqel soaua on peal a ieun sanuisqns bu
Urinalysis:
ALP
Albumin
 Endocrine tests
data. Consider these possibilities when laboratory data is
Specific gravity 
155
Cholesterol 
Immunoassays
seemingly nonsensical.
Chemistry
 Bile acids 
Sodium 
Other special tests 
Microscopic
 Chloride
 Potassium 
pH
Suggested Reading
HCO;
pO, (arterial)
Reference intervals
Geffre A, Friedrichs K, Harr K, Concordet D, Trumel C, Braun JP
BUN, blood urea nitrogen: ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST.
{2009) Reference values: a review. Ver Clin Parho! 38(3): 288-98.
aspartate aminotransferase; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; GGT, garmma
Solberg HE (200l) Establishment and use of reference values. In:
glutamyltransferase; CK, creatine kinase
Burtis CA, Ashwood ER (eds.), Tretz Fundamentals of Clinical Chem-
istry. 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp. 251-61.
49
 Solberg HE (198 l) Statistical treatment of collected reference values 
Westgard Rules for Quality Assurance. Available at: http://
and determination of reference limits. In: Grasbeck R, Alstrom T
www.westgard.com.
[eds.), Reference Values in Laboratory Medicine. London: John Wiley
S Sons, Ltd.
Reproducibility and data interpretation
Weiser MG, Vap LM, Thrall, MA (2007) Perspectives and advances
Quality control in veterinary laboratories
Weiser MG, Thrall, MA (2007) Quality control recommendations
cal chemistry. In Vererinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal
and procedures for in-clinic laboratories. In Vererinary Clinics of
Practice. Issue title: Clinical Pathology and Diagnostic Techniques.
North America: Small Animal Practice. Issue title: Clinical Pathology
Vol. 37 (March), pp. 221-36.
and Diagnostic Techniques. Vol. 37 (March), pp. 237-44.
50
Immunodiagnostics: Current Use and
Future Trends in Veterinary Medicine
Wayne A. Jensen
Morris Animal Foundation, Denver, CO
Introduction
peroxidase, alkaline phosphatase, glucose oxidase, lucifer-
ase). fluorochromes (e.g.. fluorescein, phycoerythrin).
Immunodiagnostics are tests that use antibody-antigen
radioisotopes (e.g., I-125), or microparticles (e.g., colloidal
binding to generate a measurable result that assists in the
gold, latex beads). For quantitative results, the signal mea-
diagnosis of disease. As such, immunodiagnostics are also
sured from the sample is compared to the signal obtained
"immunoassays" (although the reverse is not always true).
from standards containing know concentrations of the
Antibodies are plasma glycoproteins, called gamma globu-
analyte.
lins or immunoglobulins (Ig) generated in response to expo-
 In addition to detection of antibodies or antigens associ-
sure of the immune system to an antigen. Simply defined,
ated with infectious disease, immunodiagnostic tests are also
an antigen is any substance that stimulates the immune
used for measurement of many other analytes including
 system to produce antibodies. Antigens are usually proteins 
drugs. hormones, tumor markers., and markers of cardiac
or polysaccharides. Immunodiagnostics were initially used
injury. In the case of drugs and hormones, the analytes
in the diagnosis of infectious diseases, either indirectly by
measured are frequently haptens. A hapten can only elicit
detection of antibody or directly by detection of antigen.
production of antibodies when combined with an antigenic
Detection of antibody indicates previous exposure and not
carrier molecule. However, once forrmed haptens can react
necessarily the active presence of the antigen.
with antibodies in the absence of association with the carrier.
Immunodiagnostics take advantage of the specific binding
of an antibody to its antigen. An epitope is the portion of an
antigen bound by an antibody. Binding between an antibody
Antibody structure
and its epitope is dependent on noncovalent interactions
including ionic interactions, hydrogen bonds, and hydro-
Antibodies or immunoglobulins are proteins produced by
phobic interactions. The strength of the interaction between
differentiated B-lymphocytes. There are five classes of anti-
a single antigen-binding site on the antibody and its epitope
bodies, namely, immunoglobulin A (IgA), immunoglobulin 
is called its affnity. Most antigens (e.g., viral capsid proteins)
D (IgD), immunoglobulin E (IgE), immunoglobulin G (IgG).
have multiple epitopes. Epitopes to which the greatest
and immunoglobulin M (IgM). Each antibody consists of
amount of antibody is produced are called immunodomi-
four polypeptides—two heavy chains and two light chains
nant epitopes.
held together by interchain disulfide bonds to form a "y"
 Immunodiagnostics are capable of detecting the presence
shaped molecule (Fig. 4.1). The IgD, IgE and IgG antibody
(qualitative tests) or amount (quantitative tests) of an
classes are found as a single structural unit, whereas IgA
analyte (either antibody or antigen) present in the sample
antibodies may contain either one or two units and IgM
at concentrations below what can be accurately determined
antibodies consist of five disulfide-linked units (Fig. 4.2).
by other routine testing methodologies. Detection is usually
Intrachain disulfide bonds support structural "domains" of
approximately ll0 amino acid residues in length each.
then using the labeled reagent to probe samples for the pres-
Heavy chains are composed of either 3 (IgA, IgD, IgE) or 4
ence of antibody or antigen, respectively. Common labels
(IgE. IgM) constant domains and a single amino-terminal
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
51
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Antibody combining site (paratopc)
Historically, proteolytic enzymes (proteases) have been
used to cleave antibody molecules into functional fra gments.
Antibody molecules are cleaved into three fragments by
limited digestion with the protease papain. Two of the frag-
These fragments contain the antigen-binding activity and
Fab
are termed Fab fragments (Fragment antigen binding). Fab
fragments contain a complete light chain and the variable
and amino-terminal most constant domain of the heavy
Hinge region
chain (Fig. 4.1).
The third fragment obtained from digestion with papain
contains the remaining constant domains of the heavy
C2
Interchain disulfide bonds
chains and does not bind antigen. This fragment is referred
Intrachain disulfide honds
to as the Fc fragment (Fig. 4.l) because it was found to be
   ae n r  a , 
antibody molecule that interacts with effector molecules and
cells. An example of this is the interaction of IgE with the
Figure 4.1 Schermatic of an antibody molecule illustrating the heavy (H)
FcERI receptor on mast cells. Relative to immunodiagnos-
and light (L) chains held together by interchain disulfide bonds. Intrachain 
tics, Fc fragrments are used to raise species and class specific
Oll Aaeixoidde yoea ,'suieop, leinns aean spuog apins
antibodies for the detection of antibody responses to many
arnino acid residues in length. The variable (V) domains of the heavy and
infectious diseases. For example, anti-cat IgM and anti-cat
light chains form the antigen binding site. The constant (C) domains
IgG are used to differentially detect an IgM versus IgG
define the class of the heavy (A. D, E. G, and M) and light (kappa or
immune response, respectively, which has been reported to
larmbda) chains. Fab fragrments contain the entire light chain and the
be useful in the diagnosis of acute T. gondii infection in clini-
variable and amino-termminal most constant domain of the heavy chain. Fc
fragments contain the remaining constant domains of the heavy chain.
cally ill cats.
Another protease, pepsin, cleaves on the carboxy-terminal
side of the disulfide bonds generating a fragment, referred
to as the F(ab'), fragment, that contains both "arms" of the
"Y" (Fig. 4.1). Pepsin cleaves the remaining portion of the
heavy chain into several smaller fragments. Since the F(ab')2
fragment contains both antigen-binding sites, it has the same
Heavy chain
antigen-crosslinking capabilities as the original antibody
Light chain
molecule. F(ab'), fragments are occasionally used in diag-
Disulfide bonds :
nal antibody but lack the Fc fragment which is sometimes
associated with nonspecific binding.
l-chain
Generation of antibodies used in
immunoassays
Figure 4.2 Schematic of IgM illustrating its pentameric structure.
interchain disulfide bonds, and the J-chain.
Immunodiagnostics use antibodies to detect both antigens
(e.g.. proteins from infectious agents) and antibodies gener-
variable domain. The constant domains of the heavy chain
ated in response to foreign proteins. Antibodies used as
define the class of each antibody and is responsible for the
reagents in immunodiagnostic tests can be either polyclonal
biological activity of the antibody. Light chains are composed
or monoclonal. Antibodies are named by the species from
of a single constant domain and a single amino-terminal
which they were obtained and the antigen to which they
variable domain. The constant domain of the light chain
were produced. For example, rabbit anticanine Y chain is
defines the type of light chain as either kappa or lambda.
rabbit antibody specific for Y chain of dog IgG. Unless oth-
The combined variable regions of the heavy and light chains
erwise specifed, antibodies are assumed to be polyclonal.
form the antigen binding site and are responsible for the
specificity of antibody-antigen interaction. The presence of
Polyclonal antibodies
two heavy and two light chains results in two antigen
 Polyclonal antibodies are generated via hyperimmunization
binding sites for each antibody molecule (Fig. 4.1).
of an animal (e.g., rabbit, sheep. goat) with the antigen of
52
CHAPTER 4 Immunodiagnostics: Current Use and Future Trends in Veterinary Medicine
interest. The animal's immune response to the antigen pro-
duces antiserum, a heterogeneous mixture of antibodies
Polyclonal antibodies therefore represent a mixture of anti-
bodies derived from many different B lymphocyte clones.
each with a unique B-cell receptor and each capable of
binding the antigen. As a result, within each pool of poly-
clonal antibodies will be antibodies that bind to the numer-
will bind to their respective epitope with high affinity and
some will have lower affinities.
Monodonal antibodies
 In 1975. Georges Kohler and César Milstein? demonstrated
that fusion of antibody-producing B-cells with myeloma
cells that had lost their ability to secrete antibodies resulted
in an immortal cell line or "hybridoma" that secreted a single
monospecific antibody. In the fused hybridoma cell, the
B-cell supplies the ability to secrete a specific antibody and
the myeloma cell gives it immortality. The generation and
Figure 4.3 llustration of a competitive irmmunoassay for the detection
use of monoclonal antibodies has been an important tool in
of antigen. In this example, antigen in the patient's sample competes
research and medicine (in 1984, Kohler and Milstein
with enzyme-labeled antigen for antibodly bound to a solid phase. After a
received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their
wash step to remove unbound enzyme-labeled antigen, adition of
discovery of monoclonal antibodies) .
chromogenic substrate results in a color change that is inversely
Monoclonal antibodies are typically made using polyeth-
 proportional to the quantity of antigen in the patient's sample.
ylene glycol to fuse myeloma cells with spleen cells from a
mouse that has been immunized with the antigen of inter-
est. The success rate of fusion is low so a selective medium
is used that only allows the growth of hybridoma cells. After
fusion, the mixture of cells is diluted and aliquoted into 96-
of the wells will contain cells. This increases the chance that
    s   , r 
parent cell.
 Cell culture supernatants are then tested for the presence
of antibody with the ability to bind to the antigen of interest
- Im mobilized antigen
(usually the same antigen that was used for immunization
Figure 4.4 llustration of a competitive inmmunoassay for the detection
of the B-cell donor mouse). Immunodiagnostic assays used
of antibody. In this example, antibody in the patient's sarmple competes
for the screening process are typically high-throughput
with enzymme-labeled antibody for antigen bound to a solid phase. After a 
assays (e.g., ELISA or immunodot blot) to allow for the
wash step to remove unbound enzyme-labeled antibody, addition of
screening of hundreds of hybridoma clones. The subcloning
chromogenic substrate results in a color change that is inversely
process is repeated at least three times to ensure that the
proportional to the quantity of antibody in the patient's sample
final clone was generated from a single parent cel. The most
productive and stable clone (some hybridomas lose the
  n si  o  d o 
the concentration of analyte in the sample (Figs. 4.3 and
culture medium to a high volume for large scale production
4.4). In noncompetitive immunoassays. the amount of
of monoclonal antibody.
analyte (antigen or antibody) in the sample is directly pro-
portional to the signal generated (Fig. 4.5).
 Immunodiagnostic assays can also be either homogenous
Immunoassay formats
or heterogeneous. Homogenous immunoassays are per-
formed simply by mixing the sample with reagents and
Immunoassays can be either competitive or noncompetitive.
In competitive immunoassays, the analyte (antigen or anti-
competitive immunoassays) by the reaction chemistry that
body) in the sample competes with labeled antigen or anti-
results from antigen-antibody binding. As such, homoge-
body and the signal generated is inversely proportional to
nous immunoassays do not require the separation of bound
53
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
gated reagent to be fixed to a solid phase (Figs. 4.3, 4.4 and
4.5) to allow for removal of unbound enzyme-conjugated
reagent without removal of the bound enzyme-conjugated
+Substrate
reagent. Examples of solid phases commonly used in immu-
noassays include microtiter wells, nitrocellulose and latex or
Wash
W'ash
magnetic beads.
4
Similar to homogeneous immunoassays. heterogeneous
Figure 4.5 llustration of a noncompetitive irnmunoassay for the
pauniden s! aldwes ayl ul uabue 'ajdwexa siul ul labiue jo uonatap
immunoassays can also be formatted as either competitive
 Or noncompetitive assays. With competitive assay formats.
by antibody bound to a solid phase. After a wash step. enzyme-labeled
antigen-specific antibody binds to the captured antigen. After another
the presence of analyte in the sample decreases the amount
wash to remmove unbound enzymme-labeled antibody, addition of
 of signal generated. Common competitive immunoassay
chromogenic substrate results in a color change that is proportional to
formats include:
the quantity of antigen in the patient's sample
1. antigen in the sample competing with free labeled antigen
for a limited quantity of bound unlabeled antibody (Fig.
4.3);
antigen-antibody from free antigen (or antibody). For this
2. antigen in the sample competing with bound unlabeled
reason homogeneous immunoassays tend to be easier and
antigen for a limited quantity of free labeled antibody.
faster to perform, however, they are generally less sensitive.
 In both of these formats, the binding of antigen in the
An example of a homogenous immunoassay is the detection
sample to antibody (either bound or free) blocks binding of 
of antigen-antibody complex formation by measuring the
the labeled reagent to the solid phase and thus allows the
resultant decrease in light transmission through the sample
removal of the labeled reagent in the subsequent wash step.
(turbidimetry): see Chapter 2.
Sensitivity can be improved in the first competitive immu-
noassay format by adding the sample to the bound unla-
enzyme donor and enzyme acceptor pairs that readily asso-
beled antibody prior to addition of the labeled antigen.
ciate to generate active enzyme. In these assays, antibody
Similarly, sensitivity can be improved in the second competi-
tive assay format by adding the sample to the free labeled
either the enzyme donor or acceptor subunit blocks the
antibody prior to incubation with the bound unlabeled
association (and therefore, activity) of the enzyme. Analyte
antigen.
present in the sample binds the antibody and prevents it
 In contrast to competitive immunoassays, noncompetitive
from binding to the enzyme subunit, thereby, allowing the
immunoassays rely on direct measurement of antibody
formation of active enzyme. As such, these assays are
binding sites occupied by analyte. Another difference
considered to be competitive immunoassays since t
the
between competitive and noncompetitive immunoassays is
analyte-antibody binding reaction competes with the binding
in the relative concentration of reagents. As mentioned
of antibody to the hapten-conjugated enzyme. Another
above, competitive assays require limiting the quantities of
antigen, antibody, or both. In contrast, reagents are applied
say technology utilizes fluorescence energy transfer where
a "fluorescer" is conjugated to the hapten and the "quencher"
 in order to maximize sensitivity.
is conjugated to the antibody. In the absence of analyte in
A common noncompetitive heterogeneous immunoassay
the sample the quencher-conjugated antibody binds the
format for antigen is the capture or sandwich immunoassay
hapten-conjugated fluorescer and extinguishes the signal. In
(Fig. 4.5). In this format, bound antibody (either polyclonal
the presence of analyte in the sample, a portion of the
or monoclonal) specific for the antigen of interest is incu-
quencher-conjugated antibodies bind the analyte and are
bated with sample, washed, then incubated with another
therefore no longer available to bind the hapten-conjugated
labeled antibody (either polyclonal or monoclonal) specific
fluorescer and quench the fluorescence signal.
for the antigen of interest. Antigen present in the sample is
Unlike
homogeneous immunoassays.
heterogeneous
"captured" (i.e., sandwiched) between the bound antibody
immunoassays require the separation of antigen-antibody
and the labeled antibody with the amount of signal gener-
complexes from unbound antigen (or antibody) because the
ated dependent on the amount of antigen in the sample.
label is not affected by the antigen-antibody binding event.
Examples of an antigen capture immunoassay frequently
Using enzyme immunoassays (EIA) as an example, unbound
     a  
enzyme-conjugated reagent must be physically removed
manufactured by Abaxis, Heska, Idexx, Synbiotics. and
from bound enzyme-conjugated reagent prior to the addi-
 others. Noncompetitive immunoassay formats for the detec-
tion of the enzyme substrate. This removal step is usually
tion of antibody frequently use bound antigen to "capture"
accomplished by "washing." Another characteristic of het-
specific antibody and anti-Fc labeled antibodies for detection
erogeneous immunoassays is the requirement for unconju-
of captured antibody.
54
CHAPTER 4 Immunodiagnostics: Current Use and Future Trends in Veterinary Medicine
Factors influencing immunoassay design
to perform because there are no washing steps involved. For
this reason, homogeneous immunoassay formats are well
Considerations in the selection of an immunoassay format
suited for automation on high throughput clinical analyzers.
include; analyte characteristics and concentration, desired
Due to the requirement for washing between reagents, het-
endpoint (qualitative or quantitative), and the environment
erogeneous immunoassays tend to require greater technical
in which the test will be used.
skill of the operator. Quantitative immunoassays (both
homogeneous and heterogeneous) have historically required
Analyte characteristics and concentration
sophisticated equipment (e.g., spectrophotometer, spectro-
Small nonprotein analytes and haptens (e.g., thyroxine) are
fluorometer, luminometer) for detection and quantitation of 
not readily detected in noncompetitive immunoa ssays due to
generated signals and are, therefore, usually performed in
the inability to "sandwich" the analyte because of a lack of
centralized laboratories.
sufficient number of binding sites (epitopes). These analytes
Simple to use qualitative heterogeneous immunoassays
have been available for use in veterinary practice for many
or homogeneous immunoassay formats.
s.Homogeneous
immunoassay formats are most appropriate for antigens or
haptens whose concentrations are relatively high (nmol/L)
buffer that is manually activated (e.g. Idexx SNAP@),
(e.g., total serum thyroxine) whereas heterogeneous com-
require the addition of wash buffer after application of
petitive immunoassay formats are capable of detection limits
sample (e.g., Abaxis VetScan@ and Synbiotics Witness@), or
in the picomolar range (e.g., free serum thyroxine). Noncom-
do not require wash buffer (Heska SoloStep@). The Idexx
SNAP@ tests are sandwich ELISA formatted tests for the
excess are capable of detection limits approaching 1 fmol/L.3
detection of either antigen or antibody. The Abaxis VetScan@.
Synbiotics Witness@, and Heska SoloStep@ tests are lateral
Desired endpoint
flow immunoassays (LFIAs). LFIAs are sandwich immuno-
 All immunoassay formats can be used to report a qualitative
assays that do not use enzyme/substrate for signal amplifica-
result simply by identifying an assay "cutoff" (usually arbi-
tion, but rather use antibody (or antigen) conjugated to
trary determined as three standard deviations above the
particles (sometimes referred to as microspheres or beads)
mean of the negative controls) and reporting results as
made of latex, gold, carbon, or metal for detection of antigen-
either positive or negative. Visual read test results are usually
antibody binding (Fig. 4.6).
qualitative but some test formats allow for semiquantitative
 In LFIAs, the microsphere-labeled reagent (e.g., antibody)
results without the need for instrumentation (e.g. Heska
reacts with the analyte (e.g. antigen) as the sample wicks
ERD-HealthScreen@). Most immunoassay formats can also
ds isan aun dn  sauma pu sid aun yao
be used to report quantitative results as long as the signal
As the mixture migrates through the "test window," antigen-
recognition technology is capable of detecting differences in
antibody-microsphere complexes are captured at a "test"
 signal magnitudes. Quantitative results usually require the
line by immobilized antibody (either antibody specific for
use of calibrators containing known concentrations of
the antigen of interest or an anti-Fc antibody). Excess and
analyte to establish a standard curve from which the sample
antigen-free complexes (e.g., in the case of a negative
analyte concentration is determined.
sample) continue migrating beyond the test line. Both the
ELISA and LFIA in-clinic tests have built in procedural con-
Environment
The environment in which the immunoassay is performed
that the enzyme was active and the sample flowed correctly
has important implications for format selection. As discussed
for ELISA and LFIA tests, respectively.
Prefilter
Iabel pad
Nitrocellulose
Absorbent pad
Sample
IgG in
Ag-coated particle-IgG complexes
Absorbent pad
sample
binds to
nigrate through membrane.
Figure 4.6 llustration of a lateral flow
Ag-cnated
 Immobilized anti-lgG binds complexes
inmmunoassay (not drawn to scale).
particle
55
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
Factors influencing immunoassay
animals, the amount of IgG is frequently in great excess 
performance
relative to the amount of IgE).12
 Interference in immunoassays can also be caused by the
 As discussed above, immunoassay format can impact perfor-
presence of endogenous immunoglobulins that bind to anti-
 mance. In addition, both the reagents and samples used in 
bodies from other species (heterophilic antibodies). Since
immunoassays play a fundamental role in the quality of
mouse antibodies are frequently used as reagents for immu-
results provided.
noassays, the detection of interference due to heterophilic
antibodies specific for mouse immunoglobulin is not uncom-
Reagent considerations
 mon.13. 14 In people these antibodies are termed human anti-
Immunoassays for the detection of allergen-specific IgE
mouse antibodies (HAMA) and they are thought to originate
serve as an example of the impact reagents can have on
from either environmental exposure to mice or medical
immunoassay performance. The ideal immunoassay would
agents containing antibodies derived from mice. Hetero-
Use high-affinity antibodies that are minimally crossreactive.
philic antibodies have also been reported in dogs.' Hetero-
The specificity of early immunoassays for the detection of
philic dog antimouse antibodies cause occasional false
allergen-specific IgE was questioned due to the potential
positive results in some in-clinic heartworm antigen capture
crossreactivity of polyclonal anti-igE antibodies with IgG4.5
assays. In heartworm antigen tests, false positives can be
Allergen-specific IgG is found in sera from both atopic and
 differentiated from true positives by denaturing the antibod
nonatopic animals. Therefore, any crossreactivity of the
ies (using heat or acid treatment of the sample) prior to
anti-IigE antibodies will decrease immunoassay specificity.
performing the  immunoassay (fortunately.  heartworm
For this reason, specifc monoclonal anti-IgE antibodies and
antigen survives these denaturation processes). For this
Fc epsilon receptor have been used as IgE detection reagents 
reason, it is important to verify positive heartworm antigen
in allergen-specific IgE immunoassays. 6
test results obtained from nondenatured samples prior to
 In addition to crossreactivity of antibody, antigen crossre-
treatment for heartworms.
activity can also impact immunoassay specificity. In allergen-
specific IgE immunoassays. it was found that taxonomically
unrelated allergens contained crossreacting carbohydrate
Future trends for use of
epitopes. Specific IgE binding to these crossreacting carbo-
immunodiagnostics in veterinary medicine
hydrate epitopes results in false positives relative to intra-
dermal skin test results or immunoassay results using
In addition to development of new immunodiagnostic tests
deglycosylated allergens. 7 Importantly, crossreacting carbo-
for both infectious and metabolic diseases of animals, future
hydrate epitopes are also found on horseradish peroxidase.
immunodiagnostics technology  will provide quantitative
an enzyme frequently used as a label in immunoassays.
immunoassays in the in-clinic environment. These instru-
Under these conditions, non-IgE antibody (e.g., IgG) can
ments will be smaller and less expensive than the current
simultaneously bind the carbohydrate epitopes found on
quantitative instruments found in central immunodiagnos-
both the allergen and horseradish peroxidase, generating a
tic laboratories. Benefits will include improved patient care
false positive result for allergen-specific IgE.7s.ip For this
 due to the decreased time to obtain results, lower costs, and
reason, many allergen-specific IgE immunoassays now use
alleviation of concerns with shipping of samples to outside
alkaline phosphatase as the reporter enzyme rather than
laboratories.
horseradish peroxidase.11
The first quantitative in-clinic immunoassay for thyroxine
 designed for use in veterinary medicine was developed using
Sample considerations
an EIA format in a single-use cartridge with results mea-
Relative concentrations of analyte in the sample can impact
sured by a benchtop reader. Initial studies indicated that
the quality of immunoassay results. In homogeneous immu-
reproducibility and correlation with the reference standard
noa ssays that measure antigen-antibody complex formation,
laboratory-based test were inadequate.'6 However, a more
excess antigen can saturate antibody binding sites and
thereby prevent complex formation. The interference of
and better correlation with multiple laboratory-based thy-
excess analyte, resulting in a lower than actual measure-
ment of analyte concentration, is referred to as the prozone
bile acids have subsequently been introduced for this EIA-
effect or prozone phenomenon. Similarly, in immunoassays
based cartridge and reader system.
measuring a specific antibody class, excess antibody of a dif-
Additional quantitative in-clinic immunodiagnostic tech-
ferent class can bind the antigen and prevent binding by the
 , r as, a oe aa  s
antibody class of interest. Examples include interference due
single-use tests similar to the tests discussed above. Quanti-
to excess IgG in allergen-specific IgE immunoassays result-
tative immunoassay formats that do not use enzyme-
56
CHAPTER 4 Immunodiagnostics: Current Use and Future Trends in Veterinary Medicine
dependent signal amplification would have the advantage of
The piezofilm immunoassay technology is being developed
not requiring special handling (e.g., refrigeration) to prevent
as a point-of-care system by Vivacta Ltd. located in Kent,
deteriora tion of the enzyme and substrate. However, current
UK.23
non-EIA based qualitative tests (e.g., LFIAs) lack sufficient
sensitivity for routine use in quantitative tests.18.19
Efforts are underway to develop quantitative immunoas-
References
says which retain the simplicity of non-EIA based qualitative
tests (e.g., LFIAs) with improved sensitivity. Following are
ssnodsoau pue ssousedoxo (oooz)  undden dr Aaqna "1
examples of quantitative immunoassay technologies based
In Infetious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed., CE Greene (ed.).
on single-use cassettes that have potential for in-clinic use
pp. 754-775. St. Louis: Elsevier, Inc.
in veterinary medicine.
2. Kohler G, Milstein C (1975) Continuous cultures of fused cells
1. The fluorescence-labeled optical-read immunodipstick
secre ting antibody of predefined specificity. Narure 256: 495-7.
3. Gosling JP (1990) A decade of development in immunoassay
instead of immunogold particles or latex beads in a LFIA
methodology. Clinical Chemisrry 36: 1408-27.
format which results in l00-loo0 fold increase in sensitiv-
4. Stedman K, Lee K, Affermi C, et al. (2ool) Measurement of
canine IgE using the alpha chain of the human high affnity IgE
ity.'^ Use of a CCD camera based instrument with densito-
receptor.Veterinary Immunology and Immunopathology 78:
metric analysis software would allow quantitation of the
349-55.
signal.
5. Wassom DL, Grieve RB (1998) In vitro measurement of canine
2. The Rapid Analyte Measurement Platform (RAMPIM)
and feline IgE: a review of FceR lo-based assays for detection of
produced by Response Biomedical Corporation ( Vancouver.
allergen-reactive IgE. Vererinary Dermatology 9: 173-8.
BC, Canada) uses fluorescent-dyed latex particles in a
6. Hammerling R, de Weck AL (1998) Comparison of two diag-
LFIA cassette. Antibody-conjugated latex particles bind to
nostic tests for canine atopy using monoclonal anti-igE antibod-
the analyte and are captured at the test line. Unbound
jes. Veterinary Dermatology 9: 191-9.
antibody-conjugated latex particles are captured at the
7. Chen L, Ofori-Anti AO, Goodman RE (2007) Detection of
control line and serve as an internal calibrator. Fluorescence
plasma of individuals with food allergies to peanut and/or
measured at the test and control lines is converted into a
soybean. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology ll9(supple-
ratio which allows for correction of test-to-test variation
The RAMPrM immunoassay system has been shown to
menty: S193.
8. Mari A, Iacovacci P, Affermi C, er al. (1999) Specific IgE to cross-
provide results comparable to a central laboratory immuno-
reactive carbohydrate determinants strongly affect the in vitro
assay platform.20
diagnosis of allergic diseases. Journal of Alfergy and Clinical Immu-
3. Magnetic particles have also been incorporated into LFIAs
nology 103: 1005-11.
to increase sensitivity and provide quantitative results. 2L2
9. Batanero E, Villalba M, Monsalve RI, Rodriquez R (1996) Cross-
To function in LFIAs, the particles must be superparamag-
reactivity between the major allergen from olive pollen and
netic, becoming magnetic only when placed in a strong
unrelated glycoproteins: evidence of an epitope in the glycan
 magnetic field. Under these conditions, the magnitude of the 
moiety of the allergen. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
97: 1264-71.
change in the magnetic field is directly proportional to the
amount of magnetic particles captured at the test line which
10. Mari A (2002) IgE to cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants:
analysis of the distribution and appraisal of the in vivo and in
Magnetic particle-based  immunoassays have a distinct
129: 286-95.
advantage in that the signal is very stable over time.
11. Lorch G, Hillier A, Kwochka KW, Saville WJ, Kohn CW, LeRoy
4. The use of piezofilm in quantitative immunoassays has
BE (200l) Comparison of immediate intradermal test reactivity
recently been described.2 Piezofilm is a polymer film with
with serum IgE quantitation by use of a radioallergosorbent test
piezoelectric properties which generates an electric charge
and two ELISA in horses with and without atopy. Journa! of the
when the film is exposed to heat or mechanical strain. In
American Veterinary Medical Association 218: 1314-22.
piezofilm-based immunoassays, capture antibody is attached
12. Morgan EE, Miller WH, Wagner B (2007) A comparison of
to the surface of the film and the detection antibody is con-
intradermal testing and detection of allergen-specific immuno-
jugated to carbon colloids which absorb light. In the pres-
globulin E in serum by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in
o a s u  es
ence of antigen, the capture antibody-antigen-detection
and Immunopathology 120: 160-7.
antibody complex is localized on the surface of the piezofilm.
13. Klee GG (2ooo) Human anti-mouse antibodies. Archives of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine 124: 921-3.
to the piezofilm, eliciting an electric charge. An advantage
14. Kricka LI (l 999) Human anti-animal antibody interference in
of this technology is the lack of necessity for removal of the
immunological assays. Clinical Chemisrry 45: 942-56.
15. Solter PF, Oyama MA, Sisson DD (2008) Canine heterophilic
by unbound conjugates is dissipated into the assay medium.
antibodies as a source of false-positive B-type natruiuretic
SEcTloN I General Principles of Laboratory Testing and Diagnosis
peptide sandwich ELISA results. Vererinary Clinical Pathology 37:
21. LaBorde RT, O'Farrell BO (2002) Paramagnetic-particle detec-
86-95.
ton in lateral-flow assays. IVD Technology 8: 36-41.
16. Lurye JC, Behrend EN, Sisson DD (2002) Evaluation of an in-
22. Lenglet L, Nikitin P, Pequignot C (2008) Magnetic immunoas-
house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for quantitative
:vAInr oou QA iod un waped mau  sAes
measurement of serum total thyroxine concentration in dogs
43-9.
and cats. Journal of the American Vererinary Medical Association
23. Ross S (2008) Developing an optically stimulated piezofilm
221: 243-9.
'6  .  ss
17. Kemppainen RJ, Birchfeld JR (2006) Measurement of total
thyroxine concentrations in serum from dogs and cats by use
of various methods. American Journa! of Vererinary Research 67:
Further reading
259-65.
18. Andreotti PE, Ludwig GV, Peruski AH (2003) Immunoassay of
Bond R, Thorogood SC, LIoyd DH (1994) Evaluation of two enzyme-
infectious agenets. BioTechnigues 35: 850-9.
 linked immunosorbent assays for the diagnosis of canine atopy.
19. Bonenberger J, Doumanas M (2006) Overcoming sensitivity
Vererinary Record 135: 130-3.
 limitations of lateral-flow immunoassays with a novel labeling 
Kleinbeck ML, Hites MJ, Loker JL, Halliwell RE, Lee KW (1989)
technique. IVD Technology 12: 41-6.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for measurement of
20. Lee-Lewandrowski E, Januzzi JL, Green SM, et al. (2007) Multi-
allergen-specific IgE antibodies in canine serum. American Journa!
center validation of the Response Biomedical Corporation
of Vererinary Research 50: 1831-9.
        
20-4.
58
Hematology of Common
Domestic Species
Erythrocyte Morphology
Mary Anna Thrall
Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine
The primary function of the erythrocyte is to transport
Erythrocyte morphology often is an important aid in
hemoglobin, which carries oxygen to the tissues. The
establishing a diagnosis regarding the cause of anemia, and
deformable, permeable membrane that encloses the red-cell
it sometimes is helpful in establishing the diagnosis of other
components is made of lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates.
disorders as well. Critical to blood-cell evaluation is ade-
Altera tions in the lipid composition (primarily phospholipids 
quate preparation of a blood film (see Chapter l). The
and cholesterol) of the membrane may result in abnormal
observer should examine the leukocyte counting area to
red-cell shapes. Membrane proteins form the cytoskeleton
evaluate erythrocyte morphology. because the red blood
of the membrane, and these proteins also play key roles in
cells are neither too dense nor too flattened in this area. The
maintaining both cell shape and integrity. These membrane
interpretation of red-blood-cell morphology should be made
proteins have been named according to their relative loca-
in conjunction with other quantitative data from the com-
tion from the place of migration when solubilized and sub-
plete blood count. For example, the degree of polychromasia
jected to electrophoresis. Bands 1 and 2 (i.e., spectrin) and
in erythrocytes usually is more significant when the red-cell
band 5 (i.e., actin) are the major cytoskeletal proteins.
mass is decreased.
Abnormalities in membrane proteins have also been associ-
This chapter concentrates primarily on those morphologic
ated with abnormal red-cell shapes.
characteristics that are most diagnostically useful. Morphol-
Normal erythrocyte morphology varies among different
ogy of erythrocytes is categorized here according to color.
species (Fig. 5.l). Mammalian erythrocytes are anucleate.
size, shape, structures in or on the erythrocytes, and the
unlike those of all other vertebrates, which have nuclei.
arrangement of cells on blood films.
Erythrocytes are round and somewhat biconcave in most
mammalian species, except in members of the family Camel-
lidae (e.g., llamas, camels, and alpacas), which have oval
Erythrocyte color
erythrocytes. The biconcavity causes stained red blood cells
to appear to have a central, pale area, because the observer
Polychromasia
is looking through less hemoglobin in this area of the cell.
Polychromatophilic cells are young erythrocytes that have
been released early. Usually, they are large and more blue
Species with smaller erythrocytes, such as the cat, horse.
in color than mature erythrocytes (Fig. 5.2). The blue color
cow, sheep, and goat, have less concavity and, thus, little to
results from organelles (i.e., ribosomes, mitochondria) that
no central pallor. The biconcave disc shape is efficient for
are still present in the immature cells. The presence or
oxygen exchange, and it allows the cell to be deformable as
absence of polychromatophilic erythrocytes is very impor-
it moves through vasculature with a smaller diameter than
tant when determining the cause of anemia. If immature
that of the erythrocyte itself. Briefly, the significant differ-
cells are released, the likely cause of the anemia is blood loss
ences between species are size, shape, amount of central
or blood destruction, with the bone marrow attempting to
pallor, tendency to form rouleaux, presence of basophilic
compensate by the early release of cells (see Chapter 8). If
stippling in regenerative response to anemia, and the pres-
the anemia is caused by erythroid hypoplasia or aplasia
 i  i  i  n 
within the marrow, then the level of polychromatophilic
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
61
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
=
B
Figure 5.1 Normal canine (C), equine (E), feline (F). and bovine (B)
Figure 5.2 Blood film from a dog with iron-deficiency anemia. Note the
erythrocytes. Note the larger size and marked central pallor of the canine
lack of density of the blood filn, suggesting marked anemia. Most of the 
erythrocytes commpared to those of the other species. Wright stain
erythrocytes are small and hypochromic (arrowheads). The anemmia is 
regenerative, and nummerous polychroratophilic erythrocytes are present 
(arrows). Wright stain.
 Table 5.1 Significant differences in erythrocytes between species.
 Species
 Diameter (μum)
Rouleaux
Central Pallor
 Basophilic Stippling
Reticulocytes (%)a
Mcv (fL)
Dog
7.0
++++
1
60-72
Pig
6.0
+
土
1
50-68
e3
5.8
+
0.5
05-66
Horse
5.7
++
0b
36-52
Cow
5.5
++
0
55-L6
Sheep
4.5
+#
23-48
Goat
3.2
+
15-30
 aWith norrmal packed cell volume.
 bDoes not increase in response to anemia.
cells will not be increased (see Chapter 7). Horses are unique.
tion from iron deficiency (Fig. 5.2). Erythrocytes of iron-
however, in that they do not release significant numbers of
deficient dogs have more obvious hypochromasia than
polychromatophilic cells in the face of anemia.
erythrocytes of other species with iron deficiency: erythro-
The degree of polychromasia correlates well with the
cytes of iron-deficient cats usually are not hypochromic at
reticulocyte concentration, but it is more objective to quan-
all. One needs to distinguish hypochromic cells from bowl-
tify the regenerative response by counting reticulocytes (see
shaped (i.e., torocytes) or "punched-out" cells, which are
Chapter l). The reticulocyte is analogous to the polychro-
insignificant (Fig. 5.3). Bowl-shaped cells have a sharply
matophilic erythrocyte, but it is stained with a vital stain
defined, central clear area, and they also have a thicker rim
(e.g., new methylene blue or brilliant cresyl blue),. which
of hemoglobin than is seen in true hypochromic cells. Imma-
causes the ribosomes and other organelles to clump into
 o   o   
visible granules (see Fig. 1.37).
hypochromic, because their hemoglobin concentration is
less than normal due to their increased volume. Although
Hypochromasia
hyperchromic states are not thought to exist, spherocytes
Hypochromic red blood cells are pale and have increased
appear to have increased color intensity beca use of their lack
central pallor as a result of decreased hemoglobin concentra-
of concavity.
62
CHAPTER 5 Erythrocyte Morphology
microcytic population of cells. In these cases, examination
of the volume-distribution curve is helpful (see Chapter 1).
The pathophysiology of the microcytosis is theorized to
involve erythroid precursors continuing to divide until a
near-normal complement of hemoglobin concentration is
reached, resulting in small erythrocytes. Cells cannot obtain 
a normal hemoglobin concentration because iron is required 
to make hemoglobin. If the iron deficiency is severe, micro-
cytosis and hypochromia may be observed on the blood film.
In addition, membrane defects are present, which often lead
to specific abnormalities in shape and fragmentation (dis-
cussed later) . Dogs with portocaval shunts may have micro-
cytic anemia that usually is related to abnormal iron
metabolism and low serum iron concentration. Some breeds
of dogs (i.e., Akitas and Shiba Inus) normally have smaller
erythrocytes. Occasionally, erythrocytes of animals with
anemia or inflammatory disease may be mildly microcytic.
Figure 5.3 Blood filr from a dog showing numerous torocytes
("punched-out" erythrocytes). Note the wide rirm of hemmoglobin and lack
Macrocytic erythrocytes
of hermoglobinization in the center of the cells (arrow). Torocytes can be
Macrocytic erythrocytes are large and have an increased
mmistaken for true hypochromasia. Wright stain.
MCV (see Fig. 1.37). The most common cause of macrocy-
tosis is increased numbers of immature erythrocytes that are
Erythrocyte size
polychromatophilic on Wright-stained blood films. Unlike
other domestic species, horses release macrocytes that are
Variation in erythrocyte size is termed anisocytosis. This
not polychromatophilic. The associated increase in MCV
variation may result from the presence of large cells (i.e.
usually is the only evidence of erythroid regeneration in
macrocytes), small cells (i.e., microcytes), or both. In itself.
horses. During regeneration, species other than dogs tend to
the term does not provide any meaningful information. Red
produce regenerative macrocytes that are approximately
blood cells may appear to be small on the blood film beca use
twice the size of normal erythrocytes, resulting in a marked
of decreased diameter, but the cell volume is the true mea-
change in the MCv. Dogs. however, release macrocytes that
surement of red-cell size and is determined electronically
usually are only slightly larger than normal erythrocytes.
(see Chapter l). The best example of this is the spherocyte.
Macrocytosis without polychromasia or other evidence of an
which appears to be small because of its spheric shape and
appropriate regenerative response is a common finding in
subsequent decreased diameter; however, the red-cell
anemic cats with myelodysplasia and myeloproliferative
volume of spherocytes is almost always within the reference
disease (see Chapter 14). This macrocytosis is associated
interval. Conversely. hypochromic microcytic iron-deficient
with feline leukemia virus (FeLV) infection, and it also may
red blood cells with an electronically determined decreased
be seen in FeLV-infected cats that are not anemic.
Other, more infrequent causes of macrocytosis include
to be small on the blood film.
macrocytosis of poodles and hereditary stomatocy tosis. Mac-
rocytosis of miniature or toy poodles is rare, is thought to be
Microcytic erythrocytes
hereditary, and is usually an incidental finding. Affected dogs
Cells must be markedly small before their decreased diam-
are not anemic, but their erythrocyte count may be decreased.
eter can be visually detected (Fig. 5.2). Mean corpuscular
The MCV is usually 90-l00fL. Other findings include
volume (MCV) is more valuable than blood film examina-
tion in assessing the true size of erythrocytes. Using
bodies (often multiple), and hypersegmented neutrophils.
altomated cell-counting systems, a histogram or volume-
Numerous abnormalities are seen in erythroid precursors on
distribution curve of the erythrocyte population can be
bone marrow film examination, including megaloblasts with
 generated. Mean cell volume is determined by analysis of
nuclear and cytoplasmic asynchrony of maturation. The
the volume-distribution curve, and the hematocrit is then
cause of the defect is unknown, and no clinical signs are
calculated by multiplying the MCV by the erythrocyte con-
associated with the disorder. Finally, stomatocytes in Alaskan
centration (see Chapter l). The most common cause of
malamutes and miniature schnauzers with hereditary sto-
microcytosis is iron-deficiency anemia; a decreased MCV is
matocytosis are macrocytic (discussed later).
the hallmark of such anemia. In some iron-deficient patients.
Some anticonvulsant drugs. such as phenobarbital,
the McV may be normal even though the animal has a
phenytoin, and primidone, have been thought to induce
63
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
macrocytosis, but macrocytosis was not experimentally
reproduced in dogs receiving long-term anticonvulsant
drugs. Vitamin B,z (i.e., cobalamin) and folate deficiency do
not cause macrocytosis in domestic animals, but these defi-
        
Giant schnauzers with hereditary cobalamin malabsorption
are anemic. but this anemia is normocytic rather than
macrocytic.
Erythrocyte shape
Abnormally shaped erythrocytes are termed poilkilocytes.
This terminology is not helpful, however, because it does not
suggest a specific change in shape. Thus, no specific inter-
pretation is possible. The most important shape changes
9
include various types of spiculated erythrocytes, sphero-
 Figure 5.4 Blood film from a dog with splenic hermangiosarcoma and
cytes, and eccentrocytes. Spiculated erythrocytes have one
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Note the schistocyte (arrow) and 
or more surface spicules and include echino cytes, acantho-
 single platelet in the field (arrowhead). Wright stain
cytes, keratocytes, and schistocytes. One should be as spe-
cific as possible when describing shape changes, because
certain types of abnormal red-cell shapes are associated with
certain diseases. Less significant abnormally shaped red
blood cells include leptocytes (i.e., folded or target cells),
codocytes (i.e., target cells), dacryocytes (i.e., teardrop-
shaped erythrocytes), and torocytes (i.e., bowl-shaped
erythrocytes).
A few inherited abnormalities associated with red-cell
shape change have been described in animals and include
hereditary stomatocytosis in dogs, hereditary elliptocytosis 
resulting from band 4.1 deficiency in dogs. and hereditary
spherocytosis in Japanese black cattle resulting from band 3
deficiency. Hereditary spherocytosis has also been reported
in mice. Most inherited abnormalities of red-blood-cell
shape are associated with abnormalities of cytoskeletal
protein, or plasma or red-cell membrane cholesterol or
phospholipid concentration.
Schistocytes and keratocytes
Figure 5.5 Blood film from a cat with iron-cdeficiency anemia. Note the
Erythrocyte fragments, also termed schistocytes, usually
erythrocyte membrane abnormalities. Lack of hypochrormasia is typical for
result from shearing of the red cell by intravascular trauma.
feline iron-cdeficient erythrocytes. Blister cells (smmall arrows) and
This may be observed in animals with disseminated intra-
ue woy wly poola asul suasaid ane osle (smoe anel) satoiea 
vascular coagulopathy (DIC) as a result of erythrocytes being
iron-deficient dog. Note the blister cell (small arrow) and hypochromic
broken by fibrin strands. with vascular neoplasms (e.g..
erythrocyte (arrowhead). Wright stain.
hemangiosarcoma). and with iron deficiency. Animals
with DIC also may have a concurrent thrombocytopenia
(Fig. 5.4). When erythrocyte fragments are observed in
are crosslinked across the cell. Exclusion of hemoglobin may
blood films from dogs with hemangiosarcoma, acanthocytes
account for the colorless area. These lesions subsequently
Usually are present as well. Fragmentation in iron-deficient 
enlarge and break open to form cells with one or more
spicules. When one spicule is present, these cells are com-
to membrane lesions or increased susceptibility to intravas-
cular trauma. Iron-deficient erythrocytes initially develop an
are present, they are termed keratocytes (Fig. 5.5). The pro-
apparent blister or vacuole, which is thought to represent
jections from the keratocytes probably then fragment from
an oxidative injury and in which inner membrane surfaces
the erythrocytes, thereby forming schistocytes.
64
CHAPTER 5 Erythrocyte Morphology
Figure 5.6 Blood film from an anemic dog with a ruptured
Figure 5.7 Blood filr from a dog with lymphoma. Numerou5
hemangiosarcoma of the spleen. Left. Numerous acanthocytes are
echinocytes are present (arrows). Wright stain.
present (arrows). Note the large polychromatophilic cells in the same
field, indicating that the anemnia is regenerative. Right. Acanthocytes
(arrow) and schistocytes (arrowheads) are typical findings in dogs with 
hemangiosarcoma. Wright stain.
Acanthocytes
Acanthocytes, or spur cells, are irregular, spiculated erythro-
cytes with few, unevenly distributed surface projections of
variable length and diameter (Fig. 5.6). Acanthocytes are
lipid concentrations in the red-cell membrane. They com-
monly are seen on blood films from humans with altered
lipid metabolism, such as may occur with liver disease, but
they rarely are observed on blood films from dogs with liver
 disease. Acanthocytes, however, are generally observed on
blood films from cats with hepatic lipidosis and are often seen
on those from dogs with hemangiosarcoma. The pathogen-
esis of this shape change in dogs with hemangiosarcoma is
not known, but the presence of acanthocytes in middle-aged
Figure 5.8 Blood filrm fromm a dog that was bitten by a rattlesnake
to old large-breed dogs with a concurrent regenerative
approximately 24 hours previously. Almost all the erythrocytes are
anemia is suggestive of hemangiosarcoma.
 echinospherocytes (arrow). Note that the polychrormatophilic erythrocytes
are not affected. Wright stain.
Echinocytes
Echinocytes (i.e., burr cells) are spiculated cells with numer-
ous short, evenly spaced, blunt to sharp surface projections
roechinocytes are formed. These erythrocytes appear to be
that are quite uniform in size and shape (Fig. 5.7). Echino-
spherocytes with fine spicules, usually present from 24 to
cyte formation can be an artifactual result (i.e., crenation)
48 hours after envenomation, and are a reliable indication
of a change in pH from slow drying of blood films, but it
that envenomation has occurred.
also has been associated with renal disease, lymphoma, rat-
tlesnake envenomation, and chemotherapy in dogs and after
Spherocytes
exercise in horses. The echinocytes seen with rattlesnake
pallor (Fig. 5.9). They appear to be small, but their volume 
quite characteristic, with numerous very fine spicules on all
is normal. Spherocytes are not easily detected in species
 erythrocytes, except those that are polychromatophilic (Fig.
other than dogs because of the small size and lack of central
5.8). In some instances of rattlesnake envenomation, sphe-
pallor in the normal erythrocytes of most other domestic
65
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 5.9 Blood filr fromm dog with irmrnune-mediated hemolytic
 Figure 5.11 Blood filr from a dog with Heinz-body anemia after
anemia. Note the numerous spherocytes (arrows). The anermia i5
ingestion of onions. Eccentrocytes are present (arrows). Wright stain.
regenerative, as indicated by the polychromatophilic erythrocytes
(arrowheads). Wright stain.
These spherocytes likely represent a continuum of mem-
brane removal that finally results in a complete sphere.
Eccentrocytes
Features of eccentrocytes include shifting of hemoglobin
toward one side of the cell, loss of normal central pallor, and
a clear zone outlined by a membrane (Fig. 5.ll). They are
associated with oxidative damage. especially in dogs. and
may be found in conjunction with Heinz bodies (discussed
later). Animals with an inherited erythrocyte enzyme def-
ciency, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, may
show increased susceptibility to oxidant-induced erythro-
cyte injury, resulting in eccentrocyte formation or increased
incidence of Heinz bodies.
Leptocytes and codocytes
 Leptocytes are erythrocytes that have undergone a surface-
to-volume ratio change in which there is excess membrane
relative to the internal contents. resulting in membrane
Figure 5.10 Blood film from a dog with irmmune-mediated hermolytic
folding and target-cell formation (Fig. 5.12). They have little
anemia. Many of the erythrocytes are spherocytes (arrowheads), and
diagnostic significance, however, and may form in vitro sec-
several incommplete spheres are present (arrows). Wright stain.
ondary to contact with excess ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA) as a result of improperly filling the blood-
animals. Spherocytes have a reduced amount of membrane
collection tubes. Target cells also are referred to as codocytes
as a result of partial phagocytosis, which occurs because
and are thin, bowl-shaped erythrocytes with a dense, central
antibody or complement is on the surface of the erythrocyte.
area of hemoglobin that is separated from the peripheral
Spherocytes are very significant, in that their presence sug-
hemoglobinized region by a pale zone. Target cells may be
gests immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (see Chapter 8).
seen in dogs with increased serum cholesterol concentra-
They also, however, may be seen after blood transfusion
tion, but they also are seen in a variety of other conditions
with mismatched blood. Spherocyte formation has been
and have little significance.
reported in dogs with bee stings and zinc toxicosis, but zinc
toxicosis also may cause Heinz-body anemia. Sometimes, a
Stomatocytes
small amount of central pallor will remain in a spherocyte.
Stomatocytes are uniconcave erythrocytes with a mouth-
and it then is termed an incomplete spherocyte (Fig. 5.10).
like, clear area near the cell center (Fig. 5.l3). A few sto-
66
CHAPTER 5 Erythrocyte Morphology
Figure 5.12 Blood filrm from a dog with numerous leptocytes. Note the
Figure 5.14 Blood films from a cat with acetaminophen toxicosis. Left.
numerous target cells (arrows) and foldled cells (arrowheads). Wright
Heinz bodies appear as pale, light-blue structures (arrows). Wright stain.
stain .
Right. Heinz bodies appear as blue structures (arrows). Note the
reticulocyte (arrowheadl). Brilliant cresyl blue stain.
increased sodium and water content of erythrocytes. Drentse
partrijshond dogs with stomatocytosis also have hypertro-
phic gastritis, retarded growth, diarrhea, renal cysts, and
polyneuropathy, and in this breed, the erythrocyte defect is
thought to result from an abnormal concentration of phos-
pholipids in the erythrocyte membrane. Miniature schnaul-
zers with stomatocytosis are asymptomatic; the cause of the
erythrocyte defect in this breed has not been described.
Structures in or on erythrocytes
Heinz bodies
Oxidative denaturation of hemoglobin results in Heinz-
body formation. Approximately 1-2% of erythrocytes from
normal cats contain Heinz bodies, presumably because of an
Figure 5.13 Blood filrm from a miniature schnauzer mix breed dog with
unusual propensity for hemoglobin denaturation due to
heredlitary spherocytosis. Note the numerous slit or mouth-shaped clear
feline hemoglobin molecules containing twice the number
areas in the stormatocytes (arrows). Wright stain.
of reactive sulfhydryl groups as are in hemoglobin molecules
of other species. Heinz bodies appear as small, eccentric, pale
structures within the red cell, and they commonly seem to
matocytes on the blood film usually are insignificant.
protrude slightly from the red-cell margin on Wright-stained
 Hereditary stomatocytosis has been reported in several dog 
blood films (Fig. 5.14). Heinz bodies usually are 0.5 to
breeds, including Alaskan malamutes, miniature schnau-
1.0 μm in diameter but may be larger. They usually occur as
zers, and the Drentse partrijshond. All the disorders are
single, large structures in feline erythrocytes, but in canine
inherited in an autosomal-recessive manner, but stomato-
       
cyte formation is caused by different defects in different
Heinz bodies are difficult to see on Wright-stained blood
breeds, involving either cell membranes or regulation of cell 
films, particularly with canine erythrocytes, in which eccen-
volume. Alaskan malamutes with hereditary stomatocytosis
trocyte formation may be more apparent. When stained
also have chondrodysplasia, and only a small percentage of
with vital stains (e.g. new methylene blue or brilliant cresyl
the erythrocytes are stomatocytes. These stomatocytes are
blue), Heinz bodies appear as blue structures (Fig. 5.14). The
thought to form secondary to a membrane defect that allows
presence of Heinz bodies reduces the deformability of the
67
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
cell, making it more susceptible to both intravascular and
somes; the activity of this enzyme is reduced in lead toxicosis
extravascular hemolysis. If large numbers of erythrocytes
and normally is low in ruminants.
are affected, severe hemolytic anemia may result. Oxidative
drugs and compounds known to induce Heinz-body forma-
Nucleated erythrocytes
tion include onions, garlic, Brassica species of plants, wilted
Increased numbers of erythrocytes in which the nucleus
or dried leaves from red maple (Acer rubrum). benzocaine.
remains (Fig. 5.15) are associated with regenerative anemias
zinc, copper, acetaminophen, propofol, phenazopyridine.
and early release of these cells in response to hypoxia.
phenothiazine, phenylhydrazine, naphthalene, vitamin K,
 Increased concentrations of nucleated erythrocytes also may
methylene blue, and propylene glycol. Ill cats may develop
be seen in animals with a nonfunctioning spleen and with
a high concentration of Heinz bodies without being exposed
increased levels of endogenous or exogenous corticosteroids.
to oxidant chemicals or drugs. The most common disorders
An increase in nucleated erythrocytes out of proportion to
associated with an increased concentration of Heinz bodies
the degree of anemia frequently is associated with lead poi-
in cats are diabetes mellitus, lymphoma, and hyperthyroid-
soning. but not all animals with lead poisoning have
ism, but increased concentrations also may be seen in asso-
increased nucleated erythrocytes. In cats, the presence of
ciation with a wide variety of other diseases (see Chapter 8).
nucleated erythrocytes in the absence of significant poly-
chromasia is usually an indication of myelodysplasia or
Basophilic stippling
myeloproliferative disease.
In vivo aggregation of ribosomes into small basophilic gran-
ules is termed basophilic stippling (Fig. 5.l5). Normally.
Howell-Jolly bodies
basophilic stippling is associated with immature erythrocytes
Nuclear remnants in erythrocytes are termed Howell-Jolly
in ruminants, and it may be seen to a lesser extent in cats
bodies. An increased concentration of Howell-Jolly bodies is
and dogs with intensely regenerative anemia. Basophilic
associated with regenerative anemia, splenectomy, and sup-
pressed splenic function. These bodies are small, round.
lead poisoning, but not all animals with lead poisoning have
dark-blue inclusions of variable size (Fig. 5.15).
basophilic stippling. The enzyme pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase.
which is present in reticulocytes, normally catabolizes ribo-
Siderotic granules
Siderotic granules are stainable iron granules within mito-
chondria and lysosomes. These siderotic inclusions are also
 ad   'sao dd s  n
thought to be associated with impaired heme synthesis.
 Erythrocytes containing these inclusions are termed sidero-
cytes (Fig. 5.l6). Siderocytes in domestic animals are rare.
Figure 5.15 Top. Blood filr fromm dog with irnmune-mediated hermolytic
anemia. The anemia is very regenerative, and polychromatophilic
erythrocytes, nucleated erythrocytes (arrowheads), and a Howell-Jolly
body (arrow) are present. Note that the nucleated erythrocytes 
(rmetarubricytes) have variably colored cytoplasmn. The one on the left ha5
mature cytoplasmn, whereas the one on the right has polychroratophilic
Figure 5.16 Blood film from a dog. Numerous erythrocytes (siderocytes)
indicated by the arrow. Lower Left. Basophilic stippling (small arrow) in a 
 containing siderotic granules are present (arrows). Note the Howell-Jolly
blood film from a dog with lead poisoning. Wright stain.
bodies (arrowheads). Wright stain.
68
CHAPTER 5 Erythrocyte Morphology
but they have been associated with chloramphenicol therapy.
Viral inclusions
myelodysplasia, and ineffective erythropoiesis of unknown
Viral inclusions are occasionally seen in erythrocytes from
caulse.
dogs with distemper. Distemper inclusions are variable in
size (~1.0-2.0 μm), number, and color (faint blue to magenta)
Parasites
Erythrocyte parasites are discussed in more detail in Chapter
rocytes (Fig. 5.23).
8. Spherocyte formation and agglutination may be observed
on blood films from animals with erythrocyte parasites.
beca use the organisms induce an immune-mediated anemia.
Erythrocyte arrangement on blood films
The primary parasitic disease of feline erythrocytes is
infection with Hemobartonella felis (Fig. 5.l7). which is a
Rouleaux formation
mycoplasmal organism that is the causative agent of feline
Rouleaux formation is the spontaneous association of eryth-
infectious anemia. These organisms are attached to the
 o rs s de sil e 'sis a u san
external erythrocyte membrane and appear as rod-shaped
organisms on the periphery of the erythrocyte or as a deli-
cate, basophilic ring on the cell. A less common erythrocyte
parasite in cats is the protozoan Cytauxzoon felis, which
appears as a ring (diameter, 0.5-l.5μm) and contains a
small, basophilic nucleus (Fig. 5.18).
In dogs, erythrocyte parasites are rare. Hemobartonella canis
usually only occurs in dogs that have been splenectomized
 or that have nonfunctional spleens. The organisms appear
 as small dots that chain across the surface of the erythrocyte
(Fig. 5.19). Babesia canis and B. gibsoni are protozoal red-cell
parasites in the dog that produce severe hemolytic anemia.
Usually, B. canis appears as a teardrop-shaped structure (Fig.
5.20). but B. gibsoni is smaller and varies considerably in both
size and shape (Fig. 5.20). Other erythrocyte parasites
include B. bigemina, Eperythrozoon sp. (Fig. 5.2l) and Ana-
plasma sp. (Fig. 5.22).
Figure 5.18 Blood filr from a cat with Cytauxzoon organisms (arrows).
Wright stain.
Figure 5.17 Blood film from an anemic cat. Note the numerou5
Hemobartonella felis organisms. Some of these appear as small.
sey reyl aroua ,isoyo, e jo aneyns aul uo swsiuehio padeus-buu
Figure 5.19 Blood film from a splenectomized dog with 
bysed (arrowhead). Others appear a5 rod-shaped structures on the edge of
 Hemobartonefla canis. Note the dot-like organismns that chain across the
erythrocytes (arrows) Insets. Higher magnification of both the ring and 
surface of the erythrocyte (arrows). The anernia is regenerative, a5
the rod-shaped forms. Wright stain.
indicated by the polychromatophilic cell (arrowhead). Wright stain
69
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 5.20 Blood filr from dogs with babesiosis. Left. Babesia canis
Figure 5.22 Blood film from an anemic cow with anaplasmosis. Note
organisms appear a5 poorly staining. teardrop-shaped structures
the numerous Anaplasma marginale organisms on the periphery of the
(arrowheads). Right. Blood filrn from a dog with Babesia gibsoni (arrows).
erythrocytes (arrows). Wright stain.
Wright stain.
Figure 5.21 Blood filr from a cow with Eperythrozoon wenyoni. Note
Figure 5.23 Blood filrm from a dog with distemper. Note the pale-blue 
 the many free organisrns in the plasma. Wright stain
viral inclusions of distermper with the erythrocytes (arrows). These
uieis hybu lolon ui eiuaheu yiep ot anjg aled uieis Aeu suoisniu!
stack of coins (Fig. 5.24). Marked rouleaux formation is
Agglutination
normal in horses, and a slight amount also is normal in dogs
Agglutination of erythrocytes results in irregular, spheric
and cats. Rouleaux formation is enhanced, however, when
clumps of cells because of antibody-related bridging (Fig.
the concentration of plasma proteins such as fibrinogen or
5.25). Agglutination is very suggestive of immune-mediated
immunoglobulins is increased. Increased rouleaux forma-
hemolytic anemia, but it also may be seen after a mis-
tion often is suggestive of a gammopathy: animals with
matched blood transfusion. To confirm that agglutination is
multiple myeloma almost always have increased rouleaux
 present, mix a small quantity of blood with a drop of isotonic
formation.
saline. Agglutination will persist in the presence of saline
70
CHAPTER 5 Erythrocyte Morphology
Figure 5.24 Blood film from a normal horse, illustrating rouleaux
Figure 5.26 Blood from a dog with irnmune-mediated hermolytic
forrmation (arrows). Wright stain.
anemnia. Left. Blood has been mixed with isotonic saline, and
agglutination persists (arrows). Right. Agglutination is so severe that it
can be visualized grossly on the side of the EDTA blood-collection tube.
 commonly seen in cats associated with FeLV, is characterized
by a nonregenerative anemia in conjunction with macrocy-
tosis and megaloblastic erythroid precursors, in which
there is advanced cell hemoglobinization with incomplete
nuclear maturation. Red-cell leukemia (i.e., erythremic
myelosis, M6) is relatively rare in dogs. but in cats, it usually
centration of quite immature nucleated erythrocytes typi-
cally is present in the face of a severe, nonregenerative
anemia (see Chapter 13).
Suggested Reading
Erythrocyte size
Figure 5.25 Blood film from an anemic dog with irmmune-mediated 
Bunch SE, Easley JR, Cullen JM (l990) Hematologic values and
hermolytic anermia and marked agglutination. Note the large aggregates
plasma and tissue concentrations in dogs given phenytoin on a
of spherocytes (arrows). Wright stain, low magnification
long-term basis. Am J Ver Res 5l: 1865-8.
Bunch SE, Jordan HL, Sellon RK, er al. (1995) Characterization of
   w ils ousasd ym sao unoA u sins 
(Fig. 5.26), whereas rouleaux formation will disperse.
56: 853-8.
Agglutination may be so marked that it can be seen grossly
Degen M (1987) Pseudohyperkalemia in Akitas. J Am Ver Med Assoc
on blood films and on the side of EDTA tubes (Fig. 5.26).
190: 541-3.
Agglutination may result in a falsely increased McV and a
Gookin JL, Bunch SE, Rush LI, et al. (1998) Evaluation of microcy-
falsely decreased red-blood-cell count, because agglutinated
tosis in 18 Shiba Inus. J Am Ver Med Assoc 212: 1258-9.
Fulton R, Weiser MG, Freshman JL, er al. {l988) Electronic and
red cells (i.e., doublets and triplets) may be counted as large
morphologic characterization of erythrocytes of an adult cat with
cells (see Chapter 1).
iron deficiency anemia. Ver Parho! 25: 521-3.
Fyfe JC, Jezyk PK, Giger U, et al. (1989) Inherited selective malab-
Erythroid dysplasia and neoplasia in peripheral
sorption of Vitamin B, in giant schnauzers. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
blood
25: 533-9.
Dysplasia and leukemia of red blood cells is covered in more
Harvey JW, Asquith RL, Sussman WA, et al. (1987) Serum ferritin, serum
detail in Chapter 14. Briefly. erythroid dysplasia, which is
iron, and erythrocyte values in foals. Am J Ver Res 48: 1348-52.
71
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Laflamme DP, Mahaffey EA, Allen SW, er al. (1994) Microcytosis
Weiss DJ, Kristensen A, Papenfuss N (1993) Quantitative evaluation
and iron status in dogs with surgically induced portosystemic
of irregularly spiculated red blood cells in the dog. Ver Clin Patho!
shunts. J Ver Intern Med 8: 212-16.
22: 117-21.
serum and hepatic iron alterations in dogs with congenital por-
Acanthocytes
tosystemic vascular anomalies. J Ver Inrern Med 8: 55-6.
Biemer JJ (1980) Acanthocytosis—biochemical and physiological
 Schalm OJ (1976) Erythrocyte macrocytosis in miniature poodles.
considerations. Ann Clin Lab Sei 1980: 10: 238-49.
California Ver 3: 55-7.
Christopher MM, Lee SE (1 994) Red cell morphologic alterations in
Simpson KW, Meyer DJ, Boswood A, er al. (1997) Iron status and
cats with hepatic disease. Ver Clin Pathol 23: 7-12.
erythrocyte volume in dogs with congenital portosystemic vascu-
Gelberg H, Stackhouse LL (1977) Three cases of canine acanthocy-
lar anomalies. J Ver Intern Med 1l: 1419.
tosis associated with splenic neoplasia. Ver Med Small Anim Clin 72:
        
1183-4.
Jeukemia virus associated anemia. Ver Pathol 20: 687-97.
Hirsch VM, Jacobsen J, Mills JH (198l) A retrospective study of
Weiser MG, Kociba GJ (1983) Sequential changes in erythrocyte
 canine hemangiosarcoma and its association with acanthocytosis.
volume distribution and microcytosis associated with iron defi-
Carn Ver J 22: 152-5.
ciency in kittens. Ver Patho! 20: 1-12.
Ng CY, Mills JN (1985) Clinical and haematological features of
Weiser MG, O'Grady M (1983) Erythrocyte volume distribution
haemangiosarcoma in dogs. Ausr Ver J 62: 1-4.
analysis and hematologic changes in dogs with iron deficiency
Rebar AH, Hahn FF, Halliwell WH, et al. (1980) Microangiopathic
anemia. Ver Parhol 20: 230-41.
hemolytic anemia associated with radiation-induced hemangio-
sarcomas. Ver Parho! 17: 443-54.
Inherited erythrocyte shape abnormalities
Stomatocytes
Schistocytes
Brown DE, Weiser MG, Thrall MA, et al. (1994) Erythrocyte indices
Hammer AS, Couto CG, Swardson C, er af. {l99l) Hemostatic
and volume distribution in a dog with stomatocytosis. Ver Patho!
abnormalities in dogs with hemangiosarcoma. J Ver Intern Med 5:
31: 247-50.
11-14.
Fletch SM, Pinkerton PH, Brueckmer PJ (1975) The Alaskan mala-
Heyes H, Kohle W, Slijepcevic B. The appearance of schistocytes in
mute chondrodysplasia (dwarfism-anemia) syndrome—in review.
the peripheral blood in correlation to the degree of disseminated
J Am Anim Hosp Assor 1l: 353-61.
intravascular coagulation. An experimental study in rats. Haemo-
Pinkerton PH, Fletch SM, Brueckner PJ, et al. (1974) Hereditary
sfasis 1976; 5: 66-73.
stomatocytosis with hemolytic anemia in the dog. Blood 44:
 Rebar AH, Hahn FF Halliwell WH, et al. Microangiopathic hemolytic
557-67.
 anemia associated with radiation-induced hemangiosarcomas. Ver
Slappendel RJ, Renooij W, de Bruijne J (1 994) Normal cations and
Patho/ 1980; 17: 443-54.
abnormal membrane lipids in the red blood cells of dogs with
familial stomatocytosis-hypertrophic gastritis. Blood 84: 904-9.
Echinocytes
Slappendel RJ, van der Gaag I, van Nes JJ, et a. (199l) Familial
Brown DE, Meyer DJ, Wingfield WE, et al. Echinocytosis associated
 A e   a
with rattlesnake envenomation in dogs. Ver Pathol 1994; 31:
nized disease in the dog (Drenrse parrijshond). Ver Q 13: 30-40.
654-7.
Slappendel RJ, van Zwieten R, van Leeuwen M, et al. (2005) Heredi-
Geor RJ, Lund EM, Weiss DJ. Echinocytosis in horses: 54 cases
tary spectrin deficiency in Golden Retriever dogs. J Vert Intern Med
{1990). J Am Ver Med Assor 1993; 202: 976-80.
19:187-92
Walton RM, Brown DE, Hamar DW, er al. Mechanisms of echino-
cytosis induced by Crotalus atrox venom. Ver Pathol 1997; 34:
Elliptocytes
442-9.
Conboy JG, Shitamoto R, Parra M, et al. (199l) Hereditary ellipto-
Weiss DJ, Geor RJ, Smith CM I1. Effects of echinocytosis on hemor-
cytosis due to both qualitative and quantitative defects in mem-
 rheologic values and exercise performance in horses. Am J Ver Res
brane skeletal protein 4.1. Blood 78: 2438-43.
1994; 55: 204-10.
Mills JN, Marsden CA (1999) Presumed hereditary elliptocytosis in
Weiss DJ, Geor R, Smith CM Il, et al. Furosemide-induced electro-
a dog. Ausr Ver J 77: 651-2.
lyte depletion associated with echinocytosis in horses. Am J Ver
Smith JE, Moore K, Arens M, et al. (1983) Hereditary elliptocytosis
Res 1992; 53: 1769-72.
with protein band 4.1 deficiency in the dog. Blood 6l: 373-7.
Weiss DJ, Kristensen A, Papenfuss N, er al. (l990) Quantitative
evaluation of echinocytes in the dog. Ver Clin Pathol 19: 114-18.
Eccentrocytes
Wong P (1999) A basis of echinocytosis and stomatocytosis in the
Stockham SL, Harvey JW, Kinden DA (1994) Equine glucose-6-
 disc-sphere transformations of the erythrocyte. J Theor Bio! 196:
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Ver Pathol 31: 518-27.
343-61.
Acquired erythrocyte shape abnormalities
Spherocytes
Spiculated red blood cells (general)
Breitschwerdt EB, Armstrong PJ, Robinette CL, et al. (1986)
Rebar AH, Lewis HB, DeNicola DB, et al. (198 1) Red cell fragmenta-
Three cases of acute zinc toxicosis in dogs. Ver Hum Toxicol 28:
tion in the dog: an editorial review. Ver Pathol 18: 415-26.
109-17.
72
CHAPTER 5 Erythrocyte Morphology
Inaba M, Yawata A, Koshino I, et al. (1996) Defective anion trans-
Christopher MM, Broussard JD, Peterson ME (1995) Heinz body
 port and marked spherocytosis with membrane instability caused
formation associated with ketoacidosis in diabetic cats. J Ver Inrer1
by hereditary total deficiency of red cell band 3 in cattle due to a
Med 9: 2431.
nonsense mutation. J Clin Invesr 1996; 97: 1804-7.
Christopher MM, Perman V, Eaton JW (1989) Contribution of pro-
Klag AR, Giger U, Shofer FS (1993) Idiopathic immune-mediated
pylene glycol-induced Heinz body formation to anemia in cats. J
hemolytic anemia in dogs: 42 cases {1986-1990). J Am Ver Med
Am Ver Med Assoc 194: 1045-56.
Assoc 202: 783-8.
-     '   
Lanaux TM, Rozanski EA, Simoni RS, et al. (20ll) Interpretation of
Ogy and mechanisms of Heinz body-mediated hemolysis in cats.
canine and feline blood smears by emergency room personnel.
Ver Pathol 27: 299-310.
Ver Clin Path 40: 18-23.
George LW, Divers TJ, Mahaffey EA, et al. (1982) Heinz body anemia
Latimer KS, Jain A, Inglesby HB, et al. (1989) Zinc-induced hemo-
and methemoglobinemia in ponies given red maple (Arer rubrum 
lytic anemia caused by ingestion of pennies by a pup. J Am Vet
L.) leaves. Ver Patho! 19: 521-33.
Med Assorc 195: 77-80.
Harvey JW, Rackear D (1 985) Experimental onion-induced hemo-
Messer NTrV, Armold K (1991) Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
lytic anemia in dogs. Ver Pathol 22: 387-92.
in a horse. J Am Ver Med Assor 198: 1415-16.
Hickman MA, Rogers QR, Morris JG (1990) Effect of diet on Heinz
Mills JN, Day MJ, Shaw SE, et al. (1985) Autoimmune haemolytic
body formation in kittens. Am J Ver Res 5l: 475-8.
anaemia in dogs. Ausr Ver J 62: 121-3.
Houston DM, Myers SL (1993) A review of Heinz-body anemia in 
Noble SJ, Armstrong PJ (1999) Bee sting envenomation resulting
the dog induced by toxins. Ver Hum Toxiro! 35: 158-61.
 in secondary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in two dogs. J
Lincoln SD, Howell ME, Combs JJ, et al. (1992) Hematologic effects
Am Ver Med Assoc 214: 1026-7.
and feeding performance in cattle fed cull domestic onions (Alium
Swenson C, Jacobs R (1 986) Spherocytosis associated with anaplas-
cepa). J Am Ver Med Assoc 200: 1090-4.
mosis in two cows. J Am Ver Med Assoc 188: 1061-3
Luttgen PI, Whitney MS, Wolf AM, er al. (l990) Heinz body hemo-
Weiser MG, Thrall MA (1 993) Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
    d   ese e 
in dogs (letter). J Am Ver Med Assoc 202: 1786-8.
dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 197: 1347-50.
Wysoke JM, Bland van-den Berg P, Marshall C (1990) Bee sting-
Robertson JE, Christopher MM, Rogers QR (1998) Heinz body for-
mation in cats fed baby food containing onion powder. J Am Vet
three dogs. J S Afr Ver Assoc 6l: 29-32.
Med Assoc 212: 1260-6.
Soli NE, Froslie A (1977) Chronic copper poisoning in sheep. 1. The
Eccentrocytes
relationship of methaemoglobinemia to Heinz body formation
and hae molysis during the terminal crisis. Arra Pharm Toxico! 40:
Caldin M, Carli E, Furlanello T, Solano-Gallego L, er al. (2005) A
 p u u sn io sa o jo ps ads
169-77.
Tennant B, Dill SG, Glickman LT, er al. {198l) Acute hemolytic
Clin Pathol 34: 224-31.
Ham TH, Grauel JA, Dunn RF, et al. (1973) Physical properties of
anemia, methemoglobinemia, and Heinz body formation associ-
red cells as related to effects in vivo. IV. Oxidant drugs producing
ated with ingestion of red maple leaves by horses. J Am Ver Med
Assoc 179: 143-50.
abnormal intra cellular concentration of hemoglobin (eccentro-
Torrance AG, Fulton RB Jr. (l987) Zinc-induced hemolytic anemia
cytes) with a rigid-red-cell hemolytic syndrome. J Lab Clin Med
in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 19l: 443-4.
82: 898-910.
Weiss DJ, McClay CB, Christopher MM, er al. {l990) Effects
Harvey JW, French TW, Senior DF (1986) Hematologic abnormali-
of propylene glycol-containing diets on acetaminophen-
 ties associated with chronic acetaminophen administration in a
 s     s   
dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 189: 1334-5.
Harvey JW, Rackear D (1 985) Experimental onion-induced hemo-
1816-19.
lytic anemia in dogs. Ver Pathol 22: 387-92.
Kang MH, Park HM (2010) Hypertension after ingestion of baked
Basophilic stippling, nucleated red blood cells, and
garlic (Allium sarivum) in a dog. J Ver Med Sci 72: 515-18.
Howell-Jolly bodies
Lee K-W, Yamato O, Tajima M, er al. (2000) Hematologic changes
        
associated with the appearance of eccentrocytes after intragastric
ponies: comparison of the effects of smelter effluent-contaminated
administration of garlic extract to dogs. Am J Ver Res 6l: 1446-50.
hay and lead acetate. Am J Ver Res 43: 2129-33.
 Reagan WJ, Carter C, Turek J (1994) Eccentrocytosis in equine red
George JW (1982) Duncan JR. Pyrimidine-specific 5'-nucleotidase 
maple leaf toxicosis. Ver Clin Pathol 23: 123-7.
activity in bovine erythrocytes: effect of phlebotomy and lead
Ward PC, Schwartz BS, White JG (1983) Heinz-body anemia: "bite
poisoning. Am J Ver Res 43: 17-20.
cell" variant—a light and electron microscopic study. Am J Hemato!
Johnson KA, Powers BE, Withrow SJ, er al. (1989) Splenomegaly
15: 135-46.
in dogs. Predictors of neoplasia and survival after splenectomy.
J Ver Int Med 3: 160-6.
Erythrocyte inclusions
Knecht CD, Crabtree J, Katherman A {1979) Clinical, clinicopatho-
Heinz bodies
logic, and electroencephalographic features of lead poisoning in
Christopher MM (1989) Relation of endogenous Heinz bodies to
dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 175: 196-201.
disease and anemia in cats: 120 cases (1978-1987). J Am Ver Med
Velcek FT, Kugaczewski JT, Jongco B, er al. (1982) Function of the
Assoc 194: 1089-95.
replanted spleen in dogs. J Trauma Injury Crit Care 22: 502-6.
73
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Zook BC, McConnell G, Gilmore CE (1970) Basophilic stippling of
Rouleaux
   e e [as    sa
 Allen BV (1 988) Relationships between the erythrocyte sedimenta-
Am Ver Med Assoc 157: 2092-9.
tion rate, plasma proteins and viscosity, and leukocyte counts in
thoroughbred racehorses. Ver Rec 122: 329-32.
Siderocytes
Baumler H, Neu B, Donath E, et al. (l999) Basic phenomena of red
Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ, Ratcliffe RCC (1987) Dyserythropoiesis,
blood cell rouleaux formation. Biorheology 36: 439-42.
 sidero blasts/siderocytes and hemoglobin crystallization in a dog.
Talstad I, Scheie P, Dalen H, et al. (1983) Influence of plasma pro-
Ver Clin Pathol 16: 21-7.
teins on erythrocyte morphology and sedimentation. Scand J Hae-
Harvey JW, Wolfsheimer KJ, Simpson CF, et al. (1985) Pathologic
matol 31: 478-84.
sideroblasts and siderocytes associated with chloramphenicol
therapy in a dog. Ver Clin Pathol 14: 36-42.
Weiss DJ, Lulich J (1 999) Myelodysplastic symdrome with sidero-
blastic differentiation in a dog. Ver Clin Patho! 28: 59-63.
Erythrocyte arrangement
Agglutination
Porter RE, Weiser MG {1990) Effect of immune-mediated erythro-
cyte agglutination on analysis of canine blood using a multichan-
nel blood cell counting system. Vet Clin Patho! 19: 45-50.
74
Classification of and Diagnostic
Approach to Anemia
 Mary Anna Thrall
Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine
Anemia is a decrease in the red blood cell (RBC) mass that
production, followed by establishing the diagnosis of the
results in decreased oxygenation of tissues. The RBC mass
underlying disease. This chapter addresses the classification
is determined by measuring the packed cell volume (PCV:;
of and diagnostic approach to anemia.
i.e., hematocrit). the amount of hemoglobin in the blood,
and the erythrocyte count (see Chapter l). Of these three.
PCV is used most commonly as the primary value for inter-
Classification of anemia
 pretation in North America, although when the hematocrit
is calculated by automated cell counters, hemoglobin con-
Three general schemes are used to classify anemia: eryth-
centration is more accurate.
rocyte size and hemoglobin concentration, bone marrow
Anemia is a manifestation of an underlying disease that
response, and classification by pathophysiologic mechanism.
has produced increased erythrocyte destruction, increased
The classification by erythrocyte size and bone marrow
erythrocyte loss through hemorrhage. decreased production
response are the most useful for clinical purposes, because
of erythrocytes, or some combination of these events. Clini-
they are tools that allow veterinarians to follow a mental
cal signs usually relate to decreased oxygenation or associ-
pathway to a differential diagnosis. The pathophysiologic
ated compensatory mechanisms and may include pale
classification merely provides a conceptual framework for a
mucous membranes, lethargy. reduced exercise tolerance.
diagnostic library of disorders that cause anemia.
 a s  r a ir s
and murmurs caused by increased blood turbulence. Non-
Erythrocyte size and hemoglobin concentration
specific clinical signs, such as weight loss, anorexia, fever, or
Traditionally. anemia has been classified by erythrocyte
lymphadenopathy, may be present if the animal has an
volume (i.e., mean cell volume (Mcv)) and the amount of
underlying systemic illness. Specific clinical signs that are
hemoglobin within erythrocytes (i.e., mean corpuscular
associated with blood destruction may include splenomeg-
hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)). An anemia is referred
aly. icterus, and darkly pigmented urine resulting from
to as being microcytic when the erythrocytes are small,
hemoglobinuria or bilirubinuria.
normocytic when they are of normal volume, and macro-
The severity of clinical signs usually relates to the duration
cytic when they are larger than the reference interval. More-
of onset, because animals with a slow onset, resulting from
over, anemia is referred to as being hypochromic when the
chronic blood loss or bone marrow dysfunction, usually
cells contain a less-than-normal hemoglobin concentration
compensate to some extent for the hypoxemia. Compensa-
and as normochromic when they contain a normal hemo-
tory mechanisms include increased concentration of eryth-
globin concentration. Hyperchromic anemias do not occur.
rocyte  2,3-diphosphoglycerate. which decreases
the
but the MCHC is falsely increased when the hemoglobin
oxygen-hemoglobin affinity and, thus, enhances the deliv-
determination is falsely increased because of intravascular
ery of oxygen to tissues, increases cardiac output, and aids
hemolysis. lipemia, or the presence of Heinz bodies. The
in the redistribution of blood flow to vital organs. Death may
MCHC is also falsely increased if the erythrocyte size falls
occur in animals that experience severe acute blood loss or
below the threshold of RBC detection in the hematology
blood destruction. Appropriate therapy and prognosis is
analyzer. This will effectively reduce the hematocrit and
facilitated by determining whether the anemia is a result of
increase the MCHC. Although spherocytes appear to be
erythrocyte destruction, blood loss, or lack of erythrocyte
hyperchromic on blood films because of their shape, the
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
oul 'suos g Aam uor Aq zioz Pausand oul 'suos g Aam uuor 2io2 0
75
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
hemoglobin concentration is normal in these erythrocytes.
For example, if the hemoglobin is 14g/dL and the PCV is
The MCHC, however, may be falsely increased in patients
42%, then the MCHC is 33.3 g/dL.
with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia because of intra
Electronic cell counters have made calculation of the MCV
vascular hemolysis or agglutination, which causes errors in
obsolete, because the cell volume can be measured electroni-
measurement of the RBC mass.
cally. Thus, the MCV and RBC are used to calculate the PCV
This classification system is useful, particularly as it relates
(see Chapter l). This technology has improved the useful-
to cell volume, in that microcytic anemias almost always
ness of this classification of anemia, because subpopulations
result from iron deficiency. Other causes of microcytosis
 of microcytic or macrocytic erythrocytes can be observed in
 include hepatic portocaval vascular shunts in dogs and cats,
histograms or computer graphics, even when the MCV is
and normal canine breed variations in Akitas and Shiba
within the reference interval (Fig. 6.1). The RBC distribution
 Inus. A macrocytic anemia usually indicates that the marrow
width, which describes the width of the RBC size distribu-
is functional and is releasing immature cells that are larger
tion, increases when subpopulations of either microcytic or
than normal in size. Macrocytosis without polychromasia or
       
reticulocytosis should be evaluated further, because a regen-
before the MCV value falls out of the reference interval. The
erative response likely is not the cause in these patients. The
MCHC is still derived using the hemoglobin and PCV deter-
MCV is of particular value in horses, because reticulocytes
minations; however, laser-detection technology using light
are almost never released into the circulation in significant
scatter now allows for direct determination of the amount
numbers. Other causes of macrocytosis include feline
of hemoglobin within cells. Hemoglobin concentra tion using
leukemia virus, myelodysplasia, poodle macrocytosis, and
hereditary stomatocytosis (see Chapter 5). Animals with a
bin concentration mean (CHCM). Using this detection
normocytic anemia usually have a nonregenerative or a
system, lipemia or hemolysis will not falsely increase the
preregenerative anemia. (Preregenerative refers to anemia
CHCM. Heinz bodies, however, may, because erythrocytes
in animals with blood loss or blood destruction, but in which
containing Heinz bodies are more optically dense.
evidence of regeneration in the peripheral blood is not yet
evident.) Animals with a regenerative anemia, however.
Bone marrow response
may have an McV within the reference interval and, thus.
Classification of anemia based on responsiveness of the bone
be classified as having a normocytic anemia. The generated
marrow is very useful diagnostically. An anemia is classified
histogram or computer graphic is valuable in these patients.
as either regenerative or nonregenerative based on the
in that the subpopulation of macrocytic cells can be observed
even though the MCV is normal (discussed later).
release ofimmatureerythrocytes is a normal ma rrow response
The MCHC is less useful in the classification of anemia, in
to increased erythropoietin production, primarily by renal
that hypochromia usually is simply associated with an
tissue, secondary to hypoxia. Increased numbers of immature
increased concentration of large. immature cells (i.e., regen-
erythrocytes are released into the circulation after blood loss
erative anemia). Reticulocytes are still synthesizing hemo-
or blood destruction, and they are indicative of a regenerative
globin; therefore, their hemoglobin concentration is less
anemia. An increased concentration of immature erythro-
than that of mature erythrocytes. Occasionally, animals with
cytes usually is seen within 2-4 days after blood loss or
iron deficiency may have a hypochromic as well as a micro-
destruction. A lack of circulating immature erythrocytes in
cytic anemia, but in most iron-deficient animals, the MCHC
the face of anemia indicates a nonregenerative anemia and
is within the reference interval.
should be considered as evidence of marrow dysfunction.
Historically, MCV and MCHC were derived by calculations
Immature erythrocytes observed using a Wright-stained
based on the PCV, hemoglobin concentration, and eryth-
blood film are polychromatophilic, and they have a blue-
rocyte count. The MCV was calculated by dividing the
staining reticulum (i.e., reticulocyte) when new methylene
PCV by the erythrocyte (RBC) count. For example, if the
blue or brilliant cresyl blue stains are used (see Chapters 1
patient's PCV is 42% and its RBC count is 6.0 × 10°, then
and 5). In general, an anemia is considered to be regenera-
the PCV divided by the RBC count is 70fL (i.e., 42/6 = 7).
tive if the reticulocyte concentration is greater than 60,000
In terms of mathematical logic, 1 μL = 10*fL, and 42% of
   i e   
10"fL is 420,000,000fL. Therefore, the MCV = 70fL (i.e.,
chromasia is a better indication of bone marrow responsive-
420,000,000 + 6,000,000). The MCHC, which is the ratio
ness than is an increased mean cell volume (see Chapter 5).
of the weight of hemoglobin to the volume of erythrocytes
Horses almost never release significant numbers of reticulo-
in grams per deciliter, can be calculated by the following
cytes into the circulation.
equation:
Pathophysiologic classification
HGB
The pathophysiologic classification of anemia essentially is
MCHC (g/d1} =
<100
HCT
a categorization based on the underlying disorder. Nonre-
76
CHAPTER 6 Classification of and Diagnostic Approach to Anemia
generative anemia results from defective or decreased
is based on the classification schemes involving a combina-
     
tion of bone marrow response and erythrocyte size.
usually is classified according to whether neutrophil and
platelet production are also decreased (i.e., aplastic anemia)
Laboratory evaluation
and whether RBC production is simply decreased (i.e.,
The classification of an anemia based on erythrocyte size and
hypoplasia) or is completely absent (i.e., aplasia). Moreover.
  n  s)  
      
Essential laboratory data include PCV, MCV, and reticulocyte
intrinsic (i.e., primary) marrow disorder, such as myelofi-
count. Either blood loss or destruction will result in a regen-
brosis, myelodysplasia, or myeloproliferative disorder, or it
erative anemia, and marrow dysfunction will result in a
may be caused by an extrinsic (i.e., secondary) disorder.
nonregenerative anemia. Furthermore, microcytosis usually 
Secondary disorders include chronic renal disease; some
is evidence of iron-deficiency anemia, and macrocytosis
endocrine disorders; inflammatory diseases; infectious
usually is evidence of regeneration. Additional information
agents, such as Ehrlichia sp., equine infectious anemia virus,
may be obtained from examination of the blood film; eryth-
and feline leukemia virus; immune-mediated destruction of
rocyte morphology may even reveal a definitive diagnosis
erythrocyte precursors: and drug- or chemical-induced
(see Chapter 5).
damage (see Chapter 14).
 Other laboratory procedures that may provide helpful
Regenerative anemia is caused by blood loss or eryth-
information include plasma protein estimation by refrac-
rocyte destruction (see Chapter 8). Blood loss may be exter-
o o s  s  i   
nal or internal, and it may be acute or chronic. Causes of
in a loss of erythrocytes but also in a loss of other blood
acute blood loss include trauma, bleeding lesions (e.g..
components, including protein. Thus, patients with blood
tumors or large ulcers). and hemostatic disorders (e.g..
loss may be hypoproteinemic. Other causes of hypoprotein-
thrombocytopenia or an inherited or acquired coagulopathy
emia, however, still must be considered (see Chapter 26). If
such as warfarin toxicosis or disseminated vascular coagu-
  o   s   i si 
lopathy). Common causes of chronic blood loss include
protein usually is reabsorbed within hours.
bleeding lesions, particularly within the gastrointestinal
Other components of the complete blood count (CBC)
tract, and gastrointestinal or external parasites. Erythrocyte
also may provide useful information. For example, if a
destruction (i.e., hemolysis) may be either intravascular or
patient is severely thrombocytopenic, anemia may be caused
extravascular, and it may result from intrinsic (i.e., primary)
by blood loss secondary to impaired clot formation. On the
defects. such as hereditary membrane defects or enzyme
other hand, if the leukocyte concentration, platelet concen-
deficiencies, or from extrinsic (i.e., secondary) causes, such
tration, and PcV are all decreased and the anemia is nonre-
as erythrocyte parasites or immune-mediated destruction.
generative, then complete bone marrow failure is the likely
Intravascular hemolysis is the actual lysis of erythrocytes
cause of the anemia. An animal with a mild, nonregenera-
within the vascular system. Extravascular hemolysis occurs
tive anemia and increased immature neutrophils likely has
when abnormal erythrocytes are phagocytized by macro-
an anemia of inflammatory disease (see Chapter 7).
phages, usually within the spleen or liver. Common causes
Specific laboratory tests can be performed to help confirm
of erythrocyte destruction include immune mediated mech-
 or exclude a suspected diagnosis. If spherocytes are observed
anisms, erythrocyte parasites, and drugs and chemicals that
on the blood film of an anemic patient, then a Coombs or
produce oxidative damage, resulting in Heinz body forma-
a saline fragility test (see Chapter l} can help to confirm
tion. Less common causes of hemolysis include hypophos-
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. In patients with
phatemia, water intoxication in young ruminants, bacteria
microcytic anemia, serum iron should be measured to deter-
(e.g., Leptospira and Clostridium sp.). heparin overdose, and
mine if the microcytosis is caused by iron deficiency. In
hereditary erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies and membrane
addition, the feces should be examined for blood, because
defects.
chronic blood loss from the gastrointestinal tract is a common
cause of iron-deficiency anemia (see Chapter 8). Anemic
dogs. particularly those with a concurrent thrombocytope-
nia and hyperglobulinemia, should be tested for ehrlichiosis.
Diagnostic approach
and anemic cats should be tested for feline leukemia virus
and feline immunodeficiency virus. Anemic horses should
When presented with an anemic patient, the ultimate goal
be tested for equine infectious anemia.
is to establish a definitive diagnosis of the underlying disor-
The biochemical profile also may provide essential infor-
der so that appropriate therapy can be initiated and a prog-
mation. Patients with mild to moderate, nonregenerative
nosis established. Information can be obtained from the
anemia may have disorders that are extrinsic to the marrow
laboratory evaluation, the patient history, and the physical
but that affect the marrow function. For example, animals
examination. The most clinically useful approach to anemia
with a nonregenerative anemia that are also azotemic
LL
RBC V/ HC
B
RBC V/HC
RBC V/HC
RBC Volume
RBC Volumc
RBC
Volume
Dog, PCV 29% (43-58)
Dog, PCV 37% (43-58)
Cow, PCV 21% (24-34)
MCV 61fL(62-75)
MCV 76 fL (62-75)
MCV 48 fL (38-50)
RDW 14.3 (12-14.2)
RDW 14.3 (12-14.2)
RDW 31.2 (16-21)
D
RBC V/HC
F
RBC V/HC
RBC V/HC
V
V
HC
HC
RBC Volune
RBCVolume
RBC Volume
Cat, PCV 30% (33-50)
Cat, PCV 17% (33-50)
Horse, PCV 28% ( 30-45)
MCV 38 fL (40-54)
MCV 76 fL (40-54)
MCV 61IL(40-48)
RDW 15.2 (13.5-18.5)
RDW 18.9 (13.5-18.5)
RDW 17.6 (16.5-19.5)
78
CHAPTER 6 Classification of and Diagnostic Approach to Anemia
Figure 6.1 Red-blood-cell volume/hermoglobin concentration (RBC V/HC) cytograms and RBC volume histograrns from six anemic animals generated by
horizontal) axis, and cell volume is plotted along the y (i.e., vertical) axis. Each RBC is displayed based on volume and Hgb concentration, and normocytic
si juooody pue weno aun jo dot aun pemat paeldsi ane slian jaien weo xog-auu ynea jo xog lauan au ui ane slan jouoou
eosy an a aui saoa ou jo lasn aue jo al addn a on paeds ae san oyoy oeu su al a pema
represents the distribution of the RBCs by cell volume; normal samples have a bellshaped curve. The mean corpuscular volume (MCV) and RBC
distribution width (RDW) are determined from this histograrm. The MCV is the mean of the RBC volume histogram, and the RDW is the coefficient of
variation of the population. Each anirmal's species, packed cell volume (PCV), MCV, and RDW are provided beneath the RBC V/HC cytogram and RBC
volume histogram. Reference intervals are in parentheses.
A. A 12-year-old, mixed-breed dog with a mild anermia, mildly decreased MCV, and mildly increased RDW. The RBC V/HC cytograrm shows that many of
'uasaid si slian yioyody jo uoindod e 'uope ul yioiu ane Aaun buniui 'anenbs aippiu aul jo wonog aun pemat ane saoua a
some of which are normocytic and some of which are macrocytic. The RBC volume histograrm is shifted toward the left, also indicating that many of the
erythrocytes are slightly srmall. lron-deficiency anemnia was suspected in this patient and was confirmed by decreased serum iron concentration. The dog 
had a 3-month history of epistaxis associated with a nasal passage chondrosarcoma
B. A 12-year-old, miniature schnauzer with a very mild anemmia, mildly increased MCV, and mildly increased RDW. The RBC V/HC cytogram shows a
anon ad aul lam se puasaid s! slan yuoupody poeu jo uoeindod  slian abiel suasaidau eul aenbs alppiu ayl aoge sian jo uoeindod
histograrm is shifted slightly toward the right, and a population of macrocytic cells is evident. This is indicative of a regenerative anemia
markedly increased. The reticulocyte count is 90,0o0 cells/μL (2%). The presence of macrocytic cells and reticulocytes indicates that the anemia is
regenerative. The calf's umbilical stump had been bleeding since birth, and it also had blood in the feces for 3 days. The PCV on the previous day wa5
O lam papuodsan en aui saoua jouop ae gegad sian yoau aul jo Aue awn reun ie uonysue poaig e paiaan jen ayr pue '%e
supportive therapy and 1 week later, the PCV was 27%
D. A 13-year-old cat with a mildly decreased MCV. The RBC V/HC cytogram and RBC volume histogram are similar to those of the dog in panel A,
s aojag syaam leaaas ioy eod oion Aueud) leusau! yo insau e se saat aun ui pooi pey ien aul eaue Auaiap-uoi busains
CBC was performed. The reticulocyte count is 108,000 cells/μL, indicating that the anemmia is regenerative, but the imnmature erythrocytes are also small
because of iron deficiency.
E. A 6-year-old cat with a slightly increased RDW. Note that most of the cells are macrocytic and hypochromic. The RBC volume histograr is shifted far
toward the right because of numerous large erythrocyte5, and the reticulocyte count is 233,260 cells/μL (10.7%), indicating a very regenerative anemia.
The cat was Coombs positive, and a diagnosis of inmmune-mediated hemolytic anemia was made. No Haemobartonelfia organisms were observed on
blood films taken during various days, but polyrmerase chain reaction for Haemobartonela felis was not performed. The cat was negative for feline
leukemia viru5.
shifted toward the right, indicating a subpopulation of large cells. Reticulocytes are not released in horses, but the presence of macrocytic erythrocytes
suggests that the anemmia is regenerative. The horse was dehydrated, so it likely was more anermic than would be indicated by the PCV. Blood los5 or
 blood destruction should be suspected in this case.
because of kidney dysfunction lilkely have decreased eryth-  experiencing periodic episodes of weakness may have recur-
ropoietin production. All patients with an unexplained non-  ring. intermittent, intra-abdominal hemorrhage secondary
regenerative anemia should undergo bone marrow aspiration
to a bleeding lesion (e.g., hemangiosarcoma). One should
and examination (see Chapter 14).
if the owner has observed any evidence of blood loss, such
Signalment and history
as hematuria or epistaxis. (Melena, on the other hand, must
A complete and accurate patient history from the owner
be very severe to be obvious by visual examination of feces.)
may provide valuable information. In some cases, the signal-
Finally, one should inquire if the patient has had any pos-
ment is also helpful, because certain disorders are more
sible exposure to plants, drugs. or chemicals that might
common in certain breeds. For example, immune-mediated
induce blood destruction, marrow dysfunction, or gastroin-
hemolytic anemia is relatively common in cocker spaniels.
testinal ulceration and associated blood loss.
Acute blood loss results in acute onset of clinical signs,
whereas both chronic blood loss and marrow dysfunction
Physical examination
result in chronic onset of clinical signs. Therefore, deterrmin-
A careful, routine physical examination may reveal addi-
ing if the onset of clinical signs was acute or chronic may be
tional information. For example, if bruising. petechiae, or
helpful. Asking the owner if other clinical signs are present 
        
may be useful as well. For example, a dog that is also expe-
may be secondary to decreased or dysfunctional platelets or
riencing polyuria and polydipsia may be anemic as a conse-
t0 a coagulation disorder (see Chapter l6). If abdominal
quence of renal dysfunction. Alternatively. a dog that is 
distension is present, intra-abdominal hemorrhage should
79
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
be suspected, and an abdominal paracentesis and fluid eval-
usually occurs within a body cavity, so careful physical
lation should be performed. If the mucous membranes are
examination, body-cavity aspiration, or other methods of
icteric as well as pale, erythrocyte destruction should be
visualization usually are diagnostic. Furthermore, many
suspected. If the mucous membranes are cyanotic or brown
causes of blood destruction, such as immune-mediated
as well as pale, methemoglobinemia, which may accompany
destruction, Heinz bodies, or erythrocyte parasites, can be
Heinz-body anemia, may be present.
detected based on examination of blood films and erythro-
cyte morphology. (Diagnostic procedures for specific causes
 of anemia are discussed in more detail in Chapters 7 and 8.)
Summary
 In summary, the clinical signs, laboratory evaluation, signal-
Suggested reading
ment, history, and physical examination are all important in
establishing a diagnosis for the underlying cause of anemia.
Hodges J, Christopher MM. Diagnostic accuracy of using erythro-
Chronic external blood loss usually results in iron-deficiency
 cyte indices and polychromasia to identify regenerative anemia
anemia, which can be diagnosed on the basis of decreased
in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 201l; 238: 1452-8
MCV and serum iron. Acute external blood loss usually can
Schalm OW. Morphologic classification of the anemias. Ver Clin
be diagnosed during the physical examination; however.
Patho! 1978; 7: 6-8.
internal blood loss may initially be difficult to differentiate
Tvedten HW. Morphologic classification of anemia. Ver Clin Patho!
from blood destruction. Significant internal blood loss
1999; 28: 80-2.
80
Nonregenerative Anemia
Mary Anna Thrall
Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine
Anemia is classified as either regenerative or nonregenera
Animals with nonregenerative anemia in conjunction
tive based on the number of circulating immature erythro-
with normal neutrophil and platelet concentrations may
cytes (polychromatophilic erythrocytes or reticulocytes). A
have an intrinsic marrow defect (pure red cell hypoplasia.
lack of circulating immature erythrocytes indicates a nonre-
aplasia, or apparent erythroid maturation defect), or they
generative anemia and provides evidence of marrow dys-
may have a disorder that is extrinsic to the bone marrow
function. Most nonregenerative anemias are normocytic.
but results in defective or decreased erythropoiesis. Pure red
 Nonregenerative anemia is further subclassified based on
cell aplasia also may be either reversible or irreversible, and
whether granulopoiesis (neutrophil production) and throm-
it usually is immune mediated or caused by viral (FeLV)
bopoiesis (platelet production) are also affected. Animals
damage. Extrinsic causes of nonregenerative anemia include
with nonregenerative anemia in conjunction with neutro-
anemia of inflammatory disease, anemia of renal failure.
penia and thrombocytopenia (pancytopenia)  have either
anemias associated with endocrine disorders, and rarely.
reversible or irreversible stem cell injury. Irreversible stem
nutritional deficiencies.
cell injuries are discussed in Chapter l4 and represent an
 intrinsic defect in proliferative behavior and/or regulation of
stem cell entry into differentiated hematopoiesis. Some irre-
Aplastic anemia (aplastic pancytopenia)
versible injuries may be induced by drugs. chemicals, viruses
(e.g., feline leukemia virus (FeLV)), radiation, and immune-
Drugs, chemicals, toxins, and estrogen
mediated stem cell injury, but the cause often is never dis-
Antineoplastic and immunosuppressive drugs, such as doxo-
covered. Manifestations of stem cell injury range from
rubicin, cyclophosphamide, cytosine arabinoside, vincris-
dysplasia to lack of cell production (aplastic anemia) to
tine, hydroxyurea, and azathioprine, probably are the most
uncontrolled neoplastic proliferation. Reversible stem cell
commonly used agents that cause reversible stem cell
injury is transient but also may be caused by drugs, chemi-
damage in dogs. These drugs are used for brief periods of
cals, viruses, radiation, and immune-mediated destruction
time. however, and usually result in a neutropenia and
of stem cells. Reversible stem cell injury does not progress
thrombocytopenia rather than a significant nonregenerative
to neoplasia; however, both reversible and irreversible stem
anemia. Drugs that have been associated with stem cell
cell damage may be associated with myelofibrosis in response
injury in animals include estrogen (dogs and ferrets), phen-
to the injury.
ylbutazone (dogs and possibly horses), meclofenamic acid
 Pancytopenia also may result from myelophthisic disor-
(dogs), griseofulvin (cats), phenobarbital (dogs). phenytoin
ders in which nonhematopoietic neoplasms, such as lym-
(dogs), colchicine (dogs), azidothymidine (a reverse tran-
phoma and malignant histiocytosis, either metastasize to
scriptase inhibitor; cats), chloramphenicol (dogs and cats),
or originate in the marrow. In addition, pancytopenia
thiacetarsamide (dogs), and albendazole (a broad-spectrum
may be seen with hermophagocytic syndrome, a rare condi-
anthelmintic; dogs and cats). Some drugs may induce stem
tion that occurs secondary to infectious, neoplastic,
or
cell destruction by immune-mediated mechanisms. In dogs.
metabolic diseases and is characterized by the proliferation
trimethoprim-sulfadiazine, cephalosporin, and phenobarbi-
of benign histiocytic cells that phagocytize hematopoietic
tal have been associated with pancytopenia that may be
precursors.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
81
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
leukemia. Mycotoxins have been associated with bone
Table 7.1 Drugs. chemnicals, plants, and hormones associated with
 marrow suppression in horses and cattle, and experimental
nonregenerative anemia in domestic animals.
aflatoxin B, toxicity has been reported to cause aplastic
Dogs
anemia in pigs.
Albendazole 
Estrogen
Infectious agents
Cephalosporins
Feline leukemia virus can result in anemia by many mecha.
 Chemotherapeutic agents
Colchicine
nisms, one of which is induction of aplastic anemia. In addi-
tion, FeLV is associated with anemia that manifests as pure
 Meclofenamic acid 
Phenobarbital
red cell aplasia or hypoplasia, myeloproliferative disorders
Phenylbutazone
(see Chapter l5). anemia of inflammatory disease, and
 Phenytoin
hemolysis. Hemolytic anemias that may be associated with
 Quinidine
FeLV infection include Heinz-body anemia.i
immune-
 Thiacetarsamnide
mediated hemolytic anemia, and feline infectious anemia
Cats
(see Chapter 8). Before widespread use of the FeLV vaccine.
Albendazole
approximately 70% of anemic cats were infected with FeLV.
Azidothymidine
Anemia caused by FeLV often is macrocytic, or a subpopula-
 Griseofulvin
tion of the erythrocytes is macrocytic in the absence of
Cattle 
reticulocytosis. This may be caused by prolonged dysplastic
 Bracken fern
erythrocyte production resulting from FeLV-induced myelo-
 Mycotoxin5
dysplasia (see Chapter 15).
Trichlorethylene
Ehrlichia canis may result in pancytopenia by two mecha-
Horses
nisms: immune-mediated destruction of circulating cells, or
Mycotoxin5
Phenylbutazone
aplastic anemia (which also may be an immune-mediated
 mechanism). In addition, dogs with ehrlichiosis may present 
with only one decreased cell line (e.g., thrombocytopenia).
may have a lymphocytosis, and commonly have hyperglob-
ulinemia. The organism rarely is seen on blood films.
Equine infectious anemia virus (a lentivirus) causes
cell injury usually responds to discontinuation of the drug.
anemia by a number of mechanisms, one of which is bone
Idiopathic immune-mediated stem cell injury often responds
marrow suppression (possibly immune mediated). Parvovi-
to immunosuppressive therapy, but these injuries may take
rus infection in dogs and cats causes acute bone marrow
several weeks to respond and often require long-term treat-
necrosis, but these animals usually recover or die before the
ment for resolution. Table 7.l summarizes drugs and chemi-
anemia becomes significant.
cals that may cause aplastic anemia in domestic animals.
estrogen for mismating. termination of pseudopregnancy. or
urinary incontinence. Myelosuppression may result from
Pure red cell aplasia
the administration of excessive amounts of estrogen or from
an idiosyncratic sensitivity to estrogen. Endogenous estro-
Pure red cell aplasia is characterized by a markedly decreased
gen, resulting either from Sertoli cell tumors in male dogs
concentration of erythroid precursors in the bone marrow
or from cystic ovaries or granulosa cell tumors in female
in the face of normal granulopoiesis and thrombopoiesis,
dogs, also may result in bone marrow suppression. Because
resulting in a severe nonregenerative anemia with normal
ferrets are induced ovulators. marrow suppression from
neutrophil and platelet concentrations. In dogs. pure red cell
endogenous estrogen is a common—and potentially fatal
aplasia almost always is caused by immune-mediated
disorder in this species. The mechanism of estrogen toxicosis
destruction of erythroid precursors, and it often responds to
is unclear, but it is thought to result from the secretion (by
immunosuppressive therapy. Spherocytes and agglutination
thymic stromal cells) of an estrogen-induced substance that
may be present, and approximately half the affected dogs
inhibits stem cells. Marrow suppression is preceded by an
are Coombs' positive. Bone marrow examination usually
initial thrombocytosis and neutrophilia.
reveals an apparent arrest at some stage of erythroid precur-
Aplastic anemia in cattle has been associated with grazing
sor maturation, ranging from the rubriblast to the metaru-
on bracken fern and ingestion of soybean meal contami
      
nated with the solvent trichloroethylene. Benzene, a com-
may be seen. Occasionally, however, erythroid precursors
monly used solvent, may cause aplastic anemia as well as
are completely absent.
82
CHAPTER 7 Nonregenerative Anemia
Some dogs and horses treated with recombinant human
limits availability of iron for erythropoiesis (see more on iron
metabolism under iron deficiency anemia in Chapter 8).
recombinant as well as endogenous erythropoietin, resulting
Laboratory findings include a decreased serum iron con-
in a reversible pure red cell aplasia. Recombinant, species-
centration, normal or decreased total iron-binding capacity.
specific erythropoietin does not produce this syndrome.
normal or increased serum ferritin, and normal or increased
Finally, certain strains of FeLV virus (subgroup C) cause
stainable iron stores in the bone marrow. An inflammatory
pure red cell aplasia.
leukogram commonly is present as well. Occasionally
animals may have a microcytic anemia, which makes anemia
of inflammatory disease difficult to distinguish from iron-
Red cell hypoplasia
deficiency anemia; in these cases, serum ferritin or bone 
marrow stainable iron must be used to differentiate the two 
Nonregenerative anemia may result from abnormalities that
disorders.
are extrinsic to the marrow, including anemia of inflamma-
A decreased serum iron concentration presumably is
tory disease, anemia of chronic renal failure, and anemia
advanta geous to patients with inflammatory disease, beca use
associated with endocrine disease, and rarely. anemia associ-
it reduces the availability of iron for bacterial growth. Diag-
ated with nutritional deficiencies. Other laboratory findings.
nosis may be difficult, but assays for hepcidin concentrations
such as an inflammatory leukogram, azotemia, other bio-
are being developed. Treatment is aimed at alleviating the
chemical profile abnormalities or endocrine panel abnor-
underlying disease. Parenteral iron supplementation may
malities, usually are key to establishing the diagnosis of
have some benefit, and treatment with recombinant eryth-
these types of anemias.
ropoietin may result in an increased hematocrit. Inhibitors
of hepcidin and inflammatory modulators show promise for
Anemia of inflammatory disease
the future.
Anemia of inflammatory disease (anemia of chronic disease)
is probably the most common anemia in domestic animals.
Anemia of chronic renal failure
but it usually is mild and clinically insignificant. This type of
Anemia associated with chronic renal failure usually is mod-
   s  s sn 
erate to severe, nonregenerative, and normocytic. The
processes, including infections, trauma, and neoplasia, and
severity of the anemia correlates with the severity of
usually is mild to moderate, nonregenerative, and usually
the renal failure as evidenced by the degree of azotemia. The
normocytic in domestic animals. The pathogenesis of anemia
primary cause for this anemia is lack of production of eryth-
of inflammatory disease is multifactorial, including changes
ropoietin by the kidney. and treatment with recombinant
in iron homeostasis, altered proliferation of erythroid pro-
canine erythropoietin effectively increases the hematocrit.
genitor cells and production of erythropoietin, and decreased
Other factors, such as increased bleeding tendencies, also
RBC life span. Immune stimulation results in activation of
may play a role in this type of anemia but likely are com-
T cells and monocytes that produce cytokines, such as
para tively minor in importance. Increases in serum parathy-
interferon-Y (IFN-y). tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-c), inter-
roid hormone and phosphorus concentrations and increased
leukin (IL)-l, IL-6, and IL-10 that affect iron metabolism.
erythrocyte osmotic fragility have not been found to corre-
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and IL-6 induce hepatic produc-
late significantly with the degree of anemia. Some patients
tion of hepcidin, which regulates iron homeostasis by
with anemia of renal disease have concurrent anemia of
repressing intestinal iron absorption as well as iron release
inflammatory disease.
from ferritin stores and by mediating other regulators of
iron. Specifically, hepcidin inactivates ferroportin, which is
Anemia associated with endocrine disease
responsible for transporting iron out of cells, and LPS can
-u   a se n s 
tive. normocytic anemia, usually with a hematocrit of
ferroportin expression. These events result in inhibition of
duodenal iron absorption and also decrease iron release
approximately 30%. This anemia responds to therapy for
from stores in macrophages and hepatocytes. Moreover.
hypothyroidism and may simply be a manifestation of the
inflammatory cytokines up-regulate DMTl expression on
lowered metabolic rate. Some dogs with hypoadrenocorti-
macrophages with a resultant increased uptake of iron into
cism, particularly those with glucocorticoid deficiency, have
these cells. Additionally, IL-10 increases transferrin receptor
a mild, nonregenerative, normocytic anemia that often is
expression, resulting in increased uptake of iron into cells.
masked by dehydration.
and TNF-c, IL-1, IL-6, and IL-10 also up-regulate ferritin
 expression, promoting intracellular storage and reten tion of 
Anemia associated with nutritional deficiencies
iron. The combined effect of these changes is a relative iron
Iron-deficiency anemia is the most common anemia associ-
deficiency in both the transport and functional pools, which
ated with a nutritional deficiency. This type of anemia
83
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
usually is regenerative (unless complicated by anemia of
Farris GM, Benjamin SA (1993) Inhibition of myelopoiesis by con-
inflammatory disease) and is discussed in Chapter 8. Other
ditioned medium from cultured canine thymic cells exposed to
types of anemia related to nutritional deficiency are diag-
estrogen. Am J Ver Res 54: 1366-73.
nosed very infrequently.
Fox LE, Ford S, Alleman AR, et al. (1993) Aplastic anemia associated
with prolonged high-dose trimethoprim-sulfadiazine administra-
Cobalamin deficiency is observed in dogs and cats as a
tion in two dogs. Ver Clin Pathol 22: 89-92.
result of a hereditary absence of intrinsic factor cobalamin
Giger U, Wermer LL, Millichamp NJ, er al. (1985) Sulfadiazine-
induced allergy in six Doberman pinschers. J Am Ver Med Assor
somal recessive trait. This anemia is nonregenerative and
186: 479-84.
usually normocytic (unlike the human counterpart, which is
Holland M, Stobie D, Shapiro W (1996) Pancytopenia associated
 macrocytic) and has been reported in border collies, a beagle.
giant schnauzers, and cats. Affected puppies fail to thrive.
1683-7.
Other findings include neutropenia with hypersegmentation.
 Jeffeers M, Lenghaus C (1986) Granulocytopenia and thrombocy-
anemia with anisocytosis and poikilocytosis, megaloblastic
topenia in dairy cattle—a suspected mycotoxicosis. Ausr Ver J 63:
changes of the bone marrow, decreased serum cobalamin
2624.
Lavoie JP, Morris DD, Zinkl JG, et al. (1987) Pancytopenia caused 
tinemia. Parenteral, but not oral, cyanocobalamin adminis-
by bone marrow aplasia in a horse. J Am Ver Med Assor 19l:
1462-4.
tration eliminates all abnormalities except the decreased
McCandish IAP, Munro CD, Breeze RG, er al. (1979) Hormone pro-
serum cobalamin concentration. Chinese Shar Peis have a
ducing ovarian tumors in the dog. Ver Rec 105: 9-11.
high prevalence of cobalamin deficiency compared to other
Morgan RV (1982) Blood dyscrasias associated with testicular
breeds and healthy Shar Peis may have subclinical cobalamin
tumors in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 18: 970-5.
deficiency. The disorder is suspected to be hereditary: the
Pritchard WR, Rehfeld CE, Sauter JH (1952) Aplastic anemia of
hematologic findings have not been reported to date.
cattle associated with trichloroethylene-extracted soybean oil
Hematologic findings in animals with acquired cobalamin
meal. J Am Ver Med Assoc 12l: 1-8.
deficiency as a result of gastrointestinal or pancreatic disease
Reagan WJ (1993) A review of myelofibrosis in dogs. Toxico! Patho!
have not been well characterized, although some animals
21: 164-9.
with acquired cobalamin deficiency have been reported to
 Rinkardt NE, Kruth SA (1996) Azathioprine-induced bone marrow
toxicity in four dogs. Can Ver J 37: 612-13.
have a mild normocytic anemia. Some cats with hyperthy-
Sherding RG, Wilson GP Kociba GI (198l) Bone marrow hypopla-
roidism are hypocobalaminemic but not anemic. Cobalt defi-
sia in eight dogs with Sertoli cell tumor. J Am Ver Med Assor 178:
ciency in ruminants results in a normocytic, nonregenera tive
497-500.
anemia and is caused by grazing on cobalt-deficient soil.
Sippel WL. Bracken ferm poisoning. J Am Ver Med Assoc 1952; 121:
Cobalt is required for synthesis of cobalamin by rumen
9-13.
bacteria.
Sontas HB, Dokuzeylu B, Turna O, et al. Estrogen-induced myelo-
toxicity in dogs: A review. Can Ver J 2009: 50: 1054-8.
Stokol T, Randolph JF Nachbar S, et al. (1997) Development of bone
marrow toxicosis after albendazole administration in a dog and
Suggested reading
cat. J Am Ver Med Assorc 12: 1753-6.
Watson ADJ (1 980) Further observation on chloramphenicol toxi-
Drugs, chermicals, toxins, and endogenous estrogen
cosis in cats. Am J Ver Res 4l: 239-4.
Alleman AR, Harvey JW (1993) The morphologic effects of vincris-
Watson ADJ, Wilson JT, Tumer OM, er al. (1980) Phenylbutazone-
tine sulfate on canine bone marrow cells. Ver Clin Pathol 22: 36-41.
Berggren PC (198l) Aplastic anemia in a horse. J Am Ver Med Assoc
239-41.
179:1400-2.
Weiss DJ (1985) Idiopathic aplastic anemia in the dog. Ver Clin Patho!
Bermard SL, Leather CW, Brobst DF er al. (1983) Estrogen-induced
14: 23-5.
bone marrow depression in ferrets. Am J Ver Res 44: 657-61.
Weiss DJ, Adams LG (l987) Aplastic anemia associated with
Bloo JC, Theim PA, Sellers TS, et al. (1988) Cephalosporin-induced 
 trimethoprim-sulfadiazine and fenbendazole administration in a
immune cytopenia in the dog: demonstration of erythrocyte-.
dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 191: 1119-20.
neutrophil-, and platelet-associated IgG following treatment with
Weiss DJ, Evanson OA, Sykes J (1999) A retrospective study of
cefezedone. Am J Hemato! 28: 71-8.
canine pancytopenia. Ver Clin Patho! 28: 83-8.
Bowen RA, Olson PN, Behrendt MD, er al. (1 985) Effcacy and toxic-
Weiss DJ, Klausner JS (1990) Drug-associated aplastic anemia in
ity of estrogens commonly used to terminate canine pregnancy.
dogs: eight cases (1984-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 196: 472-5.
J Am Ver Med Assoc 186: 783-8.
 Brockus CW (1998) Endogenous estrogen myelotoxicosis associated
           
Infectious agents
Deldar A, Lewis H, Bloom J, er al. (1988) Cephalosporin-induced 
Boosinger TR, Rebar AH, Denicola DB, er al. (1982) Bone marrow
changes in the ultrastructure of canine bone marrow. Ver Patho!
alterations associated with canine parvoviral enteritis. Ver Patho!
25: 211-18.
19: 558-61.
84
CHAPTER 7 Nonregenerative Anemia
Dormsife RE, Gasper PW, Mullins JI, et al. (l989) Induction of aplas-
McCown JL, Specht AJ (20ll) Iron homeostasis and disorders in
tic anemia by intra-bone marrow inoculation of molecularly
dogs and cats: a review. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 47: 151-60.
cloned feline retrovirus. 13: 745-55.
Means RT Jr. (1999) Advances in the anemia of chronic disease. Int
Kuehn NF, Gaunt SF (1985) Clinical and hematologic fndings in
JHematol 70: 7-12.
carine ehrlichiosis. J Am Ver Med Assoc 186: 3558.
Ottenjann M, Weingart C, Amdt G, er al. (2006) Characterization of
McGuire TC, Henson JB, Quist SE {1969) Impaired bone marrow
the anemia of inflammatory disease in cats with abscesses, pyo-
response in equine infectious anemia. Am J Ver Res 30: 2099-2104.
thorax, or fat necrosis. J Ver Inrerm Med 20: 1143-50.
Mylonakis ME, Day MJ, Siarkou V, er al. (2010) Absence of myelo-
Singh B, Arora S, Agrawal P, et al. (20ll) Hepcidin: a novel peptide
fibrosis in dogs with myelosuppression induced by Ehrlichia canis
hormone regulating iron metabolism. Clin Chim Acta 412:
infection. J Comp Pathol 142: 328-31.
823-30.
Reardon MJ, Pierce KR (198l) Acute experimental canine ehrlichi-
Weiss DJ, McClay CB {1988) Studies on the pathogenesis of the 
osis. I. Sequential reaction of the hemic and lymphoreticular
erythrocyte destruction associated with the amemia of inflamma-
systems. Vet Pathol 18: 48-61.
tory disease. Ver Clin Pathof 17: 90-3.
Wardrop KJ, Bazzler TV, Relich E, er al. (1996) A morphometric
Weiss G, Goodnough LT (2005) Anemia of chronic disease. N Eng!
study of bone marrow megakaryocytes in foals infected with
J Med 352: 1011-23.
equine infectious anemia virus. Ver Patho! 33: 222-7.
Yilmaz M, Solak Y, Covic A, et al. (20ll) Renal anemia of inflam-
mation: the name is self-explanatory. Blood Purif 32: 220-5.
Pure red cell aplasia
Abkowitz JL, Holly RD, Grant CK (1987) Retrovirus-induced feline
Anemias associated with endocrine disease
pure red cell aplasia. J Clin Invesr 1987; 80: 1056-63.
Lifton SJ, King LG, Zerbe CA (1996) Glucocorticoid-deficient hypo-
Jonas RD, Thrall MA, Weiser MG (1987) Immune-mediated hemo-
adrenocorticism in dogs: 18 cases (1986-1995). J Am Ver Med Assoc
  r o a u sa e a e i
209: 2076-81.
Hosp Assoc 23: 201-4.
 Panciera DL (2001) Conditions associated with canine hypothyroid-
Piercy RJ, Swardson CJ, Hinchcliff KW (1998) Erythroid hypoplasia
ism. Ver Clin North Am Small Anim Prart 3l: 935-50.
and anemia following administration of recombinant human
erythropoietin to two horses. J Am Ver Med Assoc 212: 2447.
 Randolph JF, Stokol T, Scarlett JM, MacLeod JN (1999) Comparison
Anemia associated with chronic renal failure
of biological activity and safety of recombinant canine erythro-
Chalhoub S, Langston CE, Eatroff A (20ll) Anemia of renal disease
What it is, what to do and what's new. J Feline Med Surg 13:
poietin with that of recombinant human erythropoietin in clini-
629-40.
cally normal dogs. Am J Ver Res 60: 636-42.
Stockham SL, Ford RB, Weiss DJ (l98O) Canine autoimmune
 Cowgill LD (1992) Pathophysiology and management of anemia in 
 hemolytic disease with a delayed erythroid regeneration. J Am
chronic progressive renal failure. Semin Ver Med Surg (Small Anim)
Anim Hosp Assoc 16: 927-31.
7:175-82
Stokol T, Blue JT (1999) Pure red cell aplasia in cats: nine cases
King LG, Giger U, Diserens D, Nagode LA (1992) Anemia of chronic
{1989-1997). J Am Ver Med Assoc 214: 75-9.
renal failure in dogs. J Ver Inrerm Med 6: 264-70.
Randolph JE, Scarlett J, Stokol T, et al. (2004) Clinical efficacy and
ee [an ai and seoi r i yuae 'ir aa ' os
and nonregenerative immune-mediated anermia in dogs: 43 cases
 safety of recombinant canine erythropoietin in dogs with anemia
{1988-1999). J Am Ver Med Assoc 216: 1429-36.
of chronic renal failure and dogs with recombinant human
Stokol T, Randolph J, MacLeod JN (1 997) Pure red cell aplasia after
erythropoietin-induced red cell aplasia. J Ver Inrerm Med 18:
recombinant human erythropoietin treatment in normal beagle
81-9.
dogs. Ver Pathol 34: 474 (Abstract 12).
Weiss DJ (2008) Bone marrow pathology in dogs and cats with
Cobalamin deficiency
Bishop MA, Xenoulis PG, Berghoff N, et al. (2012) Partial charac-
pure red cell aplasia. J Comp Patho! 138: 46-53.
terization of cobalamin deficiency in Chinese Shar Peis. Ver J 191:
41-5.
Anemia of inflammatory disease
Cook AK, Suchodolski JS, Steiner JM, ert al. (201l) The prevalence
Cullis JO (20l l) Diagnosis and management of anaemia of chronic
-iouauada snoaunuds ym sien u eaue[eqoody jo
disease: current status. Br J Haemato 154: 289-300.
ism. J Small Anim Pracr 52: 101-6.
Feldman BF Kaneko JI (198 1) The anemia of inflammatory disease
Battersby IA, Giger U, Hall EJ (2005) Hyperammonaemic encepha-
in the dog. I. The nature of the problem. Ver Res Commun 4: 237-52.
lopathy secondary to selective cobalamin deficiency in a juvenile 
 Feldman BF, Kaneko JJ, Farver TB (1981) Anemia of inflammatory
Border collie. J Smal! Anim Pract 46: 339-44.
Anoneuue ul uonl aeons jo Aiqe[eae aop au u aseasi
Fordyce HH, Callan MB, Giger U (2000) Persistent cobalamin def-
disease. Am J Ver Res 42: 586-9.
ciency cau sing failure to thrive in a juvenile beagle. Nurr J Smaf!
Feldman BF, Kaneko JJ, Farver TB (1981 ) Anemia of inflammatory
Anim Pracr 41: 407-10.
disease in the dog: clinical characterization. Am J Ver Res 42:
Fyfe JC, Giger U, Hall CA, er al. (1991) Inherited selective intestinal
1109-13.
cobalamin malabsorption and cobalamin deficiency in dogs.
Feldman BF Kaneko JJ, Farver TB (198 1) Anemia of inflammatory
Pediatr Res 29: 2431.
disease in the dog: ferrokinetics of adjuvant-induced anemia. Am
Fyfe JC, Giger V, Jezyk PF (1992) Cobalamin metabolism. J Am Ver
J Ver Res 42: 583-5.
Med Assoc 20l: 202-4.
85
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Gritzmer N, Bishop MA, Suchodolski JS, er al. (20l0) Association 
Simpson KW, Fyfe J, Cormetta A, er al. (200l) Subnormal concentra-
study of cobalamin deficiency in the Chinese Shar Pei. J Hered
tions of serum cobalamin (vitamin Bz) in cats with gastrointes-
101: 211-17.
tinal disease. J Ver Interm Med 15: 327-8.
Morgan LW, McConnell JI (1999) Cobalamin deficiency associated
Thompson KA, Parmell NK, Hohenhaus AE, et al. (2009) Feline
with erythroblastic anemia and methylmalonic aciduria in a
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency: 16 cases {1992-2007). J Feline
Border collie. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 35: 392-5.
Med Surg 1l: 935-40.
Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA (200l) Metabolism of amino
Vaden SL, Wood PA, Ledley FD, Cormwell PE, Miller RT, Page R
acids in cats with severe cobalamin deficiency. Am J Ver Res 62:
(1 992) Cobalamin deficiency associated with methylmalonic aci-
1852-8.
demia in a cat. J Am Ver Med Assorc 200: 1l0l-3.
86
Regenerative Anemia
Mary Anna Thrall
Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine
The term "regenerative anemia" implies that the bone
{ridium), heparin overdose, and hereditary erythrocyte
marrow is attempting to compensate for the anemia by
enzyme deficiencies and membrane defects.
increased erythrocyte production, as well as early release of
immature red cells. Indications that the anemia is regenera-
tive are increased polychromasia on the Wright's stained
Blood loss
blood film, and increased reticulocyte concentration (other
than in equine species, which do not release many imma-
If blood is lost outside of the body, including loss into GI
ture erythrocytes). Mean cell volume (McV) may be
tract, components of the blood such as iron and plasma
increased, but is a less reliable indication of early release of
protein are lost. On the other hand, if bleeding occurs within
cells than is the presence of reticulocytes or polycromasia.
a body cavity. the protein is reabsorbed within hours, and
 Regenerative anemia is caused by either blood loss or blood
most of the erythrocytes are reabsorbed by lymphatics
destruction or may be seen in the recovery phase of marrow
within a few days. The remaining cells are lysed or phago-
dysfunction. Blood loss may be external or internal, and
cytized, and iron is reutilized.
may be acute or chronic. Causes of acute blood loss include
trauma; bleeding lesions, such as tumors or large ulcers; and
Acute blood loss
hemostatic disorders. Examples of hemostatic disorders
If blood loss is acute, the PCV initially remains normal
include thrombocytopenia, inherited coagulopathies, and
because both cells and plasma are lost. However, within a
acquired coagulopathies, such as warfarin toxicosis or dis-
few hours the PCV and plasma protein decrease as a result
seminated vascular coagulopathy. Common causes
of
of dilution, as interstitial fluid is added to blood. By 72 hours
chronic blood loss include bleeding lesions, particularly
postbleed, polychromatophilic erythrocytes (reticulocytes)
within the gastrointestinal tract, and gastrointestinal or
should begin to appear in blood, and their concentration
external parasites.
usually peaks within approximately one week. Plasma
Blood destruction (hemolysis) may be either intravascular
protein should return to normal within about one week,
or extravascular, and may be due to intrinsic (primary)
unless blood loss is recurrent or ongoing. Examples of dis-
defects, such as hereditary membrane defects or enzyme
orders causing acute blood loss include trauma and surgical
deficiencies, or extrinsic (secondary) causes, such as eryth-
procedures, coagulation disorders, thrombocytopenia, and
rocyte parasites or immune-mediated destruction. Intravas-
bleeding tumors.
cular hemolysis is the actual lysis of erythrocytes within the
Thrombocytopenia may result in bleeding when the plate-
vascular system. Extravascular hemolysis occurs when
let concentration is less than 25.000/μL; blood loss does
abnormal erythrocytes are phagocytized by macrophages.
not cause platelet concentrations to drop below l0,0o0/μL.
usually within the spleen or liver. Common causes of eryth-
Platelet concentration can usually be estimated from the
rocyte destruction include immune mediated mechanisms.
blood film. The combination of reticulocytosis (or increased
erythrocyte parasites, and drugs and chemicals that produce
polychromasia) and hypoproteinemia is indicative of blood
oxidative damage resulting in Heinz body formation. Less
loss anemia. unless hypoproteinemia is coincidental to
common causes include hypophosphosphatemia.
.water
a regenerative anemia. Causes of hypoproteinemia other
intoxication in young ruminants, bacteria (Leptospira, Clos-
than blood loss include decreased intake (malabsorption,
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
28
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
maldigestion, starvation). (
decreased production (liver
failure). or other types of protein loss (glomerulonephropa-
that are treated with a combination of surgical resection and
thy, protein losing enteropathy).
chemotherapy have a mean survival time of approximately
 Blood loss outside of the body is usually easy to diagnose.
4-10 months, depending on the protocol used.
since the source of blood loss is usually apparent, unless it
is being lost via the gastrointestinal tract. Blood loss within
Chronic blood loss (iron deficiency anemia)
a body cavity is more difficult to diagnose, and thoracic or
Chronic blood loss results in iron deficiency anemia. Iron
abdominal fluid evaluation may be necessary to confirm the
deficiency anemia in adults is almost always due to chronic
diagnosis.
blood loss. Conversely, iron deficiency anemia commonly
Erythrocyte morphology is usually normal with acute
occurs in neonates of all domestic animal species due to
blood loss, with the exception of blood loss from hemangio-
inadequate iron intake, since milk contains little iron and
sarcoma, one of the most common tumors of middle-aged
 growth rates are high. Anemia is particularly severe in baby
to older dogs, especially large breeds such as German shep-
pigs that have no access to iron-containing soil, but also
herds and golden retrievers. Hemangiosarcomas have been
occurs in kittens, puppies, foals, and calves. When blood loss
reported in cats, but are rare. They are malignant vascular
is ongoing. iron stores are depleted relatively quickly. One
tumors typically found in the spleen, liver, and right atrium
mL of blood contains 0.5mg of iron; normally 1 mg of iron
of the heart, and most have metastasized to the lungs or
is absorbed and excreted daily. Iron deficiency anemia is
other organs by the time the diagnosis is made. Many dogs
quite common in dogs, less common in ruminants, and rela-
present due to acute signs associated with anemia as a result
tively rare in cats and horses.
of rupture of the tumor, with blood loss into the abdominal
Gastrointestinal bleeding is the most common cause of
caviry. Some affected dogs have a history of intermittent
chronic blood loss. Causes of chronic gastrointestinal blood
weakness, as a result of multiple events involving tumor
loss include neoplasms such as leiomyomas, leiomysaromas.
rupturing and bleeding. followed by absorption of blood
and carcinomas; gastrointestinal ulcers, usually as a result of
from the abdominal cavity.
the use of ulcerogenic drugs such as glucocorticoids, nonste-
Acanthocytes and schistocytes are seen in some dogs with
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs and salicylates; inflamma
hemangiosarcoma (Fig. 8.l); these morphologic changes are
tory bowel disease; and parasites such as hookworms. Heavy
helpful in making the diagnosis (see Chapter 5), and may
infestations of ectoparasites that utilize blood, such as fleas
also be observed in the erythrocytes in blood aspirated from
and some lice, can also lead to iron deficiency anemia.
the abdominal cavity (Fig. 8.2). Other common laboratory
Overuse of blood donors may also lead to features of severe
findings include reticulocytosis (increased polychromasia),
iron deficiency anemia, although the degree of anemia may
transient hypoproteinemia, and thrombocytopenia, usually
mild to moderate, as a result of localized microangiopathy
within the tumor, or disseminated intravascular coagulation.
Dogs that are treated with surgical resection alone have a
Figure 8.2 Abdominal fluid from a dog with ruptured splenic
hemangiosarcoma and resultant hemoabdomen. Although morphology of
erythrocytes is usually insignificant in body cavity effusions, animals with 
hermoabdomen resulting from hemangiosarcoma may have acanthocytes
Figure 8.1 Blood film from a dog with hemangiosarcoma of the spleen
(large arrows) that are diagnostically useful. Mesothelial cells (arrowhead)
Note the acanthocytes (arrows) and schistocyte (arrowhead). Vright stain
and a nucleated erythrocyte are also present (srmall arrow). Wright stain.
88
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
be very mild. Rarely, thrombocytopenia or inherited hemo-
static defects can lead to chronic blood loss. Clinical signs of
chronic blood loss include those of anemia, such as pallor,
lethargy, and weakness, and are somewhat variable, depend-
ing on the underlying cause of the blood loss.
Laboratory findings
 The hallmark of iron deficiency anemia is a decreased MCV
or a subpopulation of microcytic cells (see Chapters l and
6). Microcytosis occurs because erythrocyte precursors con-
tinue to divide in an attempt to reach their full hemoglobin
content. Additional divisions result in smaller than normal
erythrocytes. Examination of the erythrocyte histogram or
computer graphic generated by the electronic cell counter is
often useful, because subpopulations of microcytic erythro-
cytes can be observed, even when the McV is within the
reference interval (see Chapter 6). The MCV of reticulocytes
is also decreased, since even immature iron deficient eryth-
Figure 8.3 Blood film from a dog with iron deficiency anemia and
hypochromic erythrocytes (arrowheads). Note the presence of
rocytes are smaller than normal. The red cell distribution
polychromatophilic erythrocytes (large arrows), indicating that the anemia
width (RDW), which describes the width of the size distribu-
is regenerative. Anirnals with iron deficiency anemia cormnmnonly have
tion, is usually increased when subpopulations of microcytic
increased platelets (small arrows), some of which may be large. Wright
erythrocytes are present, and will often be increased before
stain.
the MCV decreases below the reference interval. Although
one might expect the MCHC to be decreased in these
patients, since the cells contain less hemoglobin than normal.
it is commonly within the reference interval.
Reticulocyte indices can be determined with flow-
cytometry type electronic cell counters. These indices, espe-
cially reticulocyte hemoglobin content (rCH) and reticulocyte
volume (rMcV) are excellent indicators of iron deficiency
anemia, as both are decreased quite early in patients with
iron deficiency. usually before changes in conventional
hematologic and biochemical indices.
Blood film examination is diagnostically useful, particu-
larly in the late stages of iron deficiency anemia. Erythro-
cytes of most species, other than cats, may appear pale, with
increased central pallor, and sometimes only a thin rim of
hemoglobin is present (Fig. 8.3). Membrane abnormalities
are common, including keratocyte and schistocyte forma-
tion, presumably due to increased susceptibility to oxidative
damage (see Chapter 5). Initially the RBC develops what
appears to be a blister or vacuole where inner membrane
Figure 8.4 Blood film from a llarma with iron deficiency anemia. Typical
surfaces are crosslinked across the cell. These lesions subse-
seell ui ualap uo ym paeiose saluouge sihooydiou
include dacryocytes (large arrowhead), folcded erythrocytes (arrows), and 
keratocytes, spiculated red cells with two or more pointed
eccentric pallor (small arrowheads). Wright stain.
projections. The projections from the keratocytes then frag-
ment from the cell, forming schistocytes. Erythrocytes are
thin, and folded cells may be seen, particularly in llamas
Thrombocytosis is present in approximately 50% of iron
(Fig. 8.4)
deficient patients. The mechanism for the increased platelet
The anemia is usually regenerative, but may become non-
concentration is not well understood, but may be due to
regenerative in the late stages. Occasionally. the bone
increased erythropoietin or other cytokines. Approximately
marrow response may be inappropriate due to underlying
 one-third of animals with chronic blood loss become hypo-
anemia of inflammatory disease, since many of these animals
proteinemic, as protein production sometimes cannot keep
have concurrent inflammation related to bleeding lesions.
pace with blood loss.
89
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
and one-third of cats with portosystemic shunts have
include decreased serum iron concentration, decreased
microcytosis.
transferrin (a glycoprotein in plasma that transports iron
Animals with anemia of inflammatory disease usually
between compartments) saturation, and low storage iron.
have normocytic anemias, but occasionally the McV will fall
Total iron binding capacity, a test for measuring the amount
below the reference interval. While serum iron is decreased
in these animals, storage iron is normal to increased.
in iron deficient dogs and cats, although it is usuallyincreased
 Finally, some dogs of the Japanese Shiba and Akita breeds
in other species with iron deficiency. Iron is stored as either
normally have microcytosis. These animals are not anemic.
ferritin or hemosiderin. Although ferritin is primarily an
and their iron metabolism is normal.
intracellular iron storage compound, it can be detected in
serum. Hemosiderin, on the other hand, is insoluble, and
can only be detected by staining cells and tissues. Thus.
Blood destruction (intravascular or
storage iron can be evaluated by measuring serum ferritin.
extravascular hemolysis)
or by examining a bone marrow aspirate and noting lack of
hemosiderin in macrophages. Serum ferritin is difficult to
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
measure, is species-specifc, and since it is an acute phase
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) is a conse-
reactant protein, tends to increase when inflammation or
quence of increased red cell destruction, either as a result of
liver disease are present. Special iron stains, such as Prussian
antibody directed against erythrocytes, or immune com-
blue, are not necessary in order to visualize hemosiderin in
plexes attaching to erythrocytes. Immune mediated hemo-
the bone marrow (see Chapter 14). The absence of hemo-
lytic anemia is usually a markedly regenerative anemia, with
siderin in feline bone marrow aspirates is not significant,
increased polychromasia (reticulocytosis). However, in some
since hemosiderin is rarely seen in aspirates of bone marrow
instances, the anemia is nonregenerative as a result of anti-
from normal cats.
body formation against RBC precursors, with destruction of
decreased McV and anemia is usually adequate to diagnose
sors. The onset may be acute or gradual. Immune mediated
iron deficiency anemia, and to trigger additional diagnostic
hemolytic anemia is sometimes classified as primary (idio-
procedures to determine the source of blood loss, such as
pathic).
or secondary, if concurrent disease is present.
testing the feces for occult blood.
However, this classification is somewhat meaningless, since
"secondary" immune mediated hemolytic anemia may be
Therapy
coincidental to the concurrent disorder. Often the cause is
Treatment consists of finding and treating the source of
never determined, but in some instances can be related to
blood loss. Iron supplementation with intramuscular inject-
other disorders or events, such as infections, other immune-
able iron in iron-deficient neonates is useful, especially baby
mediated disorders, modified live virus vaccination, neopla-
pigs, which are usually given 200 mg iron as iron dextran.
        
Although oral iron supplementation is commonly used to
toxicosis, and administration of drugs. Drugs that have been
treat iron deficiency, it is likely of little value, particularly in
associated with IMHA are numerous and include penicillin,
dogs and cats, because commercial pet food usually contains
cephalosporins, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, levamisole.
more iron than can be absorbed by the intestine. However.
and amiodarone; in these cases, immune mediated destruc-
intestinal absorption of iron increases dramatically when
tion occurs due to either the drug binding directly to
animals are iron deficient. Oral iron should not be given to
erythrocytes (penicillin). or by the formation of drug-
neonatal animals, especially kittens, since it can be toxic.
antibody immune complexes, which also may bind to red
blood cells
Differential diagnoses
Immune mediated hemolytic anemia is the most common
Other causes of microcytosis include portosystemic shunts.
cause of hemolytic anemia in the dog. and has been described
which are vascular connections between the portal and
in horses, cattle, and cats. Breeds of dogs more commonly
systemic circulation that divert portal blood around the
affected in North American include cocker spaniels, poodles.
liver. The cause of the microcytosis in these animals is not
and collies, and the disorder is slightly more common in
well understood, but is associated with abnormal iron
females than in males. In horses, IMHA has been associated
metabolism, and some of these patients may actually
with penicillin and other antibiotic administration, clostrid-
have iron deficiency anemia, usually as a result of gastroin-
ial infections, and neoplasia. In cats, IMHA has been most
a u s asnd o is a l
commonly associated with Haemobartonella felis (Mycoplasma
liver. The anemia, if present, is usually mild, and although
haemofelis) infection, feline leukemia virus, and lymphopro-
serum iron may be decreased, storage iron is usually normal
liferative and myeloproliferative disease. Immune mediated
to slightly increased. Approximately two-thirds of dogs
hemolytic anemia has been reported in cattle with anaplas
90
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
Figure 8.5 Blood film from a dog with inmune mediated hemolytic
Figure 8.6 Blood filrm from a dog with immune mediated hemolytic
anemia. The polychromatophilic erythrocytes (arrowheads) indicate that 
monocytes mmay be observed that contain hemmosiderin (large arrow) or
the anernia is regenerative: nummerous spherocytes (arrows) are present, a5
phagocytized erythrocytes (inset, arrowhead). W/right stain.
is agglutination. Wright stain.
mosis, which is not surprising. since antibody is likely to be
directed against the erythrocyte parasite.
Mechanisms of red cell destruction can be due to either
erythrophagocytosis or intravascular hemolysis. Macro-
phages have receptors for antibody as well as complement
(C,b), and removal of erythrocytes by macrophages occurs
in multiple organs, including the spleen, bone marrow, and
liver. Rarely, monocytes that have phagocytized erythro-
cytes may be observed on blood films (Fig. 8.5). Partial
erythrophagocytosis by macrophages results in the forma-
tion of spherocytes, the hallmark of IMHA. Spherocytes
appear small, although their volume is normal, because they
are sphere-shaped, lack central pallor and appear to be dense
(Fig. 8.6). They have a shortened half-life because they are
not as deformable as normal biconcave disk-shaped eryth-
rocytes. They exhibit increased saline fragility, which may
be diagnostically useful. Spherocytes are difficult to detect
in species in which the red cells normally lack central pallor.
Figure 8.7 Blood film from dog with intravascular hemolysis secondary
to immmune mediated hernolytic anermia. Numerous spherocytes
They are, however, readily detectable in dogs. although
(arrowhead) and lysed "ghost" erythrocytes (arrows) are present. Wright
imperfect spherocytes, which have a small amount of central
stain .
pallor, are sometimes missed. If complement fixation goes
to completion, resulting in membrane attack complex for-
mation, intravascular lysis occurs. In these instances, ghost
erythrocytes are occasionally observed on blood films (Fig.
grossly evident in the blood tube. IgG is sometimes referred
8.7). Hemoglobinemia, hermoglobinuria, hyperbilirubine-
to as an incomplete antibody, since it usually does not result
 mia, and bilirubinuria are often present.
in intravascular hemolysis or agglutination, but rather pre-
Antibodies associated with IMHA are usually IgG or IgM,
disposes to erythrocyte phagocytosis by macrophages. The
but IgA has also been reported to bind to erythrocytes.
presence of antibody can be detected by performing a
Usually the antibody is attached to erythrocyte membrane
Coombs' test (see Chapter l). A species-specific antiglobulin
glycoproteins. If IgM is involved, agglutination of erythro-
reagent (Coombs' serum) is added to a saline-washed sus-
cytes can usually be observed on the blood film, and may be
pension of the patient's erythrocytes. Agglutination results if
91
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
the red cells are coated with autoantibody. However, if agglu-
onset may accommodate to the anemia, and show much less
tination is already present, a Coombs test is not indicated.
severe clinical signs.
In some cases in which agglutination is observed, the Coombs
Laboratory findings vary, but always include a decreased
test is falsely negative. presumably because the IgM antibody
packed cell volume, red blood cell count, and hemoglobin
is eluted from the erythrocytes during the washing process.
concentration. If intravascular hemolysis is present, hemo-
The Coombs test was first developed for use in humans in
globinemia, hemoglobinuria, hyperbilirubinemia, and bili-
1945 by R.R.A. Coombs, a veterinary immunologist in the
rubinuria may be present. Additionally. the hemoglobin
Department of Pathology at Cambridge University, who
hypothesized that antibody to human globulin could be
cell volume, thus falsely increasing the MCHC. Blood film
synthesized by rabbits inoculated with human globulin, and
examination almost always reveals spherocytosis, which is
this sera could then attach to globulin binding to erythro-
the most diagnostically useful laboratory finding in these
cytes, resulting in agglutination. This test is also known as
patients.
the direct antiglobulin test (DAT). The Coombs test has
Agglutination may be present, and platelet concentration
numerous limitations in domestic animals because of false-
is commonly decreased because of concurrent immune
negative and false-positive results, both of which are
mediated destruction (Evans Syndrome) or secondary dis-
common. False-negative results occur due to the following:
seminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). Agglutination
low concentration of antibody bound to erythrocytes.
may be differentiated from rouleaux formation by mixing a
improper antiglobulin to antibody ratio, not incorporating
the drug that is suspected of inducing the antibody response,
tination will persist in the presence of saline while rouleaux
and improper temperature. False positive results occur
formation will disperse. Agglutination may be so marked
when various types of disease cause immune complexes
that it can be seen grossly on the blood film or on the side
or complement to bind to erythrocytes, without resulting
of the EDTA tube. If agglutination is present, the MCV may
in anemia. False positives are particularly common in
be falsely increased, since agglutinated red cells (doublets
cats. Previous treatment with glucocorticosteroids may
and triplets) may be counted as large cells (see Chapter l).
cause a negative result, and previous blood transfusion may
The McV may also be increased if reticulocytosis is present.
cause a positive result. A more sensitive enzyme linked
The leukogram is almost always inflammatory. with a
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect immunoglobulins
mature neutrophilia, increased bands, and monocytosis.
bound to erythrocytes has fewer false-negative results.
This inflammatory response was once thought to be due to
However, this direct enzyme-linked antiglobulin
test
release of colony stimulating factors from activated macro-
(DELAT) may also be falsely positive, is laborious, and not
phages. More recently, the degree of neutrophilia, as well as
available in most laboratories. Direct immunofluorescence
increased immature neutrophils, has been found to correlate
(DIF) flow cytometry is more sensitive (but less specific) than
with the amount of tissue damage secondary to hypoxia and
the Coombs test, can be used to determine the class of anti-
thromboembolic disease.
body present, detects the percentage of erythrocytes bound
 Azotermia may be present, either prerenal, or if intravas-
with antibody, and can thus be used to monitor response to
cular hemolysis is severe, renal. Free hemoglobin binds to
therapy.
haptoglobin, but when the available haptoglobin is satu-
Antibodies against erythrocytes are sometimes classified
rated, hemoglobinuria secondary to hemoglobinemia occurs.
as either warm, which is common, or cold reactive, which
Acute renal failure may be due to either erythrocyte mem-
is rare. Warm antibodies react most strongly at body tem-
brane antigen-antibody complex deposition or direct toxicity
perature, and cold antibodies react more strongly at cold
of free hemoglobin to renal tubular cells.
 n      n
Bone marrow aspiration is usually not indicated in IMHA,
blood cell agglutination in distal extremities such as the tips
  a a  s  d   i
of the ear pinnae, tail tip, nose, and digits, with subsequent
nonregenerative. In these cases, an apparent maturation
obstruction of small vessels and necrosis. Hemolytic anemia
arrest of the erythroid series, often at the rubricyte stage.
is sometimes associated with this syndrome, which has been
may be present, presumably due to destruction of more
described in the dog and cat.
mature forms of erythrocytes. Metarubricytes and polychro-
matophilic erythrocytes are often decreased to absent in the
 Clinical signs and laboratory findings
marrow from such patients, and occasionally, increased
Clinical signs are variable and often include lethargy. sple-
nomegaly, fever, and icterus, as well as other general signs
Cytes may be observed.
associated with anemia, such as pale mucous membranes.
Because both subclinical and clinical DIC are commonly
dyspnea, tachycardia, and systolic heart murmur if the
associated with IMHA, other laboratory tests that may be
anemia is severe. If the anemia is acute, animals may present
abnormal are those that are used to diagnose DIC, including
in a state of collapse, whereas animals with a more chronic
a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time, pro-
92
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
hemolysis, likely as a result of attachment of antibody to
altered erythrocyte membranes.
Immune mediated hemolytic anemia may be mistakenly
diagnosed in horses with Heinz body anemia, possibly
because collapse of the erythrocyte membrane following
eccentrocyte formation results in erythrocytes that appear
similar to spherocytes. However, an alternative explanation
is that immune mediated destruction of erythrocytes with
spherocyte formation may actually occur, since Heinz body
formation may result in band-3 clustering with secondary
antibody attachment. Spherocyte formation in cases of bee 
sting envenomation may be due to mellitin, a band-3 clus-
tering agent, or phospholipase, both of which are present in
bee venom. Band-3 clustering probably plays a significant
role in immune mediated destruction of erythrocytes and
spherocyte formation in these patients. Spherocyte forma-
tion secondary to band-3 clustering is also seen in dogs with
bop e woy uaxet wly poolg e ul (smome ahiel) satoayds grg aano
zinc toxicosis. Interestingly. dogs with zinc toxicosis are
 several days following rattlesnake envenommation. The dog previously had
echinospherocytes and some spiculated erythrocytes remain (arrowheads).
the erythrocyte washing process, zinc is removed, band 3 is
The anernia is regenerative, as indicated by the polychromatophilic
erythrocytes (small arrow). The cdog is recovering from thrombocytopenia;
returned to a dispersed distribution, and antibodies are
a giant "young" platelet is in the center of the field. Wright stain.
eluted, resulting in a negative test. Finally, animals that have
had incompatible blood transfusions may develop some
degree of IMHA and spherocytosis, and animals that have
fragmentation of erythrocytes may have spherocytosis, as
longed one-stage prothrombin time, decreased antithrombin
the fragments may "round-up" and appear to be small sphe-
activity, increased fibrin(ogen) degradation products con-
rocytes. Spectrin deficiency has been reported in Dutch
centration, and increased D-dimer concentration.
golden retrievers; some, but not all affected dogs had sphe-
rocytosis and IMHA.
Differential diagnoses
Immune mediated hemolytic anemia can usually be easily
Prognosis
differentiated from other types of hemolytic anemia by the
Mortality rates vary. and are reported to range from 25 % t0
presence of spherocytes in IMHA. However, spherocytes
50%. Although some reports suggest that dogs that are
occasionally may be seen in dogs with rattlesnake enven-
 altoagglutinating or have intravascular hermolysis have the
omation (Fig. 8.8). Although spheroechinocytes and type II
highest mortality, this is controversial. Thromboembolism is
echinocytes are seen commonly in dogs with rattlesnake
a common finding in dogs that die. Recurrence of IMHA, or
envenomation (see Chapter 5). spherocytes may be present
other immune mediated disorders such as immune mediated
after the echinocytic changes have disappeared. It is unclear
thrombocytopenia, is relatively common.
whether the rattlesnake envenomated dogs with sphero-
cytes have immune mediated hemolytic anemia, or if the
Therapy
spherocyte formation is simply a result of membrane altera-
Treatment of dogs consists of glucocorticosteroids (usually
tions secondary to the phospholipase present in the snake
prednisone. l-2mg/kg per os every 12 hours). which
venom. Spherocytes, along with spheroechinocytes and type
decreases antibody production, T-cell activity, and dimin-
III echinocytes, may also be observed in horses with clos-
ishes macrophage function. Dexamethasone is often used in
tridial infections presumably as a result of the bacterial phos-
horses, and has been reported to be effective in cattle. Dis-
pholipase hydrolyzing erythrocyte membrane phospholipids
advantages of glucocorticoids include predisposing patients
(sphingomyelin and lecithin), producing lysolecithin, an
to infection, thromboembolic disease, and polyuria and
echinogenic agent. These cases may be confusing. as clos-
polydipsia. Combination treatment may be warranted in
tridial infections in horses have been associated with immune
dogs that are not responsive to or are intolerant of glucocor-
mediated hemolytic anemia, diagnosed by the presence of
ticoids. Therapeutic modalities may include azathioprine.
spherocytes, autoagglutination, and positive Coombs' test.
danazol, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, bovine hemoglo-
However, clostridial organisms also can directly induce
bin solution, or human immunoglobulin. However, in one
hemolysis through the release of toxins. It is also possible
retrospective study, no difference in mortality was detected
that phospholipases may be able to induce immune-media ted
between the use of multiple immunosuppressive agents and
93
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
the use of glucocorticoids alone, and in fact the risk of death
Affected animals are normal at birth, but within 24-48
was slightly lower (30%) with glucocorticoids alone than
hours they become weak, lethargic. pale, and anemic, with
the overall mortality rate of 50%. In addition, the use of
icterus and dyspnea. Hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria
cyclophosphamide and bovine hemoglobin solution has
may be present, as well as splenomegaly and hepatomegaly.
been associated with increased risk of death, and may be
Thrombocytopenia and DIC may also occur.
contraindicated. Danzol, a synthetic androgen, and cyclo-
 In foals, approximately 90% of all cases of NI are attribut-
sporine, an immune response inhibitor, have been reported
able to the Aa or Qa antigen, but other antigens may be
to be of no benefit with respect to reducing mortality. Some
involved. The occurrence in mule foals may be due to a
immunosuppressive drugs, other than the glucocorticoids.
xenoantigen. It is possible that all mule pregnancies (donkey
may injure marrow, resulting in a transient loss of regenera-
sire × horse dam) are incompatible with regard to this factor
tive response, and some drugs may not be effectively metab-
and a potential for NI exists in all cases.
olized with severe anemia, making them more toxic than
usual. Fluid therapy is indicated, particularly in patients
Laboratory diagnosis
with intravascular hemolysis, and lactic acidosis secondary
Diagnosis is usually made by confirming the presence of
to anemia should be corrected. Dogs usually respond to
maternal antibodies on the neonate's erythrocytes by a
 glucocorticoid therapy within one week, although anecdotal
Coombs' or a hemolytic test. Blood from pregnant mares can
be tested 2 weeks prior to foaling for the presence of anti-
bodies in order to predict the likelihood of neonatal iso-
The dosage of glucocorticoids is gradually decreased once the
erythrolysis in the foal. If the dam is sensitized, then her
PCV increases, and can sometimes be discontinued two or
colostrum can be withheld from the foal for the first 48
three months after the PCV returns to normal. In some
hours of life, substituting another mare's colostrum.
cases, however low dose therapy (0.5 mg/kg per os every
other day) with prednisone or prednisolone may be required
Treatment
indefinitely. Blood transfusions should be given only when
Treatment consists of blood transfusion if the animal is
absolutely necessary, due to a life-threatening anemia. Sple-
severely anemic. If the mare's blood is used, the erythrocytes
nectomy has been thought to not be helpful long term, as
must be washed extensively to remove antibody-containing
removal of the spleen results in decreased erythropoietic
plasma. Glucocorticoids may be helpful in reducing the rate
tissue and may predispose dogs to Mycoplasma haemocanis
of clearance of antibody coated erythrocytes.
infection. However, this is controversial, and in one recent
study. splenectomy was thought to be associated with
Erythrocyte parasites
improved outcome in dogs.
in intravascular hemolysis or extravascular hemolysis, and
Neonatal isoerythrolysis
 Neonatal isoerythrolysis (NI) is a form of immune mediated
parasites have been detected by examination of blood films.
hemolytic anemia that occurs in newborn animals second-
However, the development of highly sensitive and specific
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays to detect small
antigen attaching to the neonate's erythrocytes, with sub-
quantities of organisms has made diagnosis much more
sequent erythrocyte hemolysis. The maternal antibodies are
accurate for many of these diseases, in some cases even
       
before the onset of clinical signs. The majority of the hemo
bloodgroup-incompatible erythrocytes, usually from the
parasites cause anemia by immune mediated extravascular
blood of a previous fetus gaining access to maternal circula-
hemolysis. Antibody against the organism, immune com-
tion, but sometimes from vaccinations that contain eryth-
plexes, or complement bind to erythrocytes resulting in
rocytes or from mismatched blood transfusions. The
phagocytosis by macrophages. However, Babesia and Theile-
disorder is most common in horse and mule foals. but
ria species cause intravascular hemolysis. Specific hemo-
occurs in less than l% of thoroughbreds. The disorder
parasites are discussed below.
rarely occurs in puppies, kittens, piglets, and calves. Cats
are unique, in that antibodies against kitten erythrocytes
Hemotropic mycoplasmas
can be produced with no previous exposure of the queen
Hemotropic mycoplasmas are pleomorphic bacteria that
to incompatible erythrocytes. In domestic animals. the
parasitize erythrocytes of many domestic animal species.
maternal antibody gains access to the neonate's blood fol-
These organisms are small (approximately 0.3μm in diam-
lowing ingestion of anti body containing colostrum. Hemo-
eter). lack a cell wall, and stain gram-negatively. They
lytic anemia has been reported in lambs fed bovine
adhere loosely to the surface of the erythrocyte membrane,
colostrum during the first few days of life, and the anemia
 de aon   le 'sids a u 
appears to be immune-mediated.
the plasma. They were originally assigned either to the
94
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
genus Haemobartonella or Eperythrozoon on the basis of
whether they were found free in the plasma. If they fulfilled
both of the previous criteria, they were assigned to the genus
 Eperythrozoon. These characteristics are now considered
insignificant. These organisms were formerly classifed as
rickettsia, but based on sequence analysis of the 16S rRNA
 gene, they have been reclassified as members of the genera
Mycoplasma.
Three strains of the organisms previously called Haemobar-
tonella felis have been recognized. The Ohio strain has been
renamed Mycoplasma haemofelis, and the California strain has
been named Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum.A third
strain, Candidatus Mycoplasma furicensis, was originally identi-
fied in a Swiss cat, but is now known to also have a world-
wide distribution. Assays based on polymerase chain reaction
technology are the most sensitive and specific diagnostic
tests available for these organisms. Of the feline mycoplas-
Figure 8.9 Left panel: Blood film from an anemic cat with Mycoplasma
haemofelis (arrowheads), previously known as Haemobartonela felis.
mas, M. haemofelis is the most pathogenic species, and causes
Right panel: Erythrocyte parasites are sometirmes mnistakenly diagnosed
hemolytic anemia in immunocompetent cats. The presence
Aa pasnen aq Aeu sey (oe) saoa uo ane see uay
of Candidatus Mycoplasma turicensis and Candidatus Mycoplasma
stain precipitate or staining the blood filrn before it is dry. Wright stain.
haemominufum is not always associated with anemia.
However, Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum has been
associated with fever, anorexia, lethargy. and anemia and is
likely a primary pathogen. Candidatus Mycoplasma furicensis
assay is available that is more diagnostically sensitive than
has reportedly not been seen by light microscopy, lilkely due
blood film examination.
to the small numbers of parasites present but possibly due
Clinical signs include those of anemia, splenomegaly.
to its smaller size (0.25 μm). It has been morphologically
fever, lethargy. and sometimes icterus. Concurrent disease,
characterized using electron microscopy.
immunosuppression,
or splenectomy may predispose
Haemobartonella canis has been renamed Mycoplasma hae-
animals to acute infection. The anemia is regenerative unless 
mocanis. Eperythrozoon suis, E. wenyoni, and E. ovis have been
underlying disease, often related to feline leukemia virus, is
renamed Mycoplasma haemosuis. M. wenyoni, and Candidatus
present that would inhibit erythropoiesis. Infected cats
Mycoplasma ovis, respectively. The eperythrozoon in alpacas
should be examined for the presence of feline leukemia
and llamas, previously not named, has been named Candi-
virus and feline immunodeficiency virus.
datus Mycoplasma haemolamae. The designation Candidatus is
Treatment consists of blood transfusion if the anemia is
reserved for incompletely described members of taxa, to give
severe. Prednisone (2 mg/kg per os every 12 hours) will sup-
them provisional status, and is eventually dropped.
press the immune mediated destruction of erythrocytes.
Doxycycline (2-5mg/kg per os every 12 hours for three
Mycoplasma haemofelis
weeks) is effective against the organism, but cats that recover
Mycoplasma haemofelis, formerly known as Haemobartonella
often become latent carriers. Toxicity of doxycycline may
felis. appears as small (0.3 μm) dark blue rods or ring forms 
include fever, gastrointestinal disturbances, and rarely.
on the surface of erythrocytes; it is more easily seen at the
esophageal stricture formation. Enrofloxacin (5-l0mg/kg
feathered edge of the blood film where the erythrocytes are
flattened (Fig. 8.9). Agglutination of erythrocytes may be
antibiotic, has been shown to be effective against Mycoplasma
present, as the presence of the organism on erythrocytes
haemofelis, but a rare complication is acute blindness.
results in an immune mediated hemolytic anemia. Myco-
plasma haemofelis is quite pathogenic, and can cause severe,
Mycoplasma haemocanis
sometimes fatal, hemolytic anemia. It is transmitted through
Mycoplasma haemocanis. formerly known as Haemobartonella
infected blood, presumably by blood feeding arthropods
canis, is an opportunistic organism, usually causing disease
such as fleas and ticks, cat bites, and iatrogenic exposure,
and is present throughout the world. The organism is also
It is closely related phylogenetically to Mycoplasma haemofelis.
transmitted from queens to kittens, either in utero, at birth,
with 99% homology of the 16SrRNA gene. Dogs that are
 or by nursing. The parasitemia is intermittent, making diag-
splenectomized develop active infections if they are trans-
nosis by blood film examination sometimes difficult. A PCR
fused with infected blood, or if they have latent infections.
95
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 8.10 Blood filrnm from an anemmic splenectomized dog. Note the
Figure 8.11 Blood film from a cow with hind limb and teat edema.
presence of Mycoplasma haemocanis (arrows) (previously
Many Mycopiasma wenyoni (previously Eperythrozoon wenyoni)
Haemobartoneifa canis). Howell-Jolly bodies (arrowhead) are usually
organismms are present in the background (smmall arrows). Polychromasia
increased in splenectomized animmals. Wright stain
(arrowhead) is present, indicating regeneration. Wright stain.
Active infection may manifest days to weeks after splenec-
tomy. The microorganism appears somewhat different than
 Mycoplasma haemofelis, in that they appear as small chains of
cocci across the surface of the erythrocyte. The chain com-
monly branches, and appears Y-shaped (Fig. 8.10). Clinical
signs include those of anemia, and icterus is rarely present.
Treatment consists of 5mg/kg doxycycline orally twice daily
for three weeks. Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum and
Candidatus Mycoplasma haematoparvum have been reported in
dogs, as well.
Haemoplasmas of ruminants
Mycoplasma wenyonii, formerly known as Eperythrozoon wen
yonii, also occurs worldwide, and similar to Mycoplasma hae-
mocanis in dogs. usually only causes severe anemia in
immunosuppressed or splenectomized cattle. The organism
may be transmitted iatrogenically. by using the same syringe
and needle in multiple animals in feedlot situations. Very
Figure 8.12 Blood filr from a sheep with Eperythrozoon ovis (arrows).
large numbers of organisms can be seen on blood films.
This organism will be renammed Mycoplasma ovis. Wright stain.
many of which are free in the plasma, in cattle that are not
anemic (Fig. 8.ll). However, a syndrome has been recog-
nized in cattle that are heavily parasitized, which includes
sometimes death. In older animals, infection is associated
dependent edema and lymphadenopathy. Although the
with poor weight gain. The organisms appear similar to
haemoplasma of sheep and goats. formerly known as
those in cattle, with many free organisms present on blood
Eperythrozoon ovis (Fig. 8.12) is generally considered non-
films (Fig. 8.13). Baby pigs are usually treated with a single
pathogenic in adults, its role as a cause of anemia in lambs
dose of long acting oxytetracycline (25mg). Tetracycline is
is controversial. It will be renamed Mycoplasma ovis.
sometimes added to hog food to prevent the acute form of
the disease.
Mycoplasma haemosuis
Mycoplasma haemosuis. formerly known as Eperythrozoon suis.
Candidatus Mycoplasma haemolamae
is pathogenic in very young pigs. as well as pigs that have
Haemoplasmas in llamas and alpacas appear to be opportun-
been splenectomized, causing severe hemolytic anemia and
96
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
Figure 8.13 Electron micrograph of Mycopiasma haemosuis 
Figure 8.15 Blood film from an anemic cow with Anapiasma marginale
(arrowheads), formmerly Eoerythrozoon suis. Photograph provided by Dr.
(arrows). Note the basophilic stippling in the large polychromatophilic 
Joanne Messick
erythrocyte (arrowhead). Wright stain .
and sheep. and causes hemolytic anemia. The organism
appears similar to A. marginale. The organisms are transmit-
ted by ticks, biting flies, and iatrogenically. Anaplasma mar-
ginale appears as a small (0.5-l μm) dark blue inclusion on
the margin of erythrocytes (Fig. 8.15). Anaplasma centrale
appears similar, but is located in a more central appearing
location on erythrocytes. Infection with the organism can
cause a fatal hemolytic anemia; older animals are usually
more severely affected. The mechanism of anemia may be
immune mediated. Untreated cattle that survive may become
chronic carriers. Diagnosis can be made by PCR assays. as
well as examination of blood films. Therapy consists of long
acting oxytetracycline, but the most efficient method to
control anaplasmosis is by vaccination using live Anaplasma
centrale, which is capable of inducing significant protection
against the more virulent A. marginaie. However these
methods of control have numerous limitations and improved
Figure 8.14 Blood filrm from a poor-doing llarma with Candidatus
approaches are needed. Inactivated or subunit vaccines and
Mycopiasma haemolamae (arrowheads), formerly Eperythrozoon spp.
alternative  pharmacological  interventions  will  likely be
 Higher magnification of the organisms (arrow) is shown in inset. Wright 
developed.
 stain.
Babesiosis
cause a mild anemia. The organism appears similar to that
Several species of babesia cause hemolytic anemia and
in cattle (Fig. 8.14).
thrombocytopenia in domestic animals. Babesia canis and B.
gibsoni are pathogenicin dogs. B. bovis and B. bigemina as well
Anaplasmosis
as other less important babesia infect cattle, B. equi and B.
Bovine anaplasmosis caused by the intraerythrocytic rickett-
caballi occur in horses, B. ovis and B. mofasi infect sheep. and
sia Anaplasma marginale is the most prevalent tickborne
B. cati, B. felis, B. herpailuri, and B. pantherae infect cats. The
disease of cattle worldwide. Anaplasma centrale occurs in
disease is usually referred to as piroplasmosis in horses.
south America, the Middle East, and South Africa, and is
Babesia are hemoprotozoan organisms, many of which are
less pathogenic. A. marginale has also been reported in deer.
in the process of being reclassified based on PCR assays and
elk, and bison. Anaplasma ovis has been reported in goats
gene sequencing. Some organisms previously thought to be
97
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
babesia appear to be more closely related to Theileria spp.
Usually only a few erythrocytes on blood films contain
including the California isolate of Babesia gibsoni, and B. equi
organisms, and they tend to be concentrated at the feathered
Babesia are transmitted by various types of ticks, most cause
edge of the blood film.
intravascular and extravascular hemolysis, and pathogenic-
Canine babesiosis is becoming more common in the
ity is variable. Other mechanisms of transmission include
United States. B. canis vogeli is endemic in the southeastern
trans placental transmission and blood contamination.
United States, particularly in greyhounds, but it usually only
Babesia spp. vary in appearance; both large forms and small
causes severe hemolytic anemia and life-threatening disease
forms have been described. Large forms of babesia include
in young dogs or dogs that are heavily parasitized. Another
B. canis, B. caballi, and B. bigemina. The other babesia are
subspecies, B. canis rossi, is more pathogenic, and is in South
small forms. Large forms (2-5μm) appear as single, paired.
Africa. A third subspecies, B. canis canis, is found in Europe
 or tetrad oval inclusions that stain lightly basophilic with an
and parts of Asia, and is intermediate in pathogenicity. B
eccentric nucleus (Fig. 8.l6). Small forms (l-3μm) of
gibsoni is endemic in northern Africa, the Middle East, south-
babesia appear as round organisms (Figs. 8.17 and 8.18).
ern Asia, and parts of the Caribbean, and is increasingly
observed in the United States, particularly in the Southeast
and Midwest. A small babesia, originally thought to be B.
gibsoni, was described in California dogs in 1991. This organ-
ism causes severe disease, including hemolytic anemia,
icterus, vasculitis, thrombocytopenia, hepatitis, glomerulo-
nephritis, and reactive lymphadenopathy.
Since 1999 B. gibsoni has been reported in numerous states
east of the Mississippi River. At least some of these organ-
isms have been distinct from the California organism. The
disease is primarily seen in American pit bull terriers and
Staffordshire terriers. Many dogs survive the acute phase
and become chronic carriers. Prevention includes aggressive
tick control. The high prevalence in the pit bull breed is now
known to be due to direct blood transmission. Babesiosis
may be diagnosed by blood film or buffy coat film examina-
tion, but PCR is much more sensitive and specific. Because
most dogs are Coombs' positive, and many exhibit erythro-
cyte agglutination, a differential diagnosis is IMHA. Hyper-
Figure 8.16 Blood filr from an anemic dog with Babesia canis
globulinemia, t
thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia 
are
(arrows). Wright stain.
 commonly observed, therefore ehrlichiosis must also be con-
Figure 8.17 Babesia gibsoni in a bone marrow aspirate from a severely
Figure 8.18 Babesia organisms in a deer (small arrows). Note that the
anemmic pit bull terrier from Kentucky. Aspirate provided by Antech
erythrocytes have become sickle-shaped, which occurs in vitro (large
Diagnostics, Inc. Wright stain.
 arrow). Basophilic stippling is also present (arrowhead). Wright stain.
98
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
Figure 8.19 Lynph node aspirate from a cow with theileriosis.
Figure 8.20 Left panel: Feline blood film with Cytauxzoon piroplasms in
Lyrnphocytes are filled with schizonts (arrows). Wright stain.
erythrocytes (arrows). Wright stain. Right panel: Cytauxzoon schizonts in 
macrophages of the same cat. H & E stain.
sidered as a differential diagnosis, as these are common labo-
ratory findings in that disease as well.
a hemolytic anemia, the anemia is often nonregenerative.
Treatment consists of imidocarb dipropionate (Imizol.
and may be accompanied by leukopenia and thrombocyto-
Schering-Plough, Union, New Jersey). The recommended
penia. Diagnosis is made by finding the signet-ring shaped
dosage is 6.6 mg/kg IM, repeated in two weeks. Diminazine
piroplasms in erythrocytes in blood films relatively late in
aceturate is also effective, but is not available in the United
the course of the disease or by finding the schizonts in mac-
States. Most dogs remain chronic carriers after therapy.
rophages by cytologic or histopathologic examination of
spleen, liver, lymph node or bone marrow (Fig. 8.20). or by
Theileriosis
PCR assay, which is very sensitive and specific. Several cats
Theileria parva, the cause of East Coast fever in Africa, and
have survived C. felis infection; these cats were from the
T annulata are protozoans that may cause hemolytic anemia
same geographic area and may have been infected with a
in cattle. The organisms are transmitted by ticks. Lympho-
less virulent strain.
cytes are first infected by sporozoites, which form schizonts
The organism is transmitted by ticks; although erythro-
(Fig. 8.19) from which the merozoites are released that
parasitemia may occur following blood inoculation, the
infect erythrocytes. The organisms are small (lμm) and
tissue phase of the organism and disease do not develop.
appear signet-ring or comma shaped. Theileria lestoquardi
Bobcats, panthers, and cougars, which serve as natural res-
causes hemolytic anemia in sheep and goats of southern
ervoirs, usually have persistent asymptomatic infections.
Europe, the Middle East, and northern Africa. Other, less
although bobcats occasionally have fatal disease. Fatal
pathogenic, species of Theileria may infect cattle, deer, and
cytauxzoonosis has also been described in a Bengal tiger and
elk in North America.
white tiger. Antiprotozoal drugs such as dipropionate
(Imizol) and diminazine aceturate (Ganaseg. Berenil) are
Feline cytauxzoonosis
occasionally effective against the organism.
Cytauxzoon felis is a protozoan that is classified within the
same family as theileria. Like theileria, merozoites (piro-
Heinz body anemia
plasms) infect erythrocytes, while a tissue phase, the schiz-
Erythrocytes are particularly susceptible to oxidative damage.
onts, infect and fill macrophages within and surrounding
aq Ae Aau aseaq pue uaaxo Aeo Aaul asneaq yioq
blood vessels throughout the body. The disease was first
exposed to various chemicals in plasma. Oxidants that are
described in 1948 in African ungulates, and was initially
constantly generated include hydrogen peroxide (HzO2).
reported in cats from Missouri in 1976.
superoxide free radical (Oz) and hydroxyl radicals (OH).
The disease is usually fatal, resulting in thrombosis of
When oxyhemoglobin is converted to methemoglobin (ferric
numerous vessels as a result of distended macrophages
state to ferrous state), superoxide radicals react with hydrogen
 occluding vessels. Clinical findings include acute lethargy.
peroxide, producing hydroxyl radicals. Formation of revers-
anorexia, fever, and icterus. Although the organism causes
ible and irreversible hemichromes then occurs. Reversible
66
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 8.21 Left panel. Blood film from a cat with Heinz body anemia.
Figure 8.22 Blood film from an anemic cat with acetarminophen 
Heinz bodies appear pale and are more apparent when they protrude
toxicosis. Note the lysed "ghost" erythrocytes (arrows). The Heinz bodies
frorn the edges of the erythrocytes (arrows). Wright stain. Right panel
(arrowheads) are very apparent in the ghost cells. The pink background is
 Brilliant cresyl blue-stained blood filmn. Heinz bodies appear as medium-
due to hemoglobinemmia. Wright stain
blue structures on the edges of the erythrocytes (arrows). A reticulocyte is
also present (arrowhead).
hemichromes include hemoglobin hydroxide and dihistidine
ferrihemochrome. These reversible hemichromes can be
converted back to methemoglobin and reduced hemoglobin.
If irreversible hemichromes are formed, the hemoglobin
denaturation continues, and aggregates of irreversible hemi-
       
bodies, first recognized by Heinz in 1890 in humans and
animals exposed to coal-tar drugs. Heinz bodies appear as
small eccentric pale structures within the red cell and may
protrude slightly from the red cell margin on Wright's
stained blood films (Fig. 8.2l). They are usually large and
single in cat erythrocytes (Fig. 8.22),. and small and multiple
in dogs. When stained with vital stains such as new methy-
lene blue or brilliant cresyl blue, Heinz bodies appear as blue 
structures (see Chapter 5).
The sulfhydryl groups on the globin portion of the mol-
Figure 8.23 Blood film from a cow with oxidant-induced anermia. Note
the eccentrocytes (large arrows), and Heinz bodies (small arrows). A
 ecule are also susceptible to oxidative damage, and although
 neutrophil is present (arrowhead).
Heinz bodies may form by oxidation of these sulfhydryl
groups, hemichrome formation is likely more important.
Hemichromes have an affinity for membrane protein band
in dogs, and red maple leaf toxicosis in horses. Alternately.
3. The protein band 3-hemichrome complex causes mem-
 erythrocytes may have a spherocyte-like appearance because 
brane protein band 3 to form clusters, both on the inside
of collapse of the erythrocyte membrane following eccen-
and outside of the erythrocyte membrane. This external
trocyte formation. Some oxidants may affect the erythrocyte
clustering of protein band 3 creates a recognition site for
cytoskeleton, resulting in eccentrocyte formation without
altoantibodies. Erythrocytes with attached antibody are
Heinz body formation. Features of eccentrocytes include
then phagocytized by macropha ges. The clustering of protein 
shifting of hemoglobin to one side of the cell, loss of normal
band 3 and associated autoantibodies may be the best expla-
 central pallor, and a clear zone outlined by a membrane (Fig.
nation for why animals with Heinz body formation may also
8.23).
have spherocyte formation and agglutination, such as has
 In addition to formation of protein band 3-hemichrome
been described in zinc toxicosis and methylene blue toxicosis
complexes, spectrin-hemoglobin crosslinking also occurs.
100
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
increasing erythrocyte membrane rigidity and decreasing
domestic animals. Sources of onions and garlic include the
deformability, ultimately malking the erythrocyte more sus-
feeding of cull onions to cattle and sheep, ingestion of wild
ceptible to removal. Heinz bodies may also be removed by
onions by horses, and ingestion of raw, cooked, dehydrated
the spleen, with the remaining portion of the erythrocyte
onions, and baby food containing onion or garlic powder.
returning to circulation. Hemichrome binding to the eryth-
by dogs and cats. The oxidative compounds in onions and
rocyte membrane also may stimulate proteolysis, contribut-
garlic are aliphatic sulfides, specifically allyl and propyl di-.
ing to breakdown of erythrocyte membrane integrity.
tri-, and tetrasulfides, with the allyl compounds being more
Oxidative injury occurs when enzymes and substrates
potent than the propyl. These compounds decrease glucose-
used in the pathway to reverse oxidative processes are
 6 phosphate dehydrogenase activity in erythrocytes, which
depleted, absent, or inhibited. Normally approximately three
in turn curtails the regeneration of reduced glutathione
percent of the hemoglobin is oxidized to methemoglobin
needed to prevent oxidative denaturation of hemoglobin.
daily, but even that small amount is constantly being reduced
Interestingly. the allyl derivatives are also thought to be
back to hemoglobin by a reduced nicotinamide-adenine
effective in increasing tissue activities of cancer-protective
dinucleotide (NADH)-dependent methemoglobin reductase
enzymes such as quinone reductase (QR) and glutathione 
enzyme within erythrocytes. Methemoglobin forms at
S-transferase (GST), thus decreasing the risk of cancer in
higher concentrations when oxidative compounds are
increased. Other enzymes also protect against oxidative
extract is used to treat sickle cell anemia, because the extract
is thought to contain antioxidants that prolong the life of
(SOD). a zinc and copper containing enzyme that converts
sickle red blood cells.
superoxide to hydrogen peroxide and water. Nicotinamide-
 Although the feeding of cull domestic onions ( Allium cepa)
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) maintains gluta-
appears to be reasonably safe in sheep. cattle may develop
thione in the reduced state, and glucose-6-phosphate
onion toxicosis. Sheep have been fed an exclusive onion
dehydrogenase plays an important role in the initial steps of
diet, and although they initially developed a Heinz body
the pathway. Glutathione has an easily oxidizable sulfhydryl
hemolytic anemia with approximately 25% reduction in
group that acts as a free-radical acceptor to counteract
packed cell volume, there was no significant decrease in
oxidant damage. Glutathione peroxidase catalyzes the con-
pregnancy or lambing rate, body condition, or fleece weight.
version of hydrogen peroxide to water, producing oxidized
Adaptation to an exclusive onion diet in sheep is thought to
glutathione, which is in turn reduced by glutathione reduc-
be due to a strong marrow response to the anemia, as well
tase. Selenium is an important component of glutathione
as modification of rumen metabolism of sulfoxides; one
peroxidase. Finally, catalase is an enzyme that converts
     s  rn a 
hydrogen peroxide to water and O, and may be more impor-
number of sulfide-metabolizing bacteria (Desulfovibrio spp).
tant than glutathione peroxidase.
Conversely, rumen microorganisms that convert sulfur con-
Cats are considered to be more susceptible to Heinz body
taining amino acids to oxidants have been reported to exac-
formation than other domestic species for a number of
erbate onion- and brassica-induced Heinz body anemia. One
reasons, including differences in their hemoglobin struct ure.
study showed that sheep fed onions (50 g/kg body weight/
     a  s s 
day) for 15 days developed more severe Heinz body hemo-
culating erythrocytes that contain Heinz bodies. Feline
lytic anemia than did the sheep fed the equivalent amount
hemoglobin has eight sulfhydryl groups. compared with
of onions with 5 g/day ampicillin sodium salt.
four in dogs and two in most other species. Many causes of
Feedlot cattle, on the other hand, can be fed a diet con-
oxidative damage to erythrocytes resulting in Heinz body or
taining up to 25% cull onions on a dry-matter (DM) basis.
eccentrocyte formation have been reported, including
Although a decrease in PCV occurs due to Heinz body-
oxidant drugs and chemicals, oxidant-containing plants.
related hemolysis, the PCV returns to normal within 30 days
inherited enzyme deficiencies, and nutritional deficiencies.
after onion feeding is discontinued. Average daily gain and
Treatment depends on predisposing cause of Heinz body
feed conversion ratios are not affected. It is thought, however.
formation. Most of the oxidative compounds that result in
that the 25% (DM) probably approaches the toxic threshold
Heinz body formation also cause methemoglobinemia.
for onion consumption in cattle. Onions should be mixed in
which when severe is characterized by brown discoloration
a balanced ration, and cattle should not be allowed free
of blood and cyanosis. These oxidants are discussed in more
access to the onions, as they may eat them preferentially.
detail below.
Onion ingestion is the most common cause of Heinz body
and eccentrocyte formation in dogs. and is a relatively
Plants
common cause of clinical and subclinical anemia. In one
Allium family (onions, chives, and garlic)
study in which dogs were fed 5.5 g/kg body weight dehy-
Onion, chive, and garlic ingestion may result in Heinz body
drated onions, 7o% of the erythrocytes contained Heinz
anemia and eccentrocyte formation in most species of
101
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
 Packed cell volume dropped approximately 20% by day 5.
centration is decreased and oxidative damage to erythrocytes
There appears to be some variation in individual susceptibil-
occurs. Other findings commonly include methemoglobin-
ity to the effects of onion ingestion in dogs. Erythrocytes
emia, with associated brown discoloration of blood and cya-
with high concentrations of reduced glutathione, such as is
nosis, and hepatic necrosis. The toxic dose of acetaminophen
seen in some Japanese Shiba dogs. may be more susceptible
in cats is 50 to 60 mg/kg body weight. (One Extra Strength
to oxidative damage produced by onions. Garlic will also
Tylenol Gelcap contains 500 mg acetaminophen, and one
induce Heinz body and eccentrocyte formation in dogs.
Extra Strength Excedrin contains 250 mg acetaminophen.)
 Ingestion of onion soup and baby food containing onion
To confirm the diagnosis, acetaminophen concentrations can
powder has also been shown to produce Heinz body anemia
be determined on serum. Treatment consists of providing
in cats. In one study, as little as 0.3% onion powder signifi-
glutathione donors, such as N-acetylcysteine, orally.
      
Acetaminophen-induced Heinz body anemia also occurs in
Ap e uo ipmod uonuo %g'I oi dn uieiuoo Ae pooj Aqeq 
dogs: the toxic dose is approximately 150mg/kg body
weight basis.
weight.
Brassica (cabbage, kale, rape)
Propylene glycot
Ingestion of plants belonging to Brassica species may result
Propylene glycol, sometimes used as an additive in semi-
in Heinz body anemia in ruminants. These plants contain
moist pet food, causes Heinz body formation in cats, but does
S-methyl-L-cysteine sulfoxide, which is metabolized to the
- s ao u ns aa   a ou
oxidant dimethyl disulfide by rumen bacteria. Brassica
ties. However, cats eating such diets may be more susceptible
species not only have a high sulfur content, which reduces
to other additional causes of oxidative injury. Even though
copper availability. but also are low in copper and zinc con-
overt anemia may not occur, red cells with Heinz bodies
centration. While this copper deficiency may play a role in
have a reduced life span.
oxidative hemoglobin damage, copper deficiency has not
been shown to exacerbate susceptibility of lambs to brassica
Zinc
anemia. As with onion toxicosis, the severity of the Heinz
Ingestion of zinc-containing materials, including pennies.
body anemia is proportional to the quantity of brassica in
which are 98% zinc by weight, other metal objects such as
the diet. A maximum concentration of 30% DM for Brassica
nuts and bolts in animal carriers, zinc toys, and zinc oxide
species consumption is recommended to avoid significant
containing ointments, have been reported to cause Heinz
anemia.
body anemia in dogs. The mechanisms by which zinc results
in oxidative damage and Heinz body formation are unclear.
Wilted red maple leaves (Acer rubrum)
but zinc is known to play a role in band-3 clustering. As a
Severe Heinz body anemia and possibly death in horses.
result of this clustering. opsonization of antibody and sphe-
ponies, llamas and zebras may be caused by ingestion of
rocyte formation may occur, resulting in the misdiagnosis of
wilted or dried (not fresh) red maple leaves. Eccentrocyte
immune mediated hemolytic anemia.
formation and hemolysis may occur without concurrent
Heinz body formation. Other findings commonly include
Copper
methemoglobinemia.  hemoglobinuria.  hemoglobinuric
 Copper toxicosis in ruminants, especially sheep, results in
nephrosis, and hepatic necrosis. The oxidative compound.
 Heinz body hemolytic anemia (Fig. 8.24). Copper accumu-
thought to be gallic acid, causes a rapid depletion of gluta-
lates in the liver of animals ingesting high concentrations of
thione; leaves are toxic when administered at doses of
copper This copper is released following stress, resulting in
 1.5 gm/kg of body weight or more. Therapy consists of ascor-
a hemolytic crisis. Copper deficiency has also been associ-
bic acid, fluids, and blood transfusions, if necessary.
ated with Heinz body formation.
Drugs and chemicals
Selenium deficiency
Acetaminophen (paracetamol)
Selenium deficiency in ruminants, associated with grazing
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) ingestion is probably the most
on selenium deficient soils in certain parts of the world,
        
including New Zealand and the Florida Everglades, has been
una ware of its toxic effects, often give the anti-inflammatory
associated with Heinz body anemia. Selenium deficiency has
human drug to cats. Acetaminophen is metabolized in
also been associated with reduced activity of glutathione
part by glucuronide conjugation; cats have limited ability
peroxidase in erythrocytes of humans that live in selenium
to form acetaminophen glucuronides, probably due to
deficient areas, including New Zealand and Finland. It is
very low activity of the liver enzyme acetaminophen UDP-
speculated that reduced glutathione peroxidase activity may
glucuronosyltransferase, thus resulting in increased oxidant
be the mechanism of the Heinz body anemia in selenium-
metabolites of acetaminophen. As a result, glutathione con-
deficient cattle.
102
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
Heinz body formation. Diabetic cats in particular may have
marked Heinz body formation. In one study, these diseases
together accounted for nearly 40% of cats with Heinz body
formation. Ketoacidotic cats had significantly more Heinz
bodies than nonketotic diabetic cats. Percentage of Heinz
bodies in diabetic cats is directly correlated with plasma beta-
hydroxy-butyrate concentration, suggesting that ketones are
associated with oxidative hemoglobin damage in cats. This
may be a potential source of in vivo oxygen radical genera-
tion in animals with ketosis, such as may be seen in post-
parturient cattle.
Hypophosphatemia induced hemolysis
Severe hypophosphatemia, usually less than l mg/dL, has
been reported to induce hemolysis in several species of
animals, as well as humans. Erythrocyte glycolysis is inhib-
ited by hypophosphatemia, primarily by decreasing intracel-
Figure 8.24 Blood filrn fromm a sheep with copper toxicosis. Note the
lular phosphorus that is required for the enzyme
Heinz bodies (arrows), which can be seen within "ghost" erythrocytes.
glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase. This results in
decreased glycolysis, leading to decreased erythrocyte ATP
concentrations, and subsequent hemolysis. In some cases.
Methylene btue
this appears to be due to decreased glutathione, and increased
 Methylene blue was historically used as a urinary antiseptic
susceptibility to oxidative injury. The most well recognized
in cats, and commonly resulted in Heinz body anemia with
syndrome of hypophosphatemia induced hemolysis is post-
chronic administration. More recently. it has been associated
parturient hemoglobinuria in cattle. Causes in small animals
with Heinz body anemia in river otters that were fed bait
include hypophosphatemia related to diabetes, and enteral
fish that had been kept in water containing methylene blue.
alimentation. Severe hypophosphatemia can be life-
which is used to detoxify ammonia in fish tanks. Interest-
threatening, not only because of hemolysis. but also owing
ingly. methylene blue is the drug of choice in the treatment
to depression of myocardial function, rhabdomyopathy, sei-
of methemoglobinemia in humans and most domestic
zures, coma, and acute respiratory failure.
animals. There is no evidence to suggest that single thera-
peutic doses of methylene blue cause hemolytic anemia.
Postparturient hemoglobinuria
even in cats.
Post parturient hemoglobinuria in cattle is a sporadic disease
of multiparous, high producing dairy cows characterized by
Crude oil
intravascular hemolysis, anemia, and hemoglobinuria. It 
Ingestion of crude oil by marine birds results in Heinz body
  i   o     
anemia, one of the primary mechanisms of toxicity associ-
cows with this syndrome are hypophosphatemic at the time
ated with the ingestion of crude oil by birds.
of anemia. It is theorized that previous hypophosphatemia
predisposes erythrocytes to injury and oxidative damage.
Other chemicals
primarily by decreasing ATP and glutathione. Experimental
Multiple other chemicals, such as naphthalene, a mothball
hypophosphatemia (l mg/dL) in postparturient cattle results
ingredient; propofol, an intravenous anesthetic: phenazo-
in a decrease in erythrocyte ATP by 50% and a decrease in
pyridine, a urinary analgesic; phenothiazine, an anthelmin-
glutathione by 30%. The syndrome is complex, because
tic; ecabapide, a gastroprokinetic drug: benzocaine, a local
some of the postparturient cattle with hemolytic anemia
anesthetic; and phenylhydrazine, an oxidative compound
have Heinz body anemia, and some have ketoacidosis due
commonly used to experimentally induce hemolytic anemia.
to their nutritional status prior to and immediately following
have been reported to cause Heinz body anemia. Skunk
calving. Ketones are associated with oxidative hemoglobin
spray, which contains thiols and other oxidizing agents, has
 damage, and may be a potential source of in vivo oxygen
 also been reported to cause Heinz body anemia in a dog.
radical generation.
Diseases
Hypophosphatemia in diabetic cats
Heinz body formation is increased in specific disease states
Hypophosphatemia is sometimes present in diabetic animals.
in cats and may contribute to anemia. Diabetes mellitus.
presumably because of phosphorus loss in the urine of polyuric
hyperthyroidism, and lymphoma have been correlated with
animals. Several instances of hypophosphatemia-induced
103
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
hemolysis have been reported in cats. Similar to the situa-
Leptospirosis (Leptospira pomona) may cause hemolytic
tion in cows with postparturient hemoglobinuria, diabetic
anemia in young calves and lambs. but is almost never
cats may also be ketotic and have Heinz body anemia; in
a feature of the disease in adult animals; leptospirosis rarely
those cases, the hemolysis may be due to hypophosphate-
causes hemolytic anemia in dogs. The mechanism of
mia, ketosis, or a combination, since hypophosphatemia
the anemia may be toxins produced by the bacteria
lilkely predisposes to Heinz body formation. Hypophospha-
temia resulting in hemolytic anemia has also been reported
mediated hemolytic anemia, probably IgM mediated. Nec-
in one cat with hepatic lipidosis.
ropsy findings in lambs include icterus, hemoglobinuria.
 renal tubular necrosis with hemoglobin casts, and hepato-
Enteral alimentation in cats
cellular necrosis.
A retrospective study of cats with hypophosphatemia
 revealed that hypophosphatemia can occur 12-72 hours
Viruses
after initiation of enteral alimentation. In this study. the
The equine infectious anemia (EIA) virus may result in
nadir for phosphorus concentrations ranged from 0.4 to
hemolytic anemia in the acute stage of the disease. The
2.4mg/dL. Hemolysis occurred in six of the nine cats that
anemia is likely immune mediated as a result of the virus
were hypophosphatemic. All cats had normal serum phos-
binding with the erythrocyte membrane and activating com-
phorus concentrations prior to feeding. Hypophosphatemia
plement. Later in the disease the anemia is nonregenerative.
also has been reported following oral tube feeding of human
and may be similar to anemia of inflammatory disease.
patients with anorexia nervosa.
Equine infectious anemia is also referred to as "swamp
fever." Diagnosis is made by detecting antibody against the
Microorganisms (other than erythrocyte parasites)
EIA virus, using a Coggins test or a competitive ELISA test.
Bacteria
Clostridial and leptospiral infections may result in hemolytic
Water intoxication induced hemolysis in calves
anemia. Clostridium perfringens Type A infection results in a
Water intoxication resulting in hemolysis, hemoglobinuria.
hemolytic anemia in lambs and calves, sometimes referred
pulmonary edema, brain edema, convulsions, coma, and
death may occur in calves that have unlimited access to
The bacteria produces a phospholipase, which hydrolyses
water following its unavailability. Water intoxication may
cell membrane phospholipids of erythrocytes, as well as
cause death within two hours, but most calves survive with
those of other cells. Clinical signs include lethargy. fever,
no permanent ill effects. Cause of hemolysis is decreased
pale mucous membranes, anemia, hemoglobinuria. and
osmolality of plasma. It has been theorized that water intoxi-
icterus. Necropsy findings include evidence of intravascular
cation induced hemolysis occurs in calves from 4-5 months
hemolysis, renal hemoglobin casts, intestinal mucosal necro-
of age because osmotic fragility of their erythrocytes is great-
sis, hepatic necrosis, and petechial and ecchymotic hemor-
est at that age. possibly related to the residual presence of
rhages. Clostridium perfringens has been associated with
iron deficient erythrocytes.
immune mediated hemolytic anemia in horses.
Clostridium haemolyticum and C. novyi Type D cause hemo-
Hereditary membrane defects and metabolic
lytic anemia in cattle that is sometimes referred to as "bacil-
disorders
Either inherited membrane defects or enzyme deficiencies
acutely fatal. The disease occurs in summer and early fall, is
  s     
associated with liver fluke migration, and is endemic in
anemia. Inherited erythrocyte membrane defects reported
swampy areas of numerous countries, including the United
States. The disease is rarely recognized ante-mortem. Clini-
itary elliptocytosis, hereditary stomatocytosis, and mem-
cal signs include those of anemia, lethargy. arched back,
brane transport defects. However, hereditary elliptocytosis
bloody diarrhea, fever, dyspnea, and occasionally hemoglo-
in dogs, which is caused by a hereditary protein 4.l def-
binuria. Bacterial spores are ingested and reside in macro-
      
phages of the liver. Anaerobic conditions within the liver.
membrane fragmentation, microcytosis, and poikilocytosis.
resulting from liver fluke migration, result in growth of the
but does not result in anemia.
bacteria and production of toxic enzymes, including leci-
thinase, that metabolize lipids and protein in cell walls.
Membrane defects
Hemolysis and necrosis of other cells, including endothelial
Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) results in hemolytic anemia.
cells and hepatocytes, result in death. Necropsy findings
has been reported in people, mice, dogs, and cattle. In cattle.
necrosis, hemorrhages, thoracic and abdominal effusion,
HS is due to hereditary band 3 deficiency. an autosomal
hemoglobinuria, renal hemoglobin casts, and edema.
dominant trait that has been reported in Japanese black
104
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
cattle. Band 3 protein is the most abundant protein in mam-
mature erythrocytes, inherited as an autosomal recessive
malian erythrocyte membranes, and functions include anion
trait. Some of these dogs have an increased concentration
exchange across the membrane, as well as maintenance of 
of reduced glutathione in their erythrocytes, which protects
normal erythrocyte shape. Cattle homozygous for the trait
the cells against oxidative damage by acetylphenylhydra
lack band 3 protein in their erythrocyte membranes, have a
zine, but increases the risk of oxidative damage by onions
mild anemia, spherocytosis, hyperbilirubinemia, splenomeg-
(see Heinz body anemia).
aly. and growth impairment. The disease is more severe in
calves; adults are relatively normal. Heterozygotes have a
partial deficiency of band 3, mild spherocytosis, and com-
Metabolic disorders
       
Inherited erythrocyte enzyme defects result in abnormalities
cyte regeneration. Hereditary spherocytosis may also be due
in metabolic pathways, often resulting in hemolytic anemia.
to spectrin deficiency. Spectrin is the major constituent of
Energy in mature mammalian erythrocytes is generated 
the cytoskeletal network underlying the erythrocyte plasma
exclusively by anaerobic glycolysis, also known as the
membrane. It associates with band 4.l and actin to form the
cytoskeletal superstructure of the erythrocyte plasma mem-
mitochondria, and thus their oxidative phosphorylation
brane. This complex is anchored to the cytoplasmic face of
capabilities. Briefly. metabolism of glucose produces adenos-
the plasma membrane via another protein, ankyrin, which
ine triphosphate (ATP). which is used to maintain erythro-
cyte shape, deformability, membrane transport, and synthesis
binds to beta-spectrin and mediates the binding of the whole
of purines, pyrimidines, and glutathione. Many enzymes are
tion of erythrocyte spectrin with other proteins through
involved in anaerobic glycolysis, including phosphofructoki-
specific binding domains lead to the formation of an exten-
nase and pyruvate kinase. Deficiencies of both of these
sive subplasmalemmal meshwork which is thought to be
enzymes have been described in domestic animals.
responsible for the maintenance of the biconcave shape of
erythrocytes, for the regulation of plasma membrane com-
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
ponents and for the maintenance of the lipid asymmetry of
Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency is the most common enzy-
the plasma membrane. Spectrin deficiency has been reported
in a family of Dutch golden retrievers.
dogs in 197l. Since that time, it has been reported in beagles.
Hereditary stomatocytosis has been reported in miniature
West Highland white terriers, Cairn terriers, miniature
schnauzers, chondrodysplastic Alaskan malamutes, and in
poodles, and various other breeds. Clinical signs include
the Drentse partrijshond breed of dogs that also have hyper-
those of anemia, such as exercise intolerance. The anemia
trophic gastritis (see Chapter 5). These disorders have differ-
is very regenerative, and half or more of the erythrocytes
ent underlying causes in these three breeds, and the
on the blood film may be reticulocytes. The MCV may be
 schnauzers do not have anemia, although their red cell sur-
markedly increased due to the reticulocytosis. Hepato-
vival time is slightly shortened.
splenomegaly may be present. Affected dogs die of myelofi-
A Coombs’ negative chronic intermittent hemolytic
brosis or hepatic failure by 3-5 years of age. Myelofibrosis
anemia has been reported in Abyssinian and Somali cats.
and osteosclerosis are a consistent finding in PK-deficient
Clinical signs and laboratory findings include mild to severe
dogs. but do not develop in PK deficient people or cats. In
anemia, splenomegaly, increased MCV, and the presence of
certain breeds (Basenjis, West Highland white terriers) in
a few stomatocytes. Osmotic fragility of erythrocytes is
which the mutation is specific, diagnosis can be made by
  s   o s 
PCR-based tests. Bone marrow transplantation has been
splenectomy. The specific cause of the hemolytic anemia is
shown to correct the disorder and prevent the development
not known, but a membrane defect is suspected.
of osteosclerosis. Pyruvate kinase deficiency in cats has been
Animals with erythrocyte membrane transport defects.
described in various breeds, including Abyssinian, Somali.
especially those with defects in transport of amino acids
and domestic short hair cats. The anemia is mild to moder-
involved in glutathione metabolism, may develop hemolytic
ate, slightly to strongly regenerative; splenectomy reduces
anemia (Heinz body anemia) when exposed to oxidants.
the severity of hemolytic anemia. Cats live to advanced age
Some Finnish Landrace sheep have red cell glutathione defi-
since osteosclerosis does not develop.
ciency, inherited as autosomal recessive. Cysteine uptake
and glutathione synthesis are impaired, and glutathione
concentration in erythrocytes is only 30% of normal. A
Phosphofructokinase deficiency
similar defect is thought to be common in thoroughbred
Phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency is a rare genetic dis-
horses, but does not cause anemia. Some Japanese Shiba
order in humans, and has been described in English springer
and Akita dogs have erythrocytes with high potassium, low
spaniels, an American cocker spaniel, and a mixed breed
sodium concentrations, due to retention of Na,K-ATPase in
dog. The cocker spaniel had an ancestor that was bred in a
105
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
kennel that also had English springer spaniels, and the
Porphyrias
mixed breed dog was thought to be part English springer
Hemoglobin synthesis occurs in erythroid precursors, where
spaniel. The mutation in all of these dogs was identical. It is
protoporphyrin, iron, and globin molecules are brought
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, and is also referred
together and assembled into functional hemoglobin. Syn-
to as glycogen storage disease type Vl, since the enzyme
thesis of the heme portion of the molecule is complex, and
deficiency also results in a lack of lactate production and
requires numerous enzymes. Inherited deficiencies of these
accumulation of sugar phosphates and glycogen in muscle.
enzymes result in an accumulation of porphyrin precursors.
 Intermittent severe intravascular hemolysis is triggered by
as well as a failure to adequately synthesize hemoglobin,
mild alkalemia; even mild respiratory alkalosis caused by
and the disorders are known as erythropoietic porphyrias.
 e a  d  oa
which have been described in humans, cattle, swine, and
crisis. Moreover 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG). a com-
cats. Some of the erythropoietic porphyrias result in hemo-
pound that decreases the oxygen affinity for hemoglobin,
lytic anemia. Hepatic porphyrias are caused by different
thus making oxygen more available to tissues, is generated
enzyme deficiencies, and to date have been discovered
in the EM pathway. PFK deficiency results in a deficiency of
only in humans: the liver is the site of synthesis for
2,3-DPG, which results in tissue hypoxia of affected dogs.
enzymes containing heme, such as catalase, cytochromes.
However, this tissue hypoxia stimulates erythropoietin pro-
and peroxidase.
duction, and thus, except when in hemolytic crisis, these
Another  inherited disorder, erythropoietic protopor-
dogs are not anemic. Clinical signs include excitement or
phyria, is due to a defect of the enzyme heme synthetase
exercise-induced hemolytic anemia and occasional mild
(ferrochelatase). This disorder has been described in Limoll-
muscle cramping. Life expectancy can be normal if hemo-
sin and Blonde d'Aquitaine cattle, and the only clinical
lytic crises are avoided. The disorder can be identified in
manifestation is severe photosensitivity with intense pruri-
affected dogs. as well as carriers, by a PCR-based DNA test
tus. Anemia, porphyrinuria, and discolored teeth are not
that is specific for the English springer spaniel mutation.
observed. Inheritance of erythropoietic protoporphyria is
recessive in cattle and only occurs in homozygotes, unlike
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
in humans in whom the heterozygous condition results in
The pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) generates reduced
clinical signs.
nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPG), which
 Toxins, especially lead, may destroy many of the enzymes
is protective against mechanical and metabolic insults, par-
involved in the synthesis of heme. These toxicoses lead
ticularly oxidants. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
      s     
(G6PD) is the rate-limiting enzyme in the PPP. In humans.
heme precursors, which are eliminated in increased concen-
G6PD deficiency is inherited as an X-linked disorder, which
tration in the urine. These toxicoses are referred to as
causes hemolytic anemia, particularly following exposure to
porphyrinurias.
oxidants. Hemolytic anemia caused by G6PD deficiency has
Clinical signs associated with porphyrias vary, depending
been described in an American saddle bred colt, as well as
on the specific enzyme abnormality. and the amount of
a dog. Morphologic abnormalities in the colt included eccen-
residual activity of the affected enzyme. Porphyrins are
trocytosis, and the colt's dam, which was a heterozygote for
reddish-brown in color, have a characteristic red fluores-
the disorder, also had eccentrocytes on her blood film.
cence when exposed to ultraviolet light, and stain various
tissues, including teeth and bones; congenital erythropoietic
Hereditary methemoglobinemia
porphyria in cattle was called "pink tooth" at one time. The
Methemoglobin is not able to bind oxygen because the iron
porphyrins in these animals are excreted excessively in all
moiety of the heme group has been oxidized to the ferric
body fluids, including urine, feces, saliva, sweat, and tears.
One of the most common abnormalities is photosensitivity
globin is oxidized to methemoglobin each day, but this met-
resulting in photodermatitis, particularly evident on light
hemoglobin is reduced back to hemoglobin, primarily by the
colored areas of the skin. This is due to excitation of por-
enzyme NADH-methemoglobin reductase. Inherited defi-
phyrins by ultraviolet light, and subsequent transfer of
ciencies of this enzyme have been described in numerous
 Oxygen to tissues, causing oxidation of cellular lipids, pro-
breeds of dogs and cats. This disorder does not cause signif-
teins, and organelles.
cant problems in dogs and cats, other than increased risk
associated with anesthesia. Glutathione reductase deficiency
Bovine congenital erythropoietic porphyria
has been described in horses, and even in the absence of
Bovine congenital erythropoietic porphyria  has been
oxidants, resulted in a mild hemolytic anemia with eccen-
reported in Holsteins and Shorthorns, and is caused by a
trocyte formation and methemoglobinemia. Horses in one
partial deficiency of uroporphyrinogen Ill cosynthetase
report had normal methemoglobin reductase activity. but
(UROgenIll Cosyn), resulting in an accumulation of uropor-
activity was reduced in a separate case.
phyrin I and coproporphyrin I, which accumulate in tissues.
106
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
and are excreted in urine and feces in increased quantities.
Hodges J, Christopher MM (201l) Diagnostic accuracy of using
 ss     r
erythrocyte indices and polychromasia to identify regenerative
teeth, anemia, and photosensitization. The disorder is inher-
anemia in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 238: 1452-8.
ited as an autosomal recessive trait. Affected animals have
Ng CY, Mills JN (1985) Clinical and haematological features of
hemolytic anemia that is regenerative, and blood film find-
Rebar AH, Hahn FF, Halliwell WH, er al. (1980j Microangiopathic
ings are those of a regenerative anemia in cattle, including
hemolytic anemia associated with radiation-induced hemangio-
polychromasia, macrocytosis, anisocytosis, basophilic stip-
sarcomas. Ver Parhol 17: 443-54.
pling. and increased nucleated erythrocytes. Affected calves
Weiss DJ, Kristensen A, Papenfuss N (1993) Qualitative evaluation
have a particularly striking regenerative response, with
of irregularly spiculated red blood cells in the dog. Ver Clin Patho!
22: 117-21.
is shortened, due to both the heme synthesis disorder, as
well as the porphyrin-related damage to erythrocyte mem-
Chronic blood loss
brane lipids. Ultraviolet light may increase severity of
Brommer H, van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MM (2000) Iron def-
hemolysis, due to exposure of erythrocytes while in surface
cency in stabled Dutch warmblood foals. J Ver Inrerm Med 15: 482-5.
Bunch SE, Jordan HL, Sellon RK, er al. (1995) Characterization of
capillaries. The disease has been almost completely elimi-
 iron status in young dogs with portosystemic shunt. Am J Ver Res
nated in cattle.
56: 853-8.
Degen M (1987) Pseudohyperkalemia in Akitas. J Am Ver Med Assor 
Porphyria of cats
190: 541-3.
Two forms of porphyria have been described in cats. One
 Duval D, Mahaffey E (1996) Predicted mean corpuscular volume as
type, described in a family of Siamese cats, is due to a
an indicator of bone marrow iron in anemic dogs. Ver Clin Patho!
partial deficiency of uroporphyrinogen Ill cosynthetase.
1996; 25: 95-8.
and is similar to the disorder in humans and cattle. Affected
Easley JR (1985) Erythrogram and red cell distribution width of
cats had photosensitivity and severe hemolytic anemia, as
Equidae with experimentally induced anemia. Am J Ver Res 46:
well as renal disease. The renal disease was characterized
2378-84.
  ad  na i a
Fulton R, Weiser MG, Freshman JL, et al. {l988) Electronic and
emic tubular injury. Membrane-enclosed lamellar bodies
 morphologic characterization of erythrocytes of an adult cat with
iron deficiency anemia. Ver Pathol 25: 521-3.
       
Gookin JL, Bunch SE, Rush LJ, et al. (1998) Evaluation of microcy-
various tissues, similar to those seen in lysosomal storage
tosis in 18 Shibas. J Am Ver Med Assor 212: 1258-9.
disorders.
Harvey JW, Asquith RL, Sussman WA, er al. (1987) Serum ferritin.
A second type of porphyria has been described in domestic
serum iron, and erythrocyte values in foals. Am J Ver Res 48:
cats in which the clinical signs are only discoloration of teeth
1348-52.
and urine due to the presence of uroporphyrin, copropor-
Laflamme DP, Mahaffey EA, Allen SW, er al. (1994) Microcytosis
phyrin, and porphobilinogen. Anemia and photosensitiza-
and iron status in dogs with surgically induced portosystemic
tion are not present. The disorder in domestic cats is inherited
shunts. J Ver Inr Med 8: 212-16.
as autosomal dominant.
McCown JL, Specht AJ (20ll) Iron homeostasis and disorders in
dogs and cats: a review. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 47: 151-60.
Porphyria of swine
 Meyer DJ, Harvey JW (1994) Hematologic changes associated with
Porphyria has been described in affected swine, which have
-od [enalus ym shop u sueaie uou sedau pue uias
discoloration of teeth and excessive uroporphyrin in the
tosystemic vascular anomalies. J Ver Inr Med 8: 55-6.
Morin DE, Garry FB, Weiser MG, et al. (1992) Hematologic features
urine. Affected swine are not anemic and photosensitization
of iron deficiency anemia in llamas. Ver Parhol 29: 400-4.
is not present. The specific defect is not known, and no
Morin DE, Garry FB, Weiser MG (1993) Hematologic responses in
animals are currently available for study. The disorder is
llamas with experimentally-induced iron deficiency anemia. Ver
inherited as autosomal dominant.
Clin Patho! 22: 81-6.
Murray SL, Lau KW, Begg A, Jacobs K (20o0) Myelodysplasia.
'ede ue u Auanyap uon pue  uuea 'euaieudsoqdoday
Suggested reading
Ausr Ver J 79: 328-31.
Nathanson MH, Muir A, McLaren GD (1985) Iron absorption in
Blood loss
normal and iron-deficient beagle dogs: mucosal iron kinetics. Am
Acute blood loss
J Physiol 249: G439-48.
Gelberg H, Stackhouse LL (1977) Three cases of canine acanthocy-
 Ristic JM, Stidworthy MF (2002) Two cases of severe iron-deficiency
tosis associated with splenic neoplasia. Ver Med Small Anim Clin 72:
anaemia due to inflammatory bowel disease in the dog. J Smal!
1183-4.
Anim Pracr 43: 80-3.
Hirsch VM, Jacobsen J, Mills JH (198l) A retrospective study of
Simpson Kw, Meyer DJ, Boswood A, et al. (1997) Iron status and
canine hemangiosarcoma and its association with acanthocytosis.
erythrocyte volume in dogs with congenital portosystemic vascu-
Can Ver J 22: 152-5.
lar anomalies. J Ver Inr Med 1l: 1419.
107
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Steinberg JD, Olver CS (2005) Hematologic and biochemical abnor-
heifer, using blood transfusions and corticotherapy. Can Ver J 47:
malities indicating iron deficiency are associated with decreased
685-8.
reticulocyte hemoglobin content (CHr) and reticulocyte volume
Latimer KS, Jain A, Inglesby HB, er al. (1989) Zinc-induced hemo-
(rMCV) in dogs. Ver Clin Pathol 34: 23-27.
 uy r dnd e Aq sauad jo uosalu Aq asne eaue o
Weiser G, O'Grady M (1983) Erythrocyte volume distribution anal-
Med Assoc 195: 77-80.
 ysis and hematologic changes in dogs with iron deficiency anemia.
McManus PM, Craig LE (200l) Correlation between leukocytosis
Ver Pathol 20: 230-41.
Weiser MG, Kociba GJ (1983) Sequential changes in erythrocyte
anemia: 34 cases (1994-1999). J Am Ver Med Assoc 218: 1308-13.
volume distribution and microcytosis associated with iron defi-
Messer NT rV, Amold K (l99l) Immune-mediated hemolytic
ciency in kittens. Ver Pathol 20: 1-12.
anemia in a horse. J Am Ver Med Assor 198: 1415-16.
Mills JN, Day MJ, Shaw SE, er al. (1985) Autoimmune haemolytic
Blood destruction
anaemia in dogs. Ausr Ver J 62: 121-3.
 Immune mediated hemolytic anemia
Noble SJ, Armstrong PJ (1999) Bee sting envenomation resulting
Breitschwerdt EB, Armstrong PJ, Robinette CL, er al. (1986) Three
cases of acute zinc toxicosis in dogs. Ver Hum Toxicol 28: 109-17.
Brown DE, Meyer DJ, Wingfield WE, er al. (1994) Echinocytosis
Piek CJ, Junius G, Dekker A (2008) er al. Idiopathic immune-
mediated hemolytic anemia: treatment outcome and prognostic
6547.
factors in 149 dogs. J Ver Inrern Med 22: 366-73.
 Burgess K, Moore A, Rand W, et al. (20oo) Treatment of immune-
Porter RE, Weiser MG (1990) Effect of immune-mediated erythro-
 mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs with cyclophosphamide. J Ver
cyte agglutination on analysis of canine blood using a multichan-
InrMed14:456-62
 nel blood cell counting system. Ver Clin Path 19: 45-50.
Carr AP, Panciera DL, Kidd L (2002) Prognostic factors for mortality
Reef VB (1983) Clostridium perfringirs cellulitis and immune-mediated
and thromboembolism in canine immune-mediated hemolytic
hemolytic anemia in a horse. J Am Ver Med Assor 182: 251-4.
anemia: a retrospective study of 72 dogs. J Ver Intern Med 16: 504-9.
Reimer ME, Troy GC, Warnick LD (1 999) Immune-mediated hemo-
Christian JA (20ol) Red blood cell survival and destruction. In:
lytic anemia: 70 cases (1988-1996). J Am Anim Hosp Assor 35:
Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.), Schaim's Vererinary Hemarol-
384-91.
ogy. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp.
Scott-Moncrieff JC, Reagan WJ, Snyder PW, et al. (1997) Intrave-
117-24.
nous administration of human immune globulin in dogs with
Coombs RRA (l970) History and evolution of the anti-globulin
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. J Am Ver Med Assor 210:
reaction and its application in clinical and experimental medicine.
1623-7.
Am J Clin Path 53: 131-5.
Scott-Moncrieff JC, Treadwell NG, McCullough SM, et al. (2001)
Day TK, Macintire DK, Murtaugh RJ, et al. (2001) Differing opinions
on treatment of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. J Am Vet
hemolytic anemia. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37: 220-7.
Med Assoc 218: 1414-15.
Slappendel RJ, van Zwieten R, van Leeuwen M, et al. (2005) Heredi-
Day MJ (1996) Serial monitoring of clinical, haematological, and
tary spectrin deficiency in Golden Retriever dogs. J Ver Inrern Med
19: 187-92.
anaemia. J Sm Anim Pracr 37: 523-4.
Stokol T, Blue JT, French TW (2000) Idiopathic pure red cell aplasia
Duval D, Giger U (l996) Vaccine-associated immune-mediated
and nonregenera tive immune-mediated anemia in dogs: 43 cases
hemolytic anemia in the dog. J Ver Int Med 10: 290-5.
{1988-1999). J Am Ver Med Assoc 216: 1429-36.
Grundy SA, Barton C (200l) Influence of drug treatment on sur-
vival of dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: 88
cases(1989-1999). J Am Ver Med Assoc 218: 536-43.
Walton RM, Brown DE, Hamar DW, er al. (1997) Mechanisms of
Horgan JE, Roberts BK, Schermerhorn T (2009) Splenectomy as an
adjunctive treatment for dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic
442-9.
anemia: ten cases (2003-2006). Ver Emerg Crir Care 19: 254-61.
Weinkle TK, Center SA, Randolph JF, et al. (2005) Evaluation of
Jonas RD, Thrall MA, Weiser MG (1987) Immune mediated hemo-
 prognostic factors, survival rates, and treatment protocols for
lytic anemia with delayed erythrogenesis in the dog. J Am Anim
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs: 15l cases {1993-
Hosp Assoc 23: 201-4.
2002). J Am Ver Med Assor 226: 1869-80.
Klag AR, Giger U, Shofer FS (1993) Idiopathic immune-mediated
Weiser MG, Thrall MA (1993) Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
hemolytic anemia in dogs: 42 cases (1986-1990). J Am Ver Med
in dogs (letter). J Am Ver Med Assor 202: 1786-8.
Assoc 202: 783-8.
 - aa   z  s
Klein MK, Dow SW, Rosychuk RA (1989) Pulmonary thromboem-
anemia associated with Clostridium perfringens infection. Ver Clin
bolism associated with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in
Pathol32:22-6
dogs: tenl cases (1982-1987). J Am Ver Med Assor 195: 246-50.
Wilkerson MJ, Davis E, Shuman W, er al. (2000) Isotype-specific
Kohn B, Weingart C, Eckmann V, et al. (2006) Primary immune-
antibodies in horses and dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic
mediated hemolytic anemia in 19 cats: diagnosis, therapy. and
anemia. J Ver Inr Med 14: 190-6.
outcome (1998-2004). J Ver Interm Med 20: 159-66.
Wysoke JM, Bland van-den Berg P, Marshall C (1990) Bee sting-
Lallemand M, Fecteau G, Desnoyer M, er al. (2006) Treatment of 
induced haemolysis, spherocytosis and neural dysfunction in
 presumptive idiopathic immune-mediated anemia in a Holstein
three dogs. J S African Ver Assoc 6l: 29-32.
108
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
Neonatal isoerythrolysis
Lester SJ, Hume JB, Phipps B (1995) Haemobartonella canis
Boyle AG, Magdesian KG, Ruby RE (2005) Neonatal isoerythrolysis
infection following splenectomy and transfusion. Can Ver J 36:
in horse foals and a mule foal: 18 cases {1988-2003). J Am Ver
444-5.
Med Assoc 227: 127683.
 MacWilliams Ps (1987) Erythrocytic rickettsia and protozoa of the
McClure JU, Koch C, Traub-Dargatz J (1994) Characterization of a
dog and cat. Ver Clin N Am—Sm Anim Pracr 17: 1443-61.
red blood cell antigen in donkeys and mules associated with
Maede Y (1979) Sequestration and phagocytosis of Haemobarronella
neonatal isoerythrolysis. Anim Gener 25: 1l9-20.
felis in the spleen. Am J Ver Res 40: 691-5.
MacLeay JM (200l) Neonatal isoerythrolysis involving the Qc and
Messick JB, Cooper SK, Huntley M (1999) Development and evalu-
Db antigens in a foal. J Am Ver Med Assor 219: 79-81.
ation of a polymerase chain reaction assay using the l6S rRNA
Polkes AC, Giguere S, Lester GD, er al. (2008) Factors associated
gene for detection of Eperythrozoon suis infection. J Ver Diag Invest
with outcome in foals with neonatal isoerythrolysis (72 cases,
11: 229-36.
1988-2003). J Ver Inrern Med 22: 1216-22.
Messick JB, Berent LM, Cooper SK (1 998) Development and evalu-
 Smith JE, Dever M, Smith J, et al. (1992) Post-transfusion survival
ation of a PCR-based assay for detection of Haemobarronella felis
of 50Cr-labeled erythrocytes in neonatal foals. J Ver Intern Med 6:
in cats and differentiation of H. felis from related bacteria by 
1 83-5.
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. J Clin Micro
Traub-Dargatz JL, McClure JJ, Koch C, et al. (1995) Neonatal iso-
36: 462-6.
erythrolysis in mule foals. J Am Ver Med Assoc 206: 67-70.
Museux K, Boretti Fs, Willi B, er al. {2009 In vivo transmission
studies of "Candidarus Mycoplasma ruricensis" in the domestic cat.
Ver Res 40: 45.
Erythrocyte parasites
 Neimark H, Johansson KE, Rikihisa Y et al. (200l) Proposal to tran5-
Haemotrophic mycoplasmas
fer some members of the genera Haemobarronella and Eperyrhro-
Alleman AR, Pate MG, Harvey JW, et al. (1 999) Westerm immunob-
lot analysis of the antigens of Haemobaronella felis with sera from
experimentally infected cats. J of Clin Micro 37: 1474-9.
didarus Mycoplasma haemosuis" and “Candidatus Mycoplasma wen-
Austerman JW (1979) Haemobartonellosis in a monsplenectomized
yonii." Intermat J Systemic Evoiutionary Micro 5l: 891-9.
dog. Ver Med Sm Anim Clin 74: 954.
Obara H, Fujihara M, Watanabe Y, et al. (20ll) A feline hemo-
Bellamy JE. MacWilliams PS, Searcy GP (1978) Cold-agglutinin
hemolytic anemia and Haemobaronella canis infection in a dog. J
in Japan. J Ver Med Sei 73: 841-3.
Am Ver Med Assoc 173: 397401
Pospischil A, Hoffmann R (l982) Eperythrozoon suis in naturally
Berent LM, Messick JB, Cooper SK (1998) Detection of Haemobar-
infected pigs: a light and electron microscopic study. Ver Patho! 19: 
tonella felis in cats with experimentally induced acute and chronic
65 1-7.
infections, using a polymerase chain reaction assay. Am J Ver Res
Reagan WJ, Garry F, Thrall MA, et al. (1990) The clinicopathologic.
59: 1215-20.
light, and scanning electron microscopic features of eperythrozo-
Berent LM, Messick JB, Cooper SK, et al. (2000) Specific in situ
        n 
hybridization of Haemobartonella felis with a DNA probe and tyra-
Reymolds CA, Lappin MR (2007) "Candidarus Mycoplasma haemo-
mide signal amplification. Ver Parho! 37: 47-53.
Bobade PA, Nash AS, Rogerson P (l988) Feline haemobartonellosis:
43: 249-57.
clinical, haematological and pathological studies in natural infec-
Shelton GH, Linenberger ML (l995) Hematologic abnormalities
tions and the relationship to infection with feline leukaemia virus.
associated with retroviral infections in the cat. Sem Ver Med Surg
Ver Record 122: 32-6.
(Sm Anim) 10: 220-33.
Smith JA, Thrall MA, Smith JL, et al. (1990) Eperyrhrozoon
assay for detection of Haemobaronella canis in a dog. J Am Ver Med
wenyonii infecion in dairy cattle. J Am Ver Med Assoc 196:
Assoc 218: 1943-5.
1244-50.
Carney HC, England J (1993) Feline hemobartonellosis. Ver Clin of
 Stevenson M (1997) Treatment for Haemobarronella felis in cats. Vet
Record 140: 512.
Dowers KL, Olver C, Radecki SV, et al. (2002) Use of enrofloxacin
Sykes JE (2010) Feline hemotropic mycoplasmas. Ver Clin North Am
for treatment of large-form Haemobarronella felis in experimentally
Small Anim Pract 40: 1157-70.
infected cats. J Am Ver Med Assor 221: 250-3.
Tasker S, Helps CR, Belford CJ (2001) et al. 16S rDNA comparison
Foley JE, Harrus S, Poland A, et al. (1998) Molecular, clinical, and
demonstrates near identity between a United Kingdom Haemobar-
pathologic comparison of twa distinct strains of Haemobarronella
ronella felis strain and the American Califormia strain. Ver Micro 81:
felis in domestic cats. Am J Ver Res 59: 1581-8.
73-8.
Grindem CB, Corbett WT, Tomkins MT (1990) Risk factors for Hae-
VanSteenhouse JL, Taboada J, Dorfman Ml (1995) Hemobarronella
mobartonella felis infection in cats. J Am Ver Med Assor 196: 96-9.
felis infection with atypical hematological abnormalities. J Am
 Jensen WA, Lappin MR, Kamkar S, et al. (2001) Use of a polymerase
Anim Hosp Assoc 3l: 165-9.
chain reaction assay to detect and differentiate two strains of
Willi B, Museux K, Novacco M, er al. (20ll) First morphological
Haemobarronella felis in naturally infected cats. Am J Ver Res 62:
characterization of "Candidarus Mycoplasma ruricensis" using elec-
604-8.
tron microscopy. Ver Microbio! 149: 367-73.
Zulty JC, Kociba GI (1990) Cold agglutinins in cats with haemobar-
sitic diseases of dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 17l: 750-3.
tonellosis. J Am Ver Med Assoc 196: 907-10.
109
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Babesiosis
Greene CE, Latimer K, Hopper E, et al. (1999) Administration of
Birkenheuer AJ, Correa MT, Levy MG, er al. (2005) Geographic
diminazene aceturate or imidocarb dipropionate for treatment of
distribution of babesiosis among dogs in the United States and
cytauxzoonosis in cats. J Am Ver Med Assoc 215: 497-500.
association with dog bites: 150 cases (2000-2003). J Am Ver Med
Haber MD, Tucker MD, Marr HS, et al. (2007) The detection of
Assoc 227: 942-7.
Cytauxzoon felis in apparently healthy free-roaming cats in the
Conrad PA, Thomford J, Yamane I, et al. (1991) Hemolytic anemia
USA. Ver Parasitol 146: 316-20.
caused by Babesia gibsoni infection in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 199:
Hoover JP, Walker DB, Hedges JD (1994) Cytauxzoonosis in cats:
60 1-5.
eight cases (1985-1992). J Am Ver Med Assoc 205: 455-60.
 Jakob W, Wesemeier HH (1996) A fatal infection in a Bengal tiger
agents and protozoa. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain, NC (eds.),
resembling cytauxzoonosis in domestic cats. J Comp Pathol 114:
Schalm's Vererinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
439-44.
Williams & Wilkins, pp. 154-62.
Meier HT, Moore LE (2000) Feline cytauxzoonosis: a case report
Irizarry-Rovira AR, Stephens J, Christian J, er al. (200l) Babesid
and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 36: 493-6.
gibsoni infection in a dog from Indiana. Ver Clin Pathol 30:
Meinkoth J, Kocan AA, Whitworth L, er al. (2000) Cats surviving
180-8.
natural infection with Cyrauxzoon felis: 18 cases {1 997-1998). J Ver
 Jacobson LS, Clark IA (1994) The pathophysiology of canine babe-
Interm Med 14: 521-5.
siosis: new approaches to an old puzzle. J Sourh African Ver Assoc
 Nietfeld JC, Pollock C (2002) Fatal cytauxzoonosis in a free-ranging
65: 13445.
bobcat (Lynx rufus). J Wild! Dis 38: 607-10.
Macintire DK, Bou dreaux MK, West GD, er al. (2002) Babesia gibsoni
Rotstein DS, Taylor SK, Harvey JW, et al. (1999) Hematologic effects
infection among dogs in the southeasterm United States. J Am Ver
of cytauxzoonosis in Florida panthers and Texas cougars in
Med Assoc 220: 325-9.
Florida. J Wild! Dis 35: 613-17.
Meinkoth JH, Kocan AA, Loud SD, et al. (2002) Clinical and hema-
Walker DB, Cowell RL (1995) Survival of a domestic cat with natu-
Aae  s r   r saa 
rally acquired cytauxzoonosis. J Am Ver Med Assoc 206: 1363-5.
identified Babesia gibsoni-like isolates from Oklahoma. J Am Ver
Med Assoc 220: 185-9.
Solano-Gallego L, Baneth G (20ll) Babesiosis in dogs and cats-
Heinz body anemia
Expanding parasitological and clinical spectra. Ver Parasitol 181:
Alward A, Corriher CA, Barton MH, et al. (2006) Red maple (Arer
48-60
rubrum) leaf toxicosis in horses: a retrospective study of 32 cases.
 Stegeman JR, Birkenheuer AJ, Kruger JM, et al. (2003) Transfu sion-
J Ver Interm Med 20: 1197-1201.
associated Babesia gibsoni infection in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc
Andress JL, Day TK, Day D {1995) The effects of consecutive day
222: 959-63.
 propofol anesthesia on feline red blood cells. Ver Surg 24(3):
277-82.
Bauer MC, Weiss DJ, Perman V (1992) Hematologic alterations in
Ana pla smosis
Shkap V, Molad T, Fish L, et al. (2002) Detection of the Anaplasma
adult cats fed 6 or 12% propylene glycol. Am J Ver Res 53(1):
centrale vaccine strain and specific differentiation from Anaplasma
69-72.
marginale in vaccinated and infected cattle. Parasitol Res 88:
Bauer MC, Weiss DJ, Perman V (1992) Hematological alterations in
w jaa loa[a aaAdoad Aenap %tl pue 9 Aq panu suan
546-52.
Suarez CE, Noh S (201l) Emerging perspectives in the research of
Toxico/ 34(2): 127-31.
 Belfield N, Archer J, Herrtage M (2007) Heinz body haemolytic
bovine babesiosis and anaplasmosis. Ver Parasitof 180: 109-25.
amaemia in a dog secondary to ingestion of a zinc toy: a case
Swenson C, Jacobs R (1986) Spherocytosis associated with anaplas-
mosis in two cows. J Am Ver Med Assor 188:1061-3.
report. Ver J 174: 414-17.
Christopher MM (1989) Relation of endogenous Heinz bodies to
disease and anemia in cats: 120 cases (1978-1987). J Am Ver Med
Theileriosis
Assoc 194: 1089-95.
Stockham SL, Kjemtrup AM, Conrad PA, et al. (20o0) Theileriosis
Christopher MM, Broussard JD, Peterson ME (1995) Heinz body
 in a Missouri beef herd caused by Theileria buffeli: case report, herd
formation associated with ketoacidosis in diabetic cats. J Ver Inf
investigation, ultrastructure, phylogenetic analysis, and experi-
Med 9: 2431.
mental transmission. Ver Parho! 37:1l-21.
Christopher MM, Perman V, Eaton JW (1989) Contribution of pro-
pylene glycol-induced Heinz body formation to anemia in cats. J
Cytauxzoonosis
Am Ver Med Assoc 194: 1045-56.
Birkenheuer AJ, Le JA, Valenzisi AM, et al. (2006) Cyrauxzoon felis
Christopher MM, Perman V, White JG, et al. (1989) Propylene
infection in cats in the mid-Atlantic states: 34 cases (1998-2004).
 glycol-induced Heinz body formation and D-lactic acidosis in cats.
J Am Ver Med Assoc 228: 568-71.
Prog Clin Biol Res 319: 69-87.
Birkenheuer AJ, Marr H, Alleman AR, et al. (2006) Development
Christopher MM, White JG, Eaton JW (1990) Erythrocyte pathol-
and evaluation of a PCR assay for the detection of Cyrauxzoon felis
 OgY and mechanisms of Heinz body-mediated hemolysis in cats.
DNA in feline blood samples. Ver Parasito! 137: 144-9.
Ver Pathol 27: 299-310.
Gamer MM, Lung NP, Citino S, er al. (1996) Fatal cytauxzoonosis
Dewitt SF Bedenice D, Mazan MR (2004) Hemolysis and Heinz
in a captive-reared white tiger (Panrhera tigris). Ver Pathol 33:
 body formation associated with ingestion of red maple leaves in
82-6.
two alpacas. J Am Ver Med Assoc 225: 578-83.
110
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
Fallin CW, Christopher MM (1996) In vitro effect of ketones and
Pearson W, Boermans HJ, Bettger WJ, er al. (2005) Association of
hyperglycemia on feline hemoglobin oxidation and D- and
maximum voluntary dietary intake of freeze-dried garlic with
L-lactate production. Am J Ver Res 57: 463-67.
Heinz body anemia in horses. Am J Ver Res 66: 457-65.
Gardner DE, Martinovich D, Woodhouse DA {1 976) Haematologica]
 Prache S (1994) Haemolytic anaemia in ruminants fed forage bras-
 and biochemical findings in bovine post-parturient haemoglobin-
sicas: a review. Ver Res 25: 497-520.
uria and the accompanying Heinz-body anaemia. New Zealand Vet
 Reagan WJ, Carter C, Turek J (1994) Eccentrocytosis in equine red
J24: 117-22.
maple leaf toxicosis. Ver Clin Path 23: 123-7.
George LW, Divers TJ, Mahaffey EA, et al. ( 1982) Heinz body anemia
Robertson JE, Christopher MM, Rogers QR (1998) Heinz body for-
and methemoglobinemia in ponies given red maple (Arer rubrum
 mation in cats fed baby food containing onion powder. J Am Ver
L.) leaves. Ver Pathof 19: 521-33.
Med Assoc 212(8): 1260-6.
Hammond GM, Loewen ME, Blakley BR (2004) Diagnosis and
Rumbeiha WK, Oehme FW (1992) Methylene blue can be used to
treatment of zinc poisoning in a dog. Ver Hum Toxicol 46: 272-5.
Harvey JW, French TW, Senior DF (1986) Hematologic abnormali-
hemolytic anemia. Ver Hum Toxico! 34(2): 120-2.
 ties associated with chronic acetaminophen administration in a
Soli NE, Froslie A (1977) Chronic copper poisoning in sheep. 1. The 
dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 189: 1334-5.
relationship of methaemoglobinemia to Heinz body formation
Harvey JW, Rackear D (1 985) Experimental onion-induced hemo-
and haemolysis during the terminal crisis. Arra Pharm Toxico! 40:
lytic anemia in dogs. Ver Parhol 22: 387-92.
169-77.
Hickman MA, Rogers QR, Morris JG. Effect of diet on Heinz body
Suttle NF, Jones DG, Woolliams C, et al. (l987) Heinz body anaemia
formation in kittens. Am J Ver Res 1990; 51: 475-8.
in lambs with deficiencies of copper or selenium. Br J Nur 58:
Hill AS, O'Neill S, Rogers QR, et al. Antioxidant prevention of Heinz
53948.
body formation and oxidative injury in cats. Am J Ver Res 200l;
 Taljaard TL (1993) Cabbage poisoning in ruminants. J S Afr Ver Assoc 
62: 3704.
64: 96-100.
Houston DM, Myers SL (1993) A review of Heinz-body anemia in
Tennant B, Dill SG, Glickman LT, er al. (l98l) Acute hemolytic
the dog induced by toxins. Ver Hum Toxico! 35: 158-61.
anemia, methemoglobinemia, and Heinz body formation associ-
Kang MH, Park HM (2010) Hypertension after ingestion of baked
ated with ingestion of red maple leaves by horses. J Am Ver Med
garlic (Allium sativum) in a dog. J Ver Med Sei 72: 515-18.
Assoc 179: 143-50.
Kinuta M, Matteson JL, Itano HA {1995) Difference in rates of the
Torrance AG, Fulton RB Jr. (1987) Zinc-induced hemolytic anemia
reaction of various mammalian oxyhemoglobins with phenylhy-
in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 19l: 443-4.
drazine. Arrh Toxico! 69: 212-14.
Villar D, Buck WB, Gonzalez JM (1998) Ibuprofen, aspirin and
Knight AP, Lassen D, McBride T, et al. (2000) Adaptation of pregnant
Wnh ia sies pue saop u iuaueau pue ssosxoi uaudouueiae
ewes to an exclusive onion diet. Ver Hum Toxicol 42: 1-4.
Toxico! 40: 156-62.
Lee K-W, Yamato O, Tajima M, et al. (2000) Hematologic changes
Wallace KP, Center SA, Hickford FH, er al. (2002) S-adenosyl-L-
methionine (SAMe) for the treatment of acetaminophen toxicity
         
in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assorc 38: 246-54.
Leighton FA, Peakall DB, Butler RG (1983) Heinz-body hemolytic
Weiss DJ, McClay CB, Christopher MM, er al. (199O) Effects
anemia from the ingestion of crude oil: a primary toxic effect in
of propylene glycol-containing diets on acetaminophen-
marine birds. Srience 220(4599): 871-3.
induced methemoglobinemia in cats. J Am Ver Med Assor 196:
Lincoln SD, Howell ME, Combs J, er al. (1992) Hematologic effects
1816-19.
and feeding performance in cattle fed cull domestic onions (Allium
Yamato O, Hayashi M, Yamasaki M, er al. (1998) Induction of
cepa). J Am Ver Med Assoc 200: 1090-4.
onion-induced haemolytic anaemia in dogs with sodium
Luttgen PJ, Whitney MS, Wolf AM, et al. (1990y Heinz body hemo-
n-propylthiosulphate. Ver Rer 142: 216-19.
lytic anemia associated with high plasma zinc concentration in a
Yamoto O, Maede Y (1992) Susceptibility to onion-induced hemo-
dog. J Am Ver Med Assorc 197: 1347-50.
McConnico RS, Brownie CF (1992) The use of ascorbic acid in the
and potassium concentrations. Am J Ver Res 53: 134-7.
treatment of 2 cases of red maple (Arer rubrum)-poisoned horses.
Yamato O, Goto I, Maede Y (1996) Hemolytic anemia in wild sea-
Corme/l Ver 82(3): 293-300.
ducks caused by marine oil pollution. J Wildl Dis 32: 381-4.
Morris JG, Cripe WS, Chapman HL Jr, er al. (1984) Selenium defi-
 Zaks KL, Tan EO, Thrall MA (2005) Heinz body anemia in a dog
ciency in cattle associated with Heinz bodies and anemia. Srience
that had been sprayed with skunk musk. J Am Ver Med Assor 226:
223(4635): 491-3.
1516-18, 1500.
Munday R, Munday JS, Munday CM (2003) Comparative effects of
mono-, di-, tri-, and tetrasulfides derived from plants of the
Hypophosphatemia
Allium family: redox cycling in vitro and hemolytic activity and
Adams LG, Hardy RM, Weiss DJ, er al. (1993) Hypophosphatemia
Phase 2 enzyme induction in vivo. Free Radic Bio Med 34: 1200-11.
and hemolytic anemia associated with diabetes mellitus and
Narurkar NS, Thomas JS, Phalen DN (2002) Heinz-body hemolytic
hepatic lipidosis in cats. J Ver Inrern Med 7: 266-71.
anemia associated with ingestion of methylene blue in a river
 Jubb TF, Jerrett IV, Browning JW, et al. (1990) Haemoglobinuria and
otter. J Am Ver Med Assoc 220: 363-6.
Aena inoum saon ap iuaedisod u euaeieudsoud odu
y Aq z 661   '  ' 0 ' 0
deficiency of phosphorus. Ausr Ver J 67: 86-9.
anemia induced by DQ-251l, a new anti-ulcer drug, in dogs. Fund
Justin RB, Hohenhaus AE (1995) Hypophosphatemia associated
App! Toxicol 20: 141-6.
with enteral alimentation in cats. J Ver Inrern Med 9: 228-33.
111
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Melvin JD, Watts RG (2002) Severe hypophosphatemia: a rare
Pinkerton PH, Fletch SM, Brueckner PJ, et al. (1974) Hereditary
cause of intravascular hemolysis. Am J Hemarol 69: 223-4.
stomatocytosis with hemolytic anemia in the dog. Blood 44:
Ogawa E, Kobayashi K, Yoshiura N, et al. (1987) Bovine postparturi-
557-67.
ent hemoglobinemia: hypophosphatemia and metabolic disorder
Slappendel RJ, Renooij W, de Bruijne JJ (1994) Normal cations and
in red blood cells. Am J Ver Res 48: 1300-3.
abnormal membrane lipids in the red blood cells of dogs with
Ogawa E, Kobayashi K, Yoshiura N, er al. (l989) Hemolytic anemia
     
and red blood cell metabolic disorder attributable to low phos-
Slappendel RJ, van der Gaag I, van Nes J1, et al. (l99l) Familial
phorus intake in cows. Am J Ver Res 50: 388-92.
     
Wang XL, Gallagher CH, McClure TJ, er al. (1985) Bovine post-
nized disease in the dog (Drentse patrijshond). Ver Quarrerly 13(1):
parturient haemoglobinuria: effect of inorganic phosphate on red
30-40.
cell metabolism. Res Ver Sri 39: 333-9.
Smith JE, Moore K, Arens M, er al. (1983) Hereditary elliptocytosis
Willard MD, Zerbe CA, Schall WD, et al. (1987) Severe hypophos-
with protein band 4.1 deficiency in the dog. Blood 6l: 373-7.
phatemia associated with diabetes mellitus in six dogs and one
Tucker EM, Young JD, Crowley C {198l) Red cell glutatathione
cat. J Am Ver Med Assoc 190: 1007-10.
 deficiency: clinical and biochemical investigations using sheep as
an experimental model system. Br J Haemaro! 48: 403-15.
 Microorganism induced anemia
Decker MJ, Freeman MJ, Morter RL (1970) Evaluation of mecha-
nisms of leptospiral hemolytic anemia. Am J Ver Res 3l: 873-8.
and potassium concentrations. Am J Ver Res 53(l): 134-7.
McGuire TC, Henson JB, Quist SE (1969) Viral-induced hemolysis
 in equine infectious anemia. Am J Ver Res 30: 2091-7.
Inherited metabolic disorders
 Dixon PM, McPherson EA, Muir A (1977) Familial methaemoglo-
Olander HJ, Hughes JP, Biberstein EL (1966) Bacillary hemoglobin-
uria: induction by liver biopsy in naturally and experimentally
binaemia and haemolytic anemia in the horse associated with
decreased erythrocytic glutathione reductase and glutathione.
infected animals. Pathologiα Vererinaria 3: 421-50.
Equine Ver J 9: 198-201.
Reef VB (1983) Closridium perfringens cellulitis and immune-
Fine DM, Eyster GE, Anderson LK, er al. (1999) Cyanosis and con-
mediated hemolytic anemia in a horse. J Am Ver Med Assor 182:
25 1-4.
Sellon DC. Equine infectious anemia (1 993) Ver Clin North Am Equine
33-5.
   a   
Pracr 9: 321-36.
kinase deficiencies. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain, NC (eds.),
Stockham SL (2ool) Anemia associated with bacterial and viral
infections. In: Feldman BF Zink] JG, Jain, NC (eds.), Schalm's
Schalm's Vererinary Hemarology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, pp. 1020-5.
Vererinary Hemarology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, pp. 163-8.
Harvey JW (1996) Congenital erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies. Vet
Clin N Am—Small Anim Pracr 26: 1003-11.
Harvey JW (200 1) Hereditary methemoglobinemia. In: Feldman BF
Water intoxication induced hemolysis
Zink] JG, Jain, NC (eds.). Schaim's Vererinary Hemarology. 5th ed.
Gibson EA, Counter DE, Bames EG (1976) An incident of water
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp. 1008-1l.
intoxication in calves. Ver Rer 98: 486-7.
Harvey JW, Dahl M, High ME (1994) Methemoglobin reductase
Gilchrist F (1 996) Water intoxication in weaned beef calves. Can Ver
J 37: 490-1.
Skibild E, Dahlgaard K, Rajpurohit Y, er al. (20ol) Haemolytic
Kirkbride CA, Frey RA {1967) Experimental water intoxication in
anaemia and exercise intolerance due to phosphofructokinase
calves. J Am Ver Med Assor 151: 742-6.
deficiency in related springer spaniels. J Small Anim Pract 42:
298-300.
Inherited membrane defects
Smith JE (198l) Animal models of human erythrocyte metabolic
Brown DE, Weiser MG, Thrall MA, et al. (1994) Erythrocyte indices
abnormalities. Clin Haemar 10: 239-51.
and volume distribution in a dog with stomatocytosis. Ver Parho!
Smith JE, Ryer K, Wallace L (1976) Glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-
31: 247-50.
genase deficiency in a dog. Enzyme 21: 379-82.
Fletch SM, Pinkerton PH, Brueckmer PJ (1975) The Alaskan mala-
 Srivastava S, Alhomida AS, Siddiqi NJ, er al. (2002) Methemoglobin
mute chondrodysplasia (dwarfism-anemia) syndrome-in review.
reductase activity and in vitro sensitivity towards oxidant induced
J Am Anim Hosp Assor 1l: 353-61.
 methemoglobinemia in Swiss mice and beagle dogs erythrocytes.
 Inaba M (200 1) Red blood cell membrane defects. In: Feldman BF
Mol Cell Biochem 232: 81-5.
Zink] JG, Jain, NC (eds.), Schatm's Vererinary Hematology. 5th ed.
 Stockham SL, Harvey JW, Kinden DA (1994) Equine glucose-6-
Philadelphia: Lippincott Wlliams & Wilkins, pp. 1012-19.
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Ver Parho! 31: 518-27.
Inaba M, Yawata A, Koshino I, et al. {1996) Defective anion trans-
Zaucha JA, Yu C, Lothrop CD Jr, et al. (200l) Severe canine heredi-
 port and marked spherocytosis with membrane instability cau sed
tary hemolytic anemia treated by nonmyeloablative marrow
by hereditary total deficiency red cell band 3 in cattle due to a
transplantatiom. Biot Blood Marrow Transplant 7: 14-24.
nonsense mutation. J Clin Invesr 97: 180417.
Kohn B, Goldschmidt MH, Hohenhaus AE, er al. (2000) Anemia,
sqd0d
splenomegaly, and increased osmotic fragility of erythrocytes in
 Bloomer JR, Morton KO, Reuter RJ, et al. (1982) Bovine protopor-
Abyssinian and Somali cats. J Am Ver Med Assor 217: 1483-90.
phyria: documentation of autosomal recessive inheritance and
112
CHAPTER 8 Regenerative Anemia
comparison with the human disease through measurement of
 Kaneko JU, Zink] JG, Keeton KS (197l) Erythrocyte porphyrin and
heme synthetase activity. Hum Gener 34: 322-30.
erythrocyte survival in bovine erythropoietic porphyria. Am J Ver
Giddens WE Jr, Labbe RF, Swango LJ, et al. (1 975) Feline congenital
Res 32: 1981-5.
erythropoietic porphyria associated with severe anemia and renal
Moore WE (1970) Metabolic acidosis in bovine erythropoietic por-
disease. Clinical, morphologic, and biochemical studies. Am J
phyria during the neonatal period. Am J Ver Res 3l: 1561-7.
Pathol 80: 367-86.
Moore WE, Stephenson BD, Anderson AS, et al. {l970) Detection
Glenn BL, Glenn HG, Omtvedt IT (1968) Congenital porphyria in
Aiun jo sisee eydiod auaoq u aneis snoazoaiaq aui jo 
coproporphyrin isomers. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 134: 926-9.
tance patterm. Am J Ver Res 29: 1653-7.
Pence ME, Liggett AD (2002) Congenital erythropoietic protopor-
Healy PJ, Dennis JA (1993) Inherited enzyme deficiencies in live-
phyria in a Limousin calf. J Am Ver Med Assoc 22l: 277-9.
stock. Ver Clin North Am Food Anim Pracr 9: 55-63.
Rudolph WG, Kaneko J (197l) Kinetics of erythroid bone marrow
Johnson LW, Schwartz S {1970) Isotopic studies of erythrocyte
cells of normal and porphyric calves in vitro. Acra Haemarol 45:
survival in normal and porphyric cattle: influence of light expo-
330-5.
sure, blood withdrawal, and splenectomy. Am J Ver Res 3l:
 Ruth GR, Schwartz S, Stephenson B (1977) Bovine protoporphyria:
2167-77.
the first nonhuman model of this hereditary photosensitizing
Kaneko JJ (2ool) The porphyrias and the porphyrinurias. In:
disease. Srience 198: 199-201.
Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain, NC (eds.), Schalm's Vererinary Hematol-
 Schelcher F Delverdier M, Bezille P, er al. (1991) Observation on
ogy. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp.
bovine congenital erythrocytic protoporphyria in the blonde
1002-7.
d'Aquitaine breed. Ver Rec 129: 403-7.
Kaneko JJ, Mills R (1969). Erythrocytic enzyme activity, ion con-
Scott DW, Mort JD, Tennant BC {1979) Dermatohistopathologic
 centrations, osmotic fragility, and glutathione stability in bovine
changes in bovine congenital porphyria. Cornell Ver 69: 145-58.
erythropoietic porphyria and its carrier state. Am J Ver Res 1969;
30: 1805-10.
Kaneko J, Mills R (1970) Hematological and blood chemical obser-
vations in neonatal normal and porphyric calves in early life.
Cormell Ver 60: 52-60.
113
Classification of and Diagnostic Approach
to Polycythemia
Mary Anna Thrall
Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine
 Polycythemia refers to an increase in the concentration of
usually is present. Some dehydrated animals, however, may
erythrocytes in the blood as evidenced by an increased packed
have normal or decreased plasma protein concentration
cell volume (PCV; or hematocrit), red-blood-cell count, or
resulting from decreased protein intake, decreased protein
hemoglobin concentration. Because the term polycythemia
production by the liver, or increased protein loss via the
implies that all blood cells, including leukocytes, are increased
kidney.  gastrointestinal tract,  or cutaneous lesions (see
in concentration, the term erythrocytosis is sometimes pre-
Chapter 26). Moreover, fluid shifts may occur so rapidly.
ferred; in domestic animals with true polycythemia, usually
such as in patients with acute gastrointestinal disease or
only the erythrocytes are increased in concentration.
severe acute hyperthermia, that the classic clinical signs of
Polycythemia may be either relative or absolute. Relative
polycythemia may occur due to decreased plasma volume
treated by diagnosis of and therapy for the underlying
or erythrocyte redistribution. Examples of the former include
disease and by replacement of fluids and electrolytes.
dehydration and body fluid shifts. The latter is the result of
splenic con traction seen most commonly in excitable animals
Relative polycythemia caused by transient
such as cats and horses. Absolute polycythemia is caused by
increase in red cell mass secondary to splenic
an actual increase in the red cell mass and may be primary
contraction
or secondary. Secondary absolute polycythemia results from
Splenic contraction causes only a modest increase in PCV.
erythropoietin concentration, which in turn is secondary to
usually to no greater than 60%. Polycythemia as a result
of splenic contraction typically is seen only in animals that
either generalized hypoxia, localized renal hypoxia, or over-
normally have a high Pcv, such as some poodles. grey-
production of erythropoietin by a tumor. Primary absolute
hounds, and dachshunds. Splenic contraction may occur
polycythemia (i.e., polycythemia vera) is considered to be a
secondary to exercise, or it may be a response to epineph-
well-differentiated  myeloproliferative disorder  in  which
rine release in animals that are excited or in pain. Plasma
erythropoiesis occurs independent of the erythropoietin
protein concentration is not increased, and the presence of
concentration. Whereas primary polycythemia is rare, it is
fear, pain, or excitement at the time of blood collection
still more common than secondary polycythemia. Primary
usually is apparent. An excitement leukogram also may be
polycythemia usually is diagnosed by excluding relative and
present, as evidenced by a mature neutrophilia and lym-
secondary polycythemia.
phocytosis; occasionally, mild thrombocytosis also is noted.
Transient polycythemia has no clinical significance, and the
Relative polycythemia
 red cell concentration reverts to normal in a short period
of time.
Relative polycythemia caused by fluid shifts or
dehydration
Patients with relative polycythemia caused by a reduction
Absolute polycythemia
in plasma volume usually have a concurrent increase in
plasma protein. In addition, clinical evidence of dehydration
Absolute polycythemia can be either secondary or primary.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall. Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
114
CHAPTER 9 Classification of and Diagnostic Approach to Polycythemia
Secondary absolute polycythemia
Primary absolute polycythemia
 Secondary absolute polycythemia caused by
Primary absolute polycythemia (i.e., polycythemia vera) is
 generalized hypoxia or hypoxemia
a well-differentiated myeloproliferative disorder in which
(physiologically appropriate polycythemia)
erythrocytes proliferate uncontrollably. producing an
Physiologically appropriate polycythemia is observed when
increased hematocrit. Unlike most other types of hemato-
inadequate tissue oxygenation triggers an increase in eryth-
poietic neoplasia, the neoplastic erythroid cells appear to be
ropoietin production, which in turn stimulates erythrocyte
normal and to have a normal maturation sequence. In
 production and release so that more oxygen can be carried
humans with polycythemia vera, an abnormal proliferation
to the tissues. Generalized hypoxia and hypoxemia (reduced
of neutrophils and platelets often accompanies erythrocyte
Paoz) may be seen in animals with severe chronic heart
proliferation, resulting in leukocytosis and thrombocytosis.
or lung disease. Congenital heart disorders that result in
An abnormal proliferation of cells other than red blood cells
shunting of blood away from the lungs are associated more
is rarely observed in domestic animals; thus, in dogs and
often with polycythemia than in acquired heart disease.
cats, the disorder probably should be referred to as primary 
Severe lung disease also may result in hypoxemia, but it
must be of chronic duration to induce polycythemia. Other
cythemia vera
 i aa    a  ss
The presence of an acquired recurrent mutation within
alveolar hypoventilation, and severe obesity. Polycythemia
the JAK2 gene has been identified in 90% of human patients 
associated with hypoxia without hypoxemia occurs in
with polycythemia vera. This mutation (V617F) is located in
 people with certain rare, inherited hemoglobinopathies, but 
the pseudokinase domain of JAK2, leading to constitutive 
these conditions have not been reported in domestic
activation of the kinase responsible for the polycythemia.
animals. Acquired chronic hemoglobinopathies (e.g. car-
Detection of the mutation is a major diagnostic tool in
humans for polycythemia vera diagnosis. Identical muta-
soning or methemoglobinemia) may induce polycythemia
tions of the JAK2 gene giving rise to active JAK2 kinase have
as well.
been shown in dogs with polycythemia vera, suggesting a
Secondary absolute polycythemia caused by hypoxemia is
common mechanism for the human and canine disease.
diagnosed by detecting decreased Paoz and oxygen satura-
While the disorder continues to be diagnosed by excluding
tion. The reference interval for Paoz varies somewhat with
other causes of polycythemia, it is likely that detection of
the altitude. At sea level, the lower end of the reference
the mutation will soon be used for diagnosis. Most cases of
interval is 80mmHg. and oxygen saturation is 92%: at
primary polycythermia in domestic animals have been
approximately 6000 feet above sea level, the lower end of
reported in dogs and cats, but a few have been reported in
the reference interval is 74mm Hg. Usually. the Paoz must
horses, cattle, and a llama.
be less than 60 mm Hg to induce polycythemia. Imaging of 
the heart and lungs as well as other diagnostic procedures
to detect cardiopulmonary disease can then be used to estab-
Clinical findings
lish a more definitive diagnosis.
Clinical findings may be secondary to the underlying cause
Secondary absolute polycythemia caused by
of the polycythemia or may result from the increased
increased erythropoietin production
number of erythrocytes per se. In animals with relative
(physiologically inappropriate polycythemia)
polycythemia, dehydration or excitement may be clinically
 Physiologically inappropriate polycythemia occurs when
evident. In animals with secondary absolute polycythemia
erythropoietin production is increased in the absence of
caused by hypoxia, clinical signs associated with congenital
 generalized tissue hypoxia. Erythropoietin production may
heart disease (e.g. murmurs, cyanosis) or with pulmonary
be increased in patients with renal lesions (usually tumors
disease (e.g., cyanosis, dyspnea, abnormal lung sounds) may
that induce localized renal hypoxia). Increased production
be observed. In animals with secondary absolute polycythe-
of erythropoietin or of an erythropoietin-like substance by
mia caused by  inappropriate erythropoietin production,
nonrenal tumors such as hepatoblastomas also may occur.
clinical signs associated with renal disease often are not
but this is rare. Animals with physiologically inappropriate
apparent.
polycythemia have normal to slightly decreased Paoz and
Clinical signs associated with erythrocytosis are secondary
oxygen saturation. Mild hypoxermia may be present as a
to increased blood volume and viscosity. They include deep-
red mucous membranes, sometimes with slight cyanosis.
serum erythropoietin concentration. Other diagnostic pro-
Increased blood viscosity may result in sluggish blood flow
cedures to evaluate the kidneys. such as imaging. renal
and subsequent decreased tissue perfusion and oxygen
aspiration cytology or biopsy. and urinalysis, should be
transport as well as hemorrhage and thrombosis. Mild to
performed.
severe central nervous system signs associated with decreased
115
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
oxygen transport, such as lethargy. ataxia, blindness, or sei-
etin concentrations appear to be more useful in dogs than
zures, also may be observed. Polyuria and polydipsia
in cats. If secondary polycythemia caused by inappropriate
occasionally are reported and are thought to result from
erythropoietin production is excluded, then the likely diag-
impaired release of vasopressin release. Splenomegaly rarely
nosis is polycythemia vera.
is observed in domestic animals; however, human patients
Other laboratory findings are not particularly helpful.
commonly have splenomegaly, may have generalized pruri-
Affected humans commonly have neutrophilia and throm-
tis, and eventually may develop marrow fibrosis and lym-
bocytosis, but these findings are rare in domestic animals.
phoid neoplasia.
Neutrophilia associated with stress or inflammation is a
more likely finding. Other than mild increased cellularity
and mild erythroid hyperplasia, bone marrow aspirates
Diagnostic approach
usually are normal in appearance. Measuring total red cell
mass with a dye technique or radioisotope-labeled erythro-
When PCV is increased, one should consider if the patient
 cytes, though infrequently performed, can help to establish
is excited or dehydrated and then perform a second com-
a more definitive diagnosis.
plete blood count to confirm that the finding is repeatable.
If the total protein concentration also is increased, the poly-
cythemia likely is relative, secondary to dehydration and
Therapy
decreased plasma volume. Sometimes, however, animals
with rapid fluid shifts, such as those with gastrointestinal
Relative polycythemia is treated by therapy for the underly-
disease, may not have an increased total protein. Moreover.
ing disease and correction of dehydration with fluid therapy.
total protein may be decreased or normal in dehydrated
The underlying disorder also is treated in animals with sec-
animals that have decreased protein intake, production, or
 ondary polycythemia caused by hypoxemia or inappropriate
increased loss.
erythropoietin production. Phlebotomy may be contraindi-
 If relative polycythemia is excluded, secondary absolute
cated in animals with hypoxemia, because the erythrocyto-
polycythemia due to hypoxemia from congenital heart
sis is physiologic. If the PCV is very high in these patients.
disease or pulmonary disease should be considered. Hypox
however, then tissue perfusion may be impaired, and phle-
ermia is best diagnosed by performing an arterial blood
botomy may be helpful.
 gas analysis to determine the PaO, and oxygen saturation.
Primary polycythemia most commonly is treated—and
If the PaO, is less than 60mm Hg. then hypoxemia likely is
the cause of polycythemia. Imaging using thoracic radio-
botomy to maintain the PCV in the high-normal range.
graphic and ultrasonic examination will provide additional
 Injectable iron may need to be given to avoid iron-deficiency
information.
anemia. Chemotherapy to decrease red cell production also
 If hypoxemia is excluded, secondary absolute polycythe-
may be used; oral hydroxyurea is the most common such
 mia caused by increased erythropoietin production should
treatment. Dose and frequency are variable, depending on
be considered. Tumors of the kidney are the most common
the response. A reported complication in cats is methemo-
cause of increased erythropoietin production. In these cases.
 globinemia and Heinz-body anemia. Alternately, radioactive
imaging with renal ultrasonography or intravenous urogra-
phosphorus has been used with success in some cases. A
phy is indicated. Serum erythropoietin concentration usually
veterinary oncologist should be consulted for up-to-date
is increased in animals with hypoxemia or inappropriate
treatment options.
erythropoietin production and is normal to decreased in
animals with primary polycythe mia (Table 9.1 ). Erythropoi-
Table 9.1 PaO2 and erythropoietin in anirnals with polycythermia
Suggested reading
Polycythemia
PaO2
Erythropoietin
Axon JE, Russell CM, Begg AP, et al. (2008) Erythrocytosis and
pleural effusion associated with a hepatoblastoma in a Thorough-
 Relative
Normal 
 Normal 
bred yearling. Ausr Ver J 86: 329-33.
Secondary 
Beech J, Bloom JC, Hodge TG (1984) Erythrocytosis in a horse.
 Caused by hypoxemia 
Decreased
Increased
J Am Ver Med Assoc 1984; 18: 986-9.
 Caused by inappropriate
 Normal 
Increased
 Berlin NI, Lewis SM (20o0) Measurement of total RBC volume rela-
erythropoietin
tive to lean body mass for diagnosis of polycythemia. Am J Clin 
 production
Patho1 114: 922-6.
 Prirnary
 Normal 
 Normal or decreased 
Beurlet S, Krief P, Sansonetti A, Briend-Marchal A, et al. (20l1)
Identification of JAK2 mutations in canine primary polycythemia.
Exp Hemarol 39: 542-5.
116
CHAPTER 9 Classification of and Diagnostic Approach to Polycythemia
 Campbell KL (1 990) Diagnosis and management of polycythemia
McFarlane D, Sellon DC, Parker B (1998) Primary erythrocytosis in
in dogs. Compend Small Anim 12: 543-50.
a 2-year-old Arabian gelding. J Ver Inrerm Med 12: 3848.
Cook G, Divers TJ, Rowland PH (1995) Hypercalcemia and eryth-
McGrath CJ (1974) Polycythemia vera in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc
rocytosis in a mare associated with a metastatic carcinoma. Equine
164: 1117-22.
Ver J 27: 316-18.
 Nelson RW, Hager D, Zanjani ED (1983) Renal lymphosarcoma with
- a  1   d ' 
in appropriate erythropoietin production in a dog. J Am Ver Med
Assoc 182: 1396-7.
and anemic dogs and cats. J Ver Inrern Med 8: 18-25.
Page RL, Stiff M, McEntee MC, er al. (l990) Transient glomerulo-
Couto CG, Boudrieau RJ, Zanjani ED (l989) Tumor-associated
nephropathy associated with primary erythrocytosis in a dog.
erythrocytosis in a dog with nasal fibrosarcoma. J Ver Interm Med
J Am Ver Med Assoc 196: 620-2.
3: 183-5.
Peterson ME, Randolph JF (1982) Diagnosis of canine primary
Crow SE, Alen DP, Murphy CJ, er al. (l995) Concurrent renal
adenocarcinoma and polycythemia in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Assor 180: 415-18.
31: 29-33.
 Peterson ME, Zanjani ED (1981) Inappropriate erythropoietin pro-
Dumo AS, Webb JA, Gauthier MJ, er al. (20ll) Polycythemia and
duction from a renal carcinoma in a dog with polycythemia. J Am 
inappropriate erythropoietin concentrations in two dogs with
renal T-cell lymphoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 47: 122-8.
Reed C, Ling GV, Gould D, et al. (1970) Polycythemia vera in a cat.
Foster ES, Lothrup CD {l988) Polycythemia vera in a cat with
J Am Ver Med Assoc 157: 85-91.
cardiac hypertrophy. J Am Ver Med Assoc 192: 1736-8.
Roby KA, Beech J, Bloom JC, et al. (1990) Hepatocellular carcinoma
Gavaghan BJ, Kittleson MD, Decock H (200l) Eisenmenger's
 e u en Pe siaa  nse
complex in a Holstein-Friesian cow. Ausr Ver J 79: 37-40.
Gentz EJ, Pearson EG, Lassen ED, et al. (1994) Polycythemia in a
 Scott RC, Patmaik AK (1972) Renal carcinoma with secondary poly-
llama. J Am Ver Med Assoc 204: 1490-2.
cythemia in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 8: 275-83.
Gold JR, Warren AL, French TW, et al. (2008) What is your diagno-
Smith M, Turrell JM (1989) Radiophosphorus (*P) treatment of
bone marrow disorders in dogs: 1l cases {1970-1987). J Am Ver
Thoroughbred filly. Ver Clin Parho! 37(3): 339-43.
Med Assoc 194: 98-102.
Gorse MJ (1988) Polycythemia associated with renal fibrosarcoma
Swinney G, Jones BR, Kissling K (1992) A review of polycythemia
in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 192: 793-4.
vera in the cat. Ausr Ver Prarr 22: 60-6.
Hasler AH, Giger U (1 996) Serum erythropoietin values in polycy-
Takagi M, Takagaki K, Kamimura S, et al. (2006) Primary erythro-
themic cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 32: 294301.
o v pa  r i ase e  e  e u s
Kaneko JU, Zinkl J, Tennant BC, et al. (1968) Iron metabolism
Pathol Clin Med 53: 296-9.
in familial polycythemia of Jersey calves. Am J Ver Res 29:
Tennant B, Harrold D, Reina-Guerra M, et al. (l969) Arterial pH,
949-52.
Poz and Pcoz of calves with familial bovine polycythemia. Corne!!
Kessler M (2008) Secondary polycythaemia associated with high
Ver 59: 594-604.
plasma erythropoietin concentrations in a dog with a necrotising
 Thiele J, Kvasnicka HM, Muehlhausen K, et al. (2001 ) Polycythemia
pyelanephritis. J Small Anim Pract 49: 363-6.
rubra vera versus secondary polycythemias. A clinicopathological
Khanna C, Bienzle D (l994) Polycythemia vera in a cat: bone
evaluation of distinctive features in 199 patients. Parhol Res Pract
marrow culture in erythropoietin-deficient medium. J Am Anim
197: 77-84.
Hosp Assoc 30: 45-9.
Thiele J, Kvasnicka HM, Zankovich R, er al. (200l) The value of
Kirby D, Gillick A (1974) Polycythemia and tetralogy of Fallot in a
bone marrow histology in differentiating between early stage
cat. Can Ver J 15: 114-19.
 polycythemia vera and secondary (reactive) polycythemias. Hae-
Klainbart S, Segev G, Loeb E, er al. (2008) Resolution of renal
marologica 86: 368-74.
 adenocarcinoma-induced secondary inappropriate polycythaemia
Van Vonderen IK, Meyer HP, Kraus JS, Kooistra HS (1997) Polyuria
after nephrectomy in two cats. J Feline Med Surg 10: 2648.
and polydipsia and disturbed vasopresin release in two dogs with
Lane VM, Anderson BC, Bulgin MS (1983) Polycythemia and cya-
secondary polycythemia. J Ver Inrerm Med 1l: 300-3.
an u iuauas Aeuound ueu ose[dody um panenosse sso
Waters DJ, Preuter JC (1988) Secondary polycythemia associated
bovine heart. J Am Ver Med Assoc 183: 460-1.
with renal disease in the dog: two case reports and review of the 
Legendre AM, Appleford MD, Eyster GE, et al. (1974) Secondary
literature. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24: 109-14.
Watson ADJ, Moore AS, Helfand SC (1994) Primary erythrocytosis
ductus arteriosus in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 164: 1l98-1201.
in the cat: treatment with hydroxyurea. J Small Anim Pracr 35:
Lennox TI, Wilson JH, Hayden DW, er al. (2000) Hepatoblastoma
320-5.
with erythrocytosis in a young female horse. J Am Ver Med Assor
Weller RE (1985) Paraneoplastic disorders in dogs with hematopoj-
216: 718-21
etic tumors. Ver Clin Norrh Am Small Anim Pracr 15: 805-16.
117
Introduction to Leukocytes and
the Leukogram
Glade Weiser
Colorado State University
 Interpretation of leukocyte concentrations in blood provides
constrictions in the nuclear membrane. The band neutrophil
insight regarding potential processes that may be occurring
may be present in normal blood in small concentrations.
in the patient. The complete set of numeric data in the lel-
kocyte profile, along with any noted morphologic abnor-
with variable degrees of indentation and constriction along
malities, is known as the leukogram. An abnormalleukogram
its perimeter (Fig. l0.l). As the nucleus develops constric-
usually leads to identification of a pathologic process (e.g..
tions, it may fold into various shapes (Fig. 10.2). Neutrophils
inflammation), but not to establishment of a specific diag-
 have numerous small, very poorly stained granules. These
nosis. Interpretation of leukocyte abnormalities into a
vary among individual animals from colorless, invisible
granules to lightly staining granules. Neutrophilic granules
a diagnosis.
 of the cow often stain faintly pink, giving the cytoplasm a
 To interpret leukocyte patterns in disease, one must first
slightly orange-pink tint overall (Fig. 10.3). Neutrophils
learn the normal characteristics of the leukogram as a basis
observed in cytologic samples may on occasion have altered
for recognizing abnormal patterns. This chapter presents
staining of the neutrophilic granules. The granules may
background information regarding the normal leukogram
appear more prominent and stain pink. This change is most
that is necessary for building skills in its interpretation.
likely to be observed in neutrophils exudated in airway
samples.
Common blood leukocytes: General
Lymphocytes
functions and morphology
Blood lymphocytes represent a diverse set of lymphocyte
subpopulations, but these subpopulations cannot be distin-
This section reviews pertinent characteristics of blood lell-
guished by blood-film examination or by techniques rou-
kocytes, such as general functions and morphologic features.
tinely used in clinical veterinary laboratories. The
including species variations in morphology.
subpopulations include B lymphocytes, which are respon-
sible for humoral immunity, and T lymphocytes, which are
Neutrophils
responsible  for cell-mediated  immunity  and   cytokine
Neutrophils participate in inflammatory responses by means
responses. T lymphocytes may be further classified as
of chemoattraction into tissue sites of inflammation and
T-inducer (i.e., helper; CD4-bearing) cells and T-cytotoxic/
phagocytosis of organisms and other foreign material. After
suppressor (CD8-bearing) cells. Null cells are a third popula-
phagocytosis, lysosomal granules fuse with phagosomes to
tion present at small concentrations. Null cells consist of at
kill organisms and then degrade the material by enzymatic
least several lymphocyte subtypes, including large granular
digestion.
lymphocytes, natural killer cells, and other cells with killer
Neutrophil morphology is introduced in Figure 10.1. The
activity. Lymphocyte subtypes may be differentiated by
neutrophilic metamyelocyte is not present in normal blood.
surface immunoglobulin and cluster designation (i.e., CD)
It has a bean-shaped nucleus that, as it matures, changes to
markers; however, this technology is not yet part of the
the horseshoe shape that is characteristic of the band nell-
routine hemogram. These measurements are currently
trophil. The band nucleus has smooth, parallel sides and no
made in specialized laboratories, usually in cases of leukemia
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
118
CHAPTER 10 Introduction to Leukocytes and the Leukogram
M
B
B
Figure 10.1 Neutrophil maturation sequence commonly seen in blood.
Figure 10.3 Variation in normal lymphocyte morphology in commparison 
The segmented or mature neutrophil (S) has an irregular nuclear 
to neutrophils. In the left panel, note that the lymnphocyte nucleus may
membrane, with one or mmore constrictions. Note the srmall, faintly
vary fromm round to oval. The cell shape, including the nucleus, may be
 staining neutrophilic granules in the cytoplasm. The neutrophilic granules
indented by adjacent erythrocytes (thin arrows). The arnount of cytoplasrm
vary in prominence from animal to animal. The band neutrophil (B) has a
varies from virtually none to a modest armount. Lyrmphocytes in rmost
horseshoe-shaped nucleus with srmooth, parallel sides. The metamyelocyte
species have srmaller diarmeter than adjacent neutrophils (thick arrow). An 
(M) has a bean-shaped nucleus. (Wright's Giermsa stain, high
exception is indlicated in the right panel: Bovine lyrmphocytes (B) may be
magnification.)
larger in diameter than lymphocytes of other common species and may
have the sarme dliarmeter as that of adjacent neutrophils (arrowhead).
Note that the bovine neutrophil has slightly pink neutrophilic granules.
(Wright's Giemsa stain, high magnification.)
(see Chapter 13). Such laboratories may provide special
 procedures for quantitation of certain subpopulations (e.g..
B- and T-cell concentrations).
 Lymphocytes are recognized by a round to oval nucleus
and a minimal amount of clear, almost colorless cytoplasm.
The amount of cytoplasm may be variable, as illustrated in
     n 
diameters than those of neutrophils. In ruminants, lympho-
cytes may be more irregular in size and have diameters equal
to those of neutrophils (Fig. 10.3). Less common forms of
lymphocytes (Fig. 10.4). Reactive forms likely are B cells
capable of producing immunoglobulin. They have intensely
basophilic cytoplasm, and the nucleus may be more irregu-
Figure 10.2 Representative segrmented neutrophils illustrating variation
larly shaped. In addition, the nucleus may have a cleft or an
in nuclear shape. Segmmented neutrophils start with the horseshoe-shaped
armoeboid shape. Large reactive lymphocytes are observed
 nucleus of the band cell. As the neutrophil nucleus develops more
normally in juveniles of most species. Granular lymphocytes 
constrictions, it mmay mnore easily fold into various shapes. Note the
have a small number of pink-purple granules. These are
"S"—and horseshoe-shaped nuclei in the upper left. Then, note the 
large granular lymphocytes, some of which are thought to
various nuclear shapes that result from folding and superirnposition of
 be natural killer or T cells. Large granular lymphocytes are
the folded nucleus on itself. Cells are arranged in this figure with greater
 most commonly observed in normal ruminant blood.
cegrees of folding moving toward the bottom. (Wright's Giemsa stain,
high magnification.)
Monocytes
Monocytes also participate in inflammatory responses. Mono-
cytes in blood are regarded as intermediate on a continuum
119
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 10.4 Variations in lynphocytes less comrnonly seen in blood.
Figure 10.5 Variation in blood monocyte morphology: note the cells
The reactive lymphocyte (arrow) is characterized by royal-blue cytoplasm.
not marked by an arrow. Monocytes are typically larger than neutrophils
Its nuclear shape may be irregular, often with an indentation or cleft.
(arrow). Monocytes may have cytoplasnic vacuoles, but this is not
Large granular lymphocytes (arrowheads) have an increased arnount of
consistent. The monocyte nucleus is highly variable in shape: It may be 
light-staining cytoplasm, with a sparse sprinkling of azurophilic granules.
aousas.oy aq Aeuw l lo 'padeus ploqaoue ot padeus ueaq ol punal
The granules may vary in size. Large granular lymmphocytes are most
shaped and even segmented (like the nuclei of neutrophils).
yiy 'uiers eswai styou) sueuiunu jeuou ui uaas Auanbay
Inexperienced observers frequently confuse rmonocytes with horseshoe-
magnification.)
shaped nuclei for neutrophils. The consistent features of monocytes are
larger dliarmeter than an adjacent neutrophil (arrow) and darker blue-gray
 cytoplasrn compared with neutrophils. (Wright's Giernsa stain, high
magnification.)
of maturation. Monocytes migrate into tissues, where they
con tinue to develop into macrophages. Mononuclear phago
cytes may phagocytize bacteria, larger complex organisms
(e.g., yeast and protozoa), injured cells, cellular debris, and
foreign particulate debris. These cells play an important
immunoregulatory function by presenting processed antigen
to T lymphocytes. These cells are also responsible for normal
erythrocyte destruction, associated metabolic iron recycling.
and most pathologic erythrocyte destruction.
Monocytes are the most misidentified cell on blood films.
particularly in the veterinary hospital laboratory. The nucleus
may be of almost any shape, including oval, bean, ameboid.
or horseshoe shaped (like that of neutrophils). The chroma-
tin pattern may be slightly less condensed than that of neul-
trophils. The key distinguishing features are a larger diameter
and more grayish coloration to the cytoplasm compared
with adjacent neutrophils (Fig. 10.5). The cytoplasm may
contain extremely fine, light-purple granules. When uncer-
tainty exists regarding monocyte identification, view at low
power to make cell-to-cell comparisons (Fig. 10.6). At low
power, monocytes will stand out as larger cells. Species dif-
Figure 10.6 Low-magnification comparison of neutrophils and
ferences in monocyte morphology are not remarkable.
monocytes. When in doubt regarding identification of monocytes, use a 
lower magnification to make cell-to-cell comparisons that may be dlifficult 
Eosinophils
at higher magnification. Note that the two mmonocytes (thick arrows) have 
The functions of eosinophils are not well understood, even
larger diarmeters than the representative neutrophils indicated by thin
though a considerable number of studies and observations
arrows. A lymphocyte (arrowhead) is srmaller than the adjacent
have been reported. Eosinophils contain proteins that bind
neutrophils. (Wright's Giemsa stain, low magnification.)
120
CHAPTER 10 Introduction to Leukocytes and the Leukogram
B
Figure 10.8 Species variation in basophil mmorphology. A representative
neutrophils are shown for comparison (arrowheads). Eosinophils are
neutrophil is shown in the center for comparison. Basophils are larger in 
typically larger in diarmeter than neutrophils. Canine eosinophils are
diarmeter than neutrophils. Canine basophils (C) are poorly granulated.
shown in the top band (C). Note the variation in eosinophil granule size
 Note the sprinkling of basophilic granules in the cytoplasmn. Feline
in dogs, which also may have eosinophil granules that appear to dlissolve
basophils (F) have cytoplasm packed with large, poorly staining gray
during the staining process, leaving a clear space that resemmbles a
granules that are arranged like pavement stones. Large animal basophils 
cytoplasmic vacuole. Feline eosinophils are shown in the middle band (F).
(LA) have nummerous dark-staining granules that often obscure the
Eosinophil granules of the cat are shaped like barrels or short rods. The
nucleus. (Wright's Giemsa stain, high magnification.)
 sludouisoa lewue ahien umous se Auen Aeuu Aueinuenn aul jo Aisuap
are indicated in the bottom band. Equine eosinophils (E) have large.
brightly staining granules that may obscure the nucleus, whereas bovine
has bound immunoglobulin E, like mast cells; however, their
eosinophils (B) have smaller, brightly staining granules that are densely
pathophysiologic role in the circulation is unknown. No
packed within the cytoplasmn. (Wright's Giemsa stain, high magnification.)
convincing evidence has been reported that blood basophils
migrate into tissues and become tissue mast cells. Concen-
trations of basophils in the circulation are very low, and they
to and damage parasite membranes, and they are respon-
usually are not encountered in the routine differential
sible for providing a defense mechanism against larval
count.
stages of parasitic infestation. They are also involved in the
 Basophils are larger in diameter than neutrophils. The
 modulation of allergic inflammation and immune-complex
nucleus is segmented (like those of other granulocytes). The
rea ctions.
granule morphology varies among species (Fig. 10.8). Dogs
Eosinophils vary in morphology among species (Fig. 10.7).
have a small number of dark-violet granules. Cats have
 The nucleus is segrmented (like that of neutrophils). The hall-
large, faint-gray granules that form a pavement-stone
mark feature of eosinophils are prominent, red-orange gran-
arrangement. Large animal basophils are packed with dark-
ules that are tinctorally similar to erythrocytes. Canine
violet granules that are so numerous they often obscure
eosinophils have highly variable granule size and number per
portions of the nucleus.
cell. On rare occasions, a few large granules the size of eryth-
rocytes may be present. Eosinophil granules also may wash
Reference values: The normal leukogram
empty vacuole; this observation is most pronounced in grey-
hound dogs. Feline eosinophils are densely packed, with
The approach to interpretation of the leukogram involves a
uniform, rod- or barrel-shaped granules. Equine eosinophils
series of steps to arrive at a conclusion regarding what is
have a raspberry appearance because of numerous round.
normal or abnormal. Interpretive attention should focus
very large granules that usually obscure the nucleus. Rumi-
only on the absolute values within the differential count
nant eosinophils have uniform, numerous round granules.
(see Chapter 1). When examining the hematology report.
one should look first at the total leukocyte concentration.
Basophils
The total leukocyte concentration is only used to calculate
The function of basophils is, basically, unknown. Basophils
absolute differential concentrations; it is not directly inter-
contain histamine and heparin. The cytoplasmic membrane
121
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Table 10.1 Reference intervals for absolute leukocyte concentrations of commmon dormestic anirmal species.
Leukocyte
Dog
Cat
Horse
Cow
Sheep
Pig
Total WBC (cells/μL)
6000-17,000
5500-19.500
5500-12.500
4000-12,000
4000-12,000
11,000-22,000
 Differential WBC:
 Band neutrophils (cells/μL)
00E-0
00E-0
0-100
0-100
0-100
0-800
Segmented neutrophils (cells/μL)
3000-11,500
2500-12,500
2700-6700
600-4000
0009-002
3200-10,000
Lyrmphocytes (cells/μL)
1000-5000
1500-7000
1500-5500
2500-7000
2000-9000
4500-13.000
Monocytes (cells/μL)
0-1200
008-0
0-800
008-0
008-0
200-2000
 Eosinophils (cells/μL)
100-1200
0-1500
006-0
0-2400
0-1000
100-2000
 Basophils (cells/μL)
Rare, 0-100
 Rare, 0-100
0-200
0-200
00E-0
01400
WBC, white blood cell.
 gross guidance for what to anticipate when interpreting the
sis may provide more useful interpretive guidelines in the
differential concentrations. If the total count is decreased,
future.
examine the absolute concentration of each cell type to
The clinician interprets leukocyte abnormalities by learn-
determine which are deficient. If the total count is increased.
ing to examine the individual differential leukocyte concen-
examine the absolute concentration of each cell type to
trations and then noting any morphologic abnormalities or
determine which are present in excess. Even if the total
abnormal cell types currently present that should not be
concentration is normal, examine the absolute concentra-
present in normal blood. Differential leukocyte concentra-
tion of each cell type to determine if any abnormalities in
distribution are present. Identified abnormalities in the
Abnormal nucleated cells include blasts, nucleated erythro-
absolute concentrations of individual leukocyte types are
cytes, mast cells, and immature granulocytes. Morphologic
abnormalities include inherited and transiently acquired
 Reference values are given in Table 10.l. These values are
patterned after general guidelines that that have been used
Chapter 12.
for decades (from the original work of Schalm) and are
similar to those used by most veterinary laboratories. A
more comprehensive, population-based set of reference
Suggested reading
intervals generated by newer technology for automated cell
oen auos ui aup uaq seu su papaau si suo
Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ (eds.) (2010) Schalm's Vererinary Hemarology.
hospital laboratories for specific automated systems used in
6th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
the respective settings. Improved precision of automated cell
Lee GR, Bithell TC, Foerster J, Athens JW, Lukens JN (eds.) (1993)
counting as well as improved procedures for statistical analy-
Wintrobe's Clinica! Hemarology. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
122
Neutrophil Production, Trafficking.
and Kinetics
Glade Weiser
 Colorado State University
General trends regarding the trafficking and kinetics of nel-
The myeloblast is the first recognizable cell that is com-
trophils in blood have been observed. Although species dif-
ferences are not well characterized, they appear to be
to distinguish from primitive blasts of most other lineages.
unimportant. An understanding of these behaviors by neu-
Once committed, the myeloblast produces primary (i.e., azl-
trophils helps to interpret the timing of responses to disease
rophilic) granules, the presence of which identifies the pro-
and the sequential changes between hemograms.
granulocyte stage. At subsequent stages of maturation, the
primary granules change their staining character and become
indistinguishable in conventional blood stains. In the next
Production of granulocytes
stage, the myelocyte begins to produce secondary (i.e., spe-
cific) granules that identify whether the cell will be a neu-
Neutrophils are produced almost exclusively in the active
trophil, eosinophil, or basophil. Historically, the naming of 
bone marrow of healthy, adult domestic animals. Some pro-
the specific granules and the cell type has related to the dye
duction may be found in extramedullary sites, most notably
the spleen, in juvenile animals. With long-standing increased
specific granule. Neutrophil granules have neutral staining
demand for neutrophils (e.g. in chronic inflammatory
affinity: because of poor dye affinity, the granules are very
disease). extramedullary production may be observed in
faint or not visible. Eosinophil granules have an affinity for
adult animals. This will be most prominent in the spleen,
the orange-red dye and stain intensely orange-red. Basophil
sapou ydual pue iaall aui ui uaas aq osie Aeu il inq
 granules have affinity for basic dyes and stain intensely dark
Neutrophils originate from the pluripotential stem cell
violet. Myeloblasts, progranulocytes, and myelocytes have
system, which gives rise to a more differentiated stem cell
the ability to undergo cell division as well as to mature from
that has the capacity to create granulocytes and monocytes
one stage to the next. These stages are relatively rich in
(GM stem cells). A subpopulation of these GM stem cells
ribosomes, giving the cytoplasm a bluish tint. Nuclear fea-
enters a pathway of committed differentiation of blood gran-
tures include round to oval shape and relatively fine chro-
ulocytes, consisting of neutrophils, eosinophils, and baso-
matin pattern.
phils. The stem cells are not morphologically distinct, beca use
 More mature stages are characterized by the loss of ability
they are present in small numbers and are probably morpho-
to undergo cell division and include metamyelocytes, bands.
logically indistinguishable from lymphocytes. Once a cell
and segmented neutrophils. Maturation consists mostly of
makes this entry commitment, it undergoes both proliferative
progressive nuclear condensation and change in nuclear
and maturational events to propagate blood granulocytes.
shape. The cytoplasm loses most or all of its bluish tint as
These proliferative and maturational events are associated
the ribosome content decreases. The metamyelocyte has a
with morphologically recognized stages of gran ulocytes. Rec-
nucleus that has developed an indentation. The band cell
ognition of the general progression of these stages is impor-
nucleus forms a horseshoe shape and has smooth. parallel
tant in the evaluation of bone marrow samples and the
nuclear membranes. The segmented or mature neutrophil
identification of cells in bloodin response to disease. The mor-
progressively develops indentations or constrictions in the
phologic stages of granulocytes are indicated in Figure 1l.1.
nuclear membrane. See Chapter 10.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
123
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Production Events
MorphologicEvents
Myeloblast
Myeloblast
Proliferation
Progranulocyte
Primary granule
and
formation
Maturation
Specific granule
Myelocyte
formation:
Neutrophil
Eosinophil
Basophil
Metamyelocyte
Maturation
Progressive
Only
Band
nuclear
segmentation
Segmentedneutrophil
Figure 11.2 Orderly production of neutrophils in bone marrow. Note
the progressive increase in relative cell nummbers as maturation progresses.
Figure 11.1 Morphologic features of stages of
 neutrophil maturation.
The myeloblast may give rise to approximately 16-32 cells before
Six morphologic stages are identified on a continuum of maturation, a5
proliferative ability is lost. Cell stages above the dashed line are capable 
indicated by the nammed cells. Cells capable of both cell division and
of cel division; cell stages below the dashed line are only capable of
maturation are at the top: cells capable of maturation only are at the
maturation. Please refer to Figure 11 .1 for reference to cell stages.
bottom. Major changes associated with maturation are indicated on the
right. (See text for a more complete description.)
Stem Cell
 System
Maturation and orderly production
Proliferative
Pool
Myeloblast
Production normally results in a progressive increase in the
6
Progranulocyte
Po
relative numbers of more mature stages. as indicated in
Myelocyte
Figure ll.2. This results from the combined events of pro-
3
liferating early forms, which amplify both the number of
?
Maturation &
cells and the progress toward more mature stages. In the
Storage
5
Pool
Metamyelocyte
Band neutrophll
32 segmented neutrophils. The pattern of production seen
Neutrophll
in the marrow is a mixture of a relatively small number of
primitive cells, a larger number of interrmediate stages, and
numerous more mature stages. This progression of a few
immature cells to many more mature cells is described as
Pools
orderly production. Both normal production and accelerated
production in response to increased granulocyte demand
have this orderly appearance. Cells are also delivered to
Clrculating
Marginating
Tissues
the blood in this orderly fashion (see the discussion of
Bloc
Pool
Pool
left shift in Chapter 12). Disorderly production is character-
ized by a disproportionate relative number of primitive
forms and a relative decrease or absence of more mature
Figure 11.3 Bone marrow and blood neutrophil pools. Single arrows
indicate unidirectional moverment of cells; double arrow indicates
forms. Disorderly production is one of the features used to
identify certain pathologic patterns (e.g., myeloproliferative
bidirectional movement of cells. (See text for description of various 
 compartments and progress through them.)
disorders).
bone marrow, blood, and tissues, as depicted in Figure 1l.3.
Neutrophil pools and trafficking
The bone marrow compartment may be conceptually divided
into a stem cell pool, a proliferative pool, and a maturation
To understand neutrophil responses in disease, it is helpful
and storage pool. The proliferative pool consists of neutro-
to visualize a set of compartments and pools consisting of
phils at stages during which they still have the ability to
124
CHAPTER 11 Neutrophil Production, Traffcking. and Kinetics
undergo cell division and is largely responsible for the ampli-
Klnetlcs
Aegulation
fication of cell numbers. The maturation and storage pool
Stem Cell
IL-3. ~ 6, -11
consists of cells having no ability to divide and that are
System
CSF
completing morphologic maturation. These cells may accu-
Prolferatlve
Pool
mulate to create a modest storage reserve that is variable in
Transt Tlme
Myeloblast
CSF
size, which depends on the species. The storage capacity is
Progranulocyte
7-10 days (normally)
Myelo
greatest in dogs, least in ruminants, and intermediate in cats
and horses.
(Decreaeed wlth
Maturatlon &
Intlan
fuoe
Pool
CSF
Neutrophils make a unidirectional migration to the blood
IL-3
Metarmyelocyte
compartment, which is divided into the circulating and mar-
Band neuiroph
gination pools. The circulating pool is located in large vessels
Neutrophil
CSF
in which no interaction normally occurs between neutro-
I1.,-1
TNF, LIF
phils and the endothelial lining of the vessel. Blood samples
Circulating Marginating
Tissue Space
taken by venipuncture are from the circulating pool. The
Circulatior
Pool
Half-life
Pool
margination pool consists of the microcirculation. Cells may
6-10hours
endothelial migra
move bidirectionally berween the circulating and margin-
ation pools. Neutrophils interact with the endothelial lining
Figure 11.4 Bone marrow and blood neutrophil pools. Kinetic
 of small vessels and capillaries by their property of stickiness.
information is given on the left and regulation information on the right.
Neutrophils may then unidirectionally migrate into adjacent 
Neutrophil production is regulated by a concert of growth factors and 
tissue spaces (i.e., the tissue compartment). It is in the tissue
cytokines that act at multiple sites. The transit time is normally 7-10 days
-i  u d s n r
but may be shortened with increased demmand. The circulation half-life is
defense purposes.
approximately 6-10 hours.
All neutrophil responses in disease may be understood as
being mechanisms and disturbances occurring in this set of
pools. They are discussed in detail in Chapter 12.
responsible for marked acceleration of the events to produce
neutrophils in response to inflammation. This may result in
Growth factors and regulation of
a dramatic increase in neutrophil production and delivery
 production and blood concentration
to blood. Migration into the site of inflammation is acceler-
ated and focused by chemoattractants that are released in
In health, the concentration of neutrophils in the blood is
the inflammatory lesion. The net result is an increase in the
regulated to stay within a relatively narrow range compared
flux of neutrophils from the bone marrow to the inflamma-
with the range that is possible in disease. Regulation of pro-
tory lesion. After resolution of the inflammatory lesion,
duction is mediated by a complicated set of cytokines and
blood neutrophil concentrations return to normal. This sug-
growth factors, a simplified version of which is shown in
gests the presence of some negative-feedback mechanism,
Figure ll.4. The family of cytokines and growth factors
but its nature is currently unknown.
depicted in Figure ll.4 work in concert at various stages to
regulate neutrophil production. Colony-stimulating factor
(CSF) is a group of characterized molecules: most notable
Neutrophil kinetics
are granulocyte-CSF and GM-CSF. These factors originate
from numerous and diverse sites, including mononuclear
Some basic information about the kinetics of neutrophils in
cells, endothelium, fibroblasts, and other cell types. Mono-
various pools is helpful in the interpretation of sequential
nuclear cells at sites of inflammation are probably the most 
changes in the leukogram. The transit time for production
important source of CsF and may modulate the release of
and the circulation time in blood are the two key bench-
CSFs from the other cell types. Interleukins (ILs) also par-
marks for neutrophil kinetics.
ticipate in stimulation of production. The release of neutro-
The transit time is the amount of time needed for the
phils from the marrow space to blood may be accelerated by
myeloblast to complete the maturational events and become
 IL-1, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and leukocytosis-inducing
a segmented neutrophil in blood (see Fig. ll.4). In the
factor (LIF). Because of variation in experimental conditions
normal steady state, the transit time is approximately 7 days.
and methods, LIF may be the same as IL-l and TNF.
When the bone marrow is stimulated by the inflammatory
 In the normal steady state, production is balanced by the
response, the transit time may become as short as 2-3 days.
transendothelial migration of neutrophils into tissues. This
The circulation time is the amount of time between release
balance yields blood neutrophil concentrations in the normal
of the neutrophil to the blood and its subsequent egress into
range. Increased levels of growth factors and cytokines are
tissues. Neutrophils randomly migrate into tissues, so their
125
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
circulation time is variable and not related to cell age. The
circulation time is approximately 6-10 hours, encompassing
Suggested reading
some species variation. This means that the blood neutrophil
Athens JW (1993) Granulocytesneutrophils. In: Lee GR, er al.
The circulation time may be shortened considerably when
Winrrobe's Clinical Hematology. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger.
neutrophils are consumed at a more rapid rate (e.g., at a site
pp.223-66.
of inflammation). Given the rapid rate of blood neutrophil
Quesenberry PJ, Colein GA (200l) Hematopoietic stem cells, pro-
renewal in blood, marked changes in the blood neutrophil 
genitor cells, and cytokines. In: Beutler E, et al. William's Hematof-
ogy. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 153-74.
Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ (eds) (2010) Schalm's Veterinary Hemarology.
The magnitude of these changes in the cell concentration
6th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
that may be observed on hemograms sampled only hours
apart is often dramatic and surprising.
126
12
Interpretation of Leukocyte
Responses in Disease
Glade Weiser
Colorado State University
To communicate about leukocyte responses, one must first
Left shift
become familiar with the descriptive terminology associated
Left shift refers to an increased concentration of immature
with abnormal patterns of cell concentrations in blood. To
neutrophils in blood. This usually indicates band neutro-
identify and interpret leukocyte responses, the rules for
phils, but metamyelocytes and earlier forms may accompany
interpreting abnormal concentration patterns as indicators
increased bands. (See Fig. 10.l for neutrophil and left-shift
of disease processes must be learned. This chapter presents
morphology.) A left shift may occur with neutrophilia. A left
terminology. abnormal morphologic features encountered in
shift also may occur with neutropenia; this indicates a more
the laboratory, and guidelines for interpretation of leukocyte
severe consumption of neutrophils by a more aggressive
patterns.
inflammatory lesion or an early repopulation of blood fol-
lowing a reversible stem cell injury. An orderly left shift
suggests an inflammatory stimulus; in this case, the term
orderly means that the concentration of each cell stage
Terminology of abnormal leukocyte
decreases with the degree of immaturity of the cell stage.
concentration patterns
Leukemia
Suffixes
Leukemia refers to the presence of neoplastic cells in the
 Abnormal concentrations are described using a variety of
circulation. The neoplastic cell type that is present designates
suffixes attached to the name of the cell type(s) involved.
more specifically the classification of the leukemia present.
The suffix -penia refers to a decreased concentration of
The classification may be determined by a combination of
the cell type in blood. A general term, cytopenia, refers to a
cell population morphologic differentiation features seen on
 decrease in cell concentration in a nonspecific manner.
the blood film, surface marker cytometry panels, and immu-
Cytopenias that are important for interpretation include
nocytochemistry reactions (see Chapter 13). Examples
neutropenia, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia. Cytopenia
include myelomonocytic leukemia and lymphocytic leuke-
mia. The concentration of neoplastic cells may vary from
tration of this cell type is not important. It also does not
detectable on blood film scanning to extremely high.
apply to band neutrophils. metamyelocytes, basophils.
metarubricytes, and other abnormal cells because the
Proliferative disorder
 absence of these cells is normal.
Proliferative disorder is a nonspecific term for a hematopoietic
The suffixes -philia or -cytosis refer to an increased con-
cell neoplasm that is distributed in blood, bone marrow, other
centration of the cell type in blood. Examples include:
tissues, or a combination of these and other sites. Prolifera-
● neutrophilia or neutrophilic leukocytosis
tive disorders are classifed into lymphoproliferative and
· eosinophilia
myeloproliferative categories. The distinction between the
· basophilia
lymphoid and bone marrow stem cell systems is somewhat
·monocytosis
artificial, but these two classes of proliferative disorders have
· lymphocytosis
different biologic behavior and case management prognosis.
· metarubricytosis.
Proliferative disorders are discussed separately in Chapter 14.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
127
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Lymphoproliferative Disorders
Myeloproliferative Disorder
 Differentiation Pathways
 cell dlffe
Lymphosarcoma or
Lymphocytic
Myeloma
Erythrold
Granulocytlc
Megakaryocytlc
Osteoblastlc &
Leukemia
monocytlc
flbroblastlc
Lymphoma
Neoplastlc process conflned to
solldtlsuos
Assoclated Termlnology Based on Morphologlc Dlfferentlatlon
pooq o
Poorly dlferentlated leukemla
Figure 12.1 Organization and general terminology for
Retlculoendothellosls (cats)
lyrnphoproliferative disorders. See text for discussion.
Erythremkc
Granulocytle or
myelosls
myelomonocytlc
eukemla
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Megakaryocytlc
Osteosclerosls &
Lymphoproliferative disorders, which are characterized in
eukemla
myeloflbrosls
Figure 12.1, are neoplastic processes with lymphoid cell dif-
Figure 12.2 Organization and general terminology for
ferentiation. If the neoplasm is confined to solid tissues, it is
myeloproliferative dlisorders. The top box shows general differentiation
termed lymphosarcoma or lymphoma. If it involves blood
Woog ayl sabeaull in paziubonau Aleibojoydliouu uo paseg sAemyied 
and/or bone marrow, it is termed lymphocytic leukemia. A
box shows historical and commonly applied terminology for the
specific form with plasma cell differentiation is termed
myeloproliferative disordlers based on morphologic icdentity. See text for
myeloma, which is usually associated with production of a
discu5ssion
monoclonal immunoglobulin that may be detected in blood.
Immunoglobulin light chains also may be detected in urine.
More extensive and detailed classifications of lymphoprolif-
antibody labeling to identify either cytoplasmic activities or
erative disorders based on cellular morphology and immu-
surface markers to aid in classification. Furthermore, these
nophenotyping are available (see Chapters 13 and 14 and
tools may be used to determine lymphocytic subpopulation
Suggested Reading)
identification. This is the subject of Chapter 13.
Myeloproliferative disorders
Myeloproliferative disorders arise from the bone marrow
Acquired changes in leukocyte morphology
stem cell system. More extensive and detailed classifications
neutrophil toxic change
of myeloproliferative disorders based on cellular morphol-
ogy and surface markers are available (se Chapter 13 and
Neutrophil toxic change may be observed in association with
14 and Suggested Reading). The recognized lines of differ-
inflammatory responses. The term toxic change is unfortu-
entiation and associated terminology for specific myelopro-
nate, because it originated from early observations that these
liferative disorders are detailed in Figure l2.2. Note that
alterations in cell morphology were associated with toxemia
in human patients. The term implies that the cells are injured
liferative disorders than for lymphoproliferative disorders.
or impaired. Today. however, we understand that the mor-
Granulocytic, monocytic, and erythroid differentiations are
phologic change is attributable to altered bone marrow pro-
the most common myeloproliferative disorders; the others
duction and that the cells have normal function. When an
are rare.
inflammatory stimulus is delivered to the bone marrow (see
 In recent years, it has become apparent that confirmation
Fig. ll.4), neutrophils are produced at an accelerated rate.
of lymphoproliferative disorders or identification of cell
As a result, the cells may have increased amounts of certain
uo a pl i ssp aad u al
organelles that are present during early development. The
Occasionally, the distinction between reactive and neoplastic
principal manifestation is cytoplasmic basophilia (Fig. 12.3).
lymphoid proliferation is difficult. Primitive blasts having no
This is attributable to a larger-than-normal complement of
specific differentia ting morphologic features may be difficult
ribosomes. Other, less common manifestations accompany-
to impossible to classify by morphology alone. These are often
ing cytoplasmic basophilia include Dohle bodies and cyto-
called lymphoid on initial examination. It has been learned
plasmic vacuolation. Dohle bodies are aggregates of
that lymphoid, monocytic. granulocytic, and megakaryocytic
endoplasmic reticulum and appear as gray-blue cytoplasmic
blasts can be morphologically indistinguishable. Immunocy-
precipitates. Dohle bodies are seen more commonly in cats
(Fig. 12.3).
lineage when it is important for treatment considerations.
  r i  n n  a
These procedures use panels of chemistry reactions and/or
made under conditions of accelerated production that occurs
128
CHAPTER 12 Interpretation of Leukocyte Responses in Disease
Figure 12.3 Neutrophils with marked toxic change (arrows). Note
Figure 12.4 Neutrophils with hypersegrmentation (arrows). Note the
prominent cytoplasmnic basophilia. A Dohle body is indicated by the thin
arrow. A toxic neutrophil with fine cytoplasmmic vacuolation is shown in 
5-7 chromatin lobes. Wright-Giemsa stain, high mmagnification
the lower right inset. For comparison, a norrnal neutrophil is shown in 
the upper left inset. Wright-Giemsa stain, high magnification
as part of the inflammatory response. As a result, toxic
change often accompanies other quantitative changes in the
inflammatory leukogram presented later in this chapter.
Neutrophil hypersegmentation
 Neutrophil hypersegmentation is the normal progression of 
nuclear maturation in the neutrophil. The progression from
band shape to segmentation to hypersegmentation is a con-
tinuum that occurs in a matter of hours. Normally. the
process of continued segmentation and, finally, pylknosis
occurs in neutrophils after egression to tissues. Hyperseg-
mentation observed on the blood film results from
longer than normal retention of neutrophils in the circula-
tion (Fig. 12.4). The interpretation of hypersegmentation is
relatively unimportant (it is usually associated with steroid
Figure 12.5 Neutrophil degeneration. The left panel shows neutrophil
effect on the leukogram presented in this chapter).
(arrow) degeneration on a blood film that is an artifact of aging in the
collection tube before blood-film preparation. Note the swollen chromatin 
that results in lighter staining and loss of chromatin cletail. The right
Neutrophil degeneration
panel shows neutrophils in various stages of degeneration in a cytologic
Neutrophil degeneration is a description ordinarily applied
preparation. This results from an unhealthy environment that is created.
to neutrophils from samples other than blood (e.g.. cytopa-
in part, by numerous bacteria (thin arrows). A neutrophil with chromatin
thologic specimens). Neutrophils exposed to an unhealthy
swelling and loss of detail is indicated by the arrowhead. Wright-Giemsa
environment outside of blood may rapidly degenerate. This
stain, high magnification.
is accelerated in cytopathologic specimens, which either
have a bacterial component or are frorm epithelial surfaces
the animal (Fig. 12.5). In blood, it therefore is interpreted
such as skin, airways, or the gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 12.5).
as an artifact of improper sample handling.
Features include cytoplasmic vacuolation and nuclear swell-
ing seen as a loss of chromatin pattern and light staining.
Leukocyte agglutination
These changes may progress to cell lysis. It is an artifact in
Leukocyte agglutination is an immunoglobulin-mediated
blood seen on the blood film if that film is made from blood
agglutination of leukocytes in vitro. It may affect either
that has aged for l2 hours or longer after collection from
neutrophils or lymphocytes. This phenomenon does not
129
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 12.6 Leukoagglutination involving lynphocytes. Note the tight
Figure 12.7 Granulocytes from a dog with Pelger-Huet anormaly. Four
adlherence of cells in a cluster. Multiple clusters are observable at low
hyposegmented neutrophils (thick arrow) are present. The lower right
magnification. These cell clusters result in falsely low white-blood-cell
inset shows a hyposegrnented eosinophil. A macroplatelet, present by
counts when present in the counting fluid diluent (see text). Wright-
coincidence, is indicated by the thin arrow. Wright-Giemsa stain, high
Giemnsa stain, high magnification.
magnification
occur in the animal at body temperature, and it likely has
Pelger-Huet anomaly
no pathologic consequence in vivo. It is thought to be attrib-
Mature. hyposegmented neutrophils are seen in hetero-
utable to a cold-reacting immunoglobulin that acts at tem-
Zygotes for Pelger-Huet anomaly. These cells have an imma-
peratures well below body temperature. When the blood
turely shaped nucleus (i.e., band or myelocyte form) but a
cools to room temperature or below, this abnormal immu-
coarse, mature chromatin pattern (Fig. 12.7). Neutrophils
noglobulin binds to its leukocyte target and bridges cells into
function normally. and affected animals are healthy. Typi-
agglutinated particles. It therefore occurs in the blood tube
cally, no segmented neutrophils are seen in blood films from
after collection from the patient. Its importance is that it
these animals. Eosinophils are also affected and appear as
may result in a falsely low total white-blood-cell concentra-
band forms. The importance of recognizing Pelger-Huet
tion, because agglutinated leukocytes may not be counted
anomaly is to prevent misidentification of a major left shift 
by instruments. It is observed on scanning the blood film
and misinterpretation as an inflammatory response in an
(Fig. 12.6).
otherwise apparently healthy, affected individual.
Lymphocyte vacuolation
Birman cat neutrophil granulation anomaly
Lymphocyte vacuolation may be an acquired change associ
Neutrophils from affected cats contain fine eosinophilic to
ated with ingestion of certain plants containing the toxic
magenta-colored granules (Fig. 12.8). This anomaly is inher-
substance swainsonine. An example is locoweed ingestion
ited in an autosomal recessive manner. Neutrophil function
in horses or cattle. The appearance is similar to that of lym-
is normal, and cats are healthy. This granulation must be
phocyte vacuolation associated with inherited storage disor-
distinguished from toxic granulation, which is rare, and
ders (discussed later; see Fig. 12.11).
charidosis, which usually is more coarse.
Inherited abnormalities of leukocyte
Mucopolysaccharidoses
morphology and function
Neutrophils from  animals with mucopolysaccharidosis
(MPS) typically contain numerous distinct, dark-purple or
 Inherited abnormalities of neutrophil morphology
magenta-colored granules (Fig. 12.9). Lymphocytes also
and/or function
usually contain granules and vacuoles.
 Inherited abnormalities of neutrophil morphology include
 Mucopolysaccharidosis is a group of heritable, lysosomal
Pelger-Huet anomaly. Birman cat neutrophil granulation
storage disorders caused by a deficiency of lysosomal
anomaly, mucopolysaccharidoses, and Chédiak-Higashi
enzymes needed for the stepwise degradation of glycosami-
syndrome.
noglycans (i.e., mucopolysaccharides). Common features
130
CHAPTER 12 Interpretation of Leukocyte Responses in Disease
Figure 12.8 Granulated neutrophil from a cat with Birman cat
Figure 12.10 Neutrophil from a cat with Chédiak-Higashi syndrorme
neutrophil granulation anomaly (arrow). The lower left inset shows an
Note the large eosinophilic granule in the cytoplasm (arrowhead).
enlarged view of the sarme cell. Note the fine granulation as compared
Wright-Giermsa stain, high magnification.
ae (peaymome) sasoydu (a zl biy aas) sisopeypesodonu ym
not affected. Wright-Giermsa stain, high magnification
stained with Diff-Quik. The disease is progressive, with clini-
cal signs becoming apparent at 2-4 months of age. Affected
animals may live several years, but locomotor difficulty is
progressive.
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Neutrophils in cats affected by Chédiak-Higashi syndrome
have large. fused, 2.0-mm lysosomes that stain lightly pink
or eosinophilic within the cytoplasm (Fig. 12.10). Approxi-
mately one in three or four neutrophils contain one to four
fused lysosomes. Eosinophilic granules appear slightly plump
and large. These cats have a slight tendency to bleed, because
platelet function is abnormal. Although neutrophil function
is also abnormal, cats are generally healthy. The syndrome
has been reported in cats of Persian ancestry and is inherited 
in an autosomal recessive manner.
Bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency (BLAD)
Bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency is a lethal, autosomal
Figure 12.9 Granulated leukocytes from a cat with mucopoly-
recessive disorder identified in Holstein cattle. The defect is
 saccharidosis Vl. Note the prominently granulated neutrophils at the left
a mutation in the CD 18 gene. This results in neutrophils
and center. A lyrmphocyte with sparse granulation is typical of
with a deficiency of beta-2 integrin surface molecules that
are essential for normal leukocyte adherence and emigration
into tissues; hence there is a functional defect. Clinical signs
of "poor doing" appear at 1-2 weeks of age. Affected calves
include dwarfism (except feline MPs I), severe bone disease.
may appear stunted and have signs related to respiratory
degenerative joint disease including hip subluxation, facial
and gastrointestinal tracts. They are predisposed to recurring
dysmorphia, hepatomegaly (except feline MPs VI). corneal
bacterial infections and typically do not live beyond 2-8
clouding, enlarged tongue (canine MPs), heart-valve thick-
months of age. A hematologic feature is marked, persistent
ening. excess urinary excretion of glycosaminoglycans, and
neutrophilia (often >l0o,000/μL) with no left shift. On
metachromatic granules (i.e., Alder-Reilly bodies) in blood
examination of tissues, there are few neutrophils, except
leukocytes. These granules are more distinct in MPs VI and
within vessel lumens, because they persist in the circulation
VII than in MPs I. Granules usually are not apparent when
and have impaired entry into the tissues. Testing is available
131
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 12.11 Cytoplasmic vacuolation of a lyrmphocyte (arrow) from a
Figure 12.12 Leukocytes from a cat with Gm2 gangliosidosis.
cat with a lysosomal storage disorder (alpha-mannosidosis). Wright-
 Neutrophils (arrow) may have granulation similar to that seen with
 Giermsa stain, high magnification.
 mucopolysaccharidosis. Lymphocytes (arrowhead) also have srmall 
numbers of granules with some degree of cytoplasmic vacuolation. The
 lower right inset shows an enlarged lymphocyte. Wright-Giermsa 5stain.,
to detect carriers. Incidence of the defect is decreasing due
high magnification.
to testing for the carrier state and removal of carriers from
breeding stock.
Stem Cell
Hyperplasia:
Inherited abnormalities of lymphocyte
System
lncreased production
morphology
Toxic change
Proliferative
Cytoplasmic vacuolization is the most significant inherited
Pool
Myeloblast
abnormality of lymphocytes and usually is associated with
Progranulocyte
Myelocyte
lysosomal storage disorders (Fig. 12.ll). Those lysosomal
storage diseases described in domestic animals that result in
Maturation &
vacuoles within the cytoplasm of lymphocytes include the
Storage
Release of reserve:
Pool
Metanmyelocyte
*Storage pool - neutrophilia
MPS (also have granules in neutrophils); Gmi and Gmz gan-
Neutrophil
*Maturing cells - left shift
 gliosidosis (Gmz gangliosidosis also has granules in lympho-
cytes and neutrophils) (Fig. 12.12): alpha-mannosidosis;
Niemann-Pick types A, B, and C; acid-lipase deficiency: and
fucosidosis. All these disorders, except for MPS and acid-
lipase deficiency, result in severe, progressive neurologic
nflammatorykesior
disease that is ultimately fatal.
Circulating
sumption
Pool
ool
Interpretation of leukocyte responses
Figure 12.13 Modified neutrophil trafficking mmodel illustrating effects
Perspective
 of the inflarnmatory response on blood and bone marrow. Note the cycle
 Most leukocyte response patterns are not interpreted into
of events leading to increased neutrophil delivery to blood and tissues at 
the inflammatory site: release of medliators frorm an inflarnmatory lesion,
specific diagnoses, although leukemias may be an exception.
increased marrow hyperplasia, increased delivery from marrow to blood,
 and increased consumption at the site of inflarmation.
ring in the animal. These processes must then be coupled
with other clinical information to work toward a clinical
diagnosis.
response is best understood by considering a modified nel-
trophil trafficking model (Fig. 12.13). It also may be helpful
Hematologic response to inflammation
to review the steady-state neutrophil trafficking model in
Inflammation is the most important—and one of the most
Chapter ll (see Fig. ll.3). When inflammation is estab-
common—blood leukocyte responses. The nature of the
 lished, an orchestra of chemical mediators modulates many
132
CHAPTER 12 Interpretation of Leukocyte Responses in Disease
Balance of Dynamics Determining
Stem Cell
Blood Neutrophil Concentration
System
Proliferative
Pool
byeloblast
Marrow Delivery Rate
Dod
Progranulocyte
Myelocyte
Blood Example:
Maturation &
Storage
White blood cells 35,000 cells/μL
Pool
Metamyelocyte
Band neutrophil
*Bands
 3000 cells/μL
*Neutrophils
30,000 cells/μL
Lymphocytes
1200 cells/μL
*Monocytes
800 cells/μL
Tissue
Consumption
Rate
Figure 12.14 Balance between production and consumption. All
Circulating
Marginating
Tissues
inflammatory processes may be understood as a balance between marrow
Pool
Pool
dlelivery and inflarnmatory-site consurmption. When marrow cdelivery exceeds 
consumption, blood neutrophilia develops. When tissue consumption
exceeds marrow delivery, neutropenia with a left shift dlevelops
Figure 12.15 Modified neutrophil trafficking model used to illustrate a
moderate inflarnmatory response. Also illustrated is an exarmple of the 
balance between production and consumption. Note that in this case,
events. Vasodilation and chemotactic substances work to
marrow delivery exceeds tissue consumption. The example is described a5
increase the egress of neutrophils from the local marginated
leukocytosis caused by neutrophilia (30,000 cells/μL) and a left shift (3000
pool into the inflammatory lesion. Cytokines released from
bands/μL). The neutrophil pattern is interpreted as inflarmmmation.
local mononuclear cells (see Fig. ll.4) make their way to
the bone marrow, where they increase the rate of release of
maturing neutrophils and the rate of production by increas-
ing stem-cell entry. proliferative events, and maturation
Stem Cell
events. The net result is that the marrow response dramati-
System
 cally increases the delivery rate of neutrophils to blood. In
Proliferative
summary, a complete cycle of consumption, production, and
Pool
release is activated, with the goal of delivering a supply of
hyeloblast
Myelocyte
Progranulocyte
neutrophils to the inflammatory lesion until it resolves.
oa
The pa ttern of neutrophil concentrations seen in blood may
Blood Example:
Maturation &
helpful to think of the pattern being dependent on a balance
Storage
Metamyelocyte
White blood cells
1500 cells/μL
between consumption by the lesion and production and
Pool
Band neutrophil
*Metamyelocytes
300 cells/μL
release by the marrow (Fig. 12.14). This balance may explain
Neutrophil
*Bands
500 cells/μL
+Neutrophils
 500 cells/μL
all neutrophil concentration patterns encountered during
*Lymphocytes
200 cells/μL
inflammation. In small animals, most inflammatory processes
result in some degree of neutrophilia, indicating that marrow
releases more cells to blood than are consumed at the site of
inflammation. This is illustrated using the neutrophil traffick-
Circulating
Tissues
Pool
ing in neutrophilia maybe regardedas mild to severe responses
that are managing the lesion. The severity of the process may
be roughly predicted by the magnitude of the left shift and
Figure 12.16 Modified neutrophil trafficking model used to illustrate a
the presence of toxic change in neutrophils.
severe inflarnmatory response. Also illustrated is an example of the 
Very severe—and typically acute—inflammatory lesions,
balance between production and consumption. Note that in this case,
on the other hand, may consume neutrophils more rapidly
tissue consumption exceeds mmarrow delivery. The example is described as
than the neutrophils can be delivered to blood. When this
leukopenia caused by neutropenia (500 cells/μL) and a left shift (300
occurs, neutropenia develops, as shown in the neutrophil
metarmyelocytes/μL and 500 bands/μL). The neutrophil pattern is
trafficking model in Figure 12.l6. In this case, a left shift is
interpreted as severe, acute infl armmation.
133
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
as a medical emergency in dogs: to some extent, this is also
Table 12.1 Comparative bone marrow contribution to neutrophil
 traficking and relationship to ranges of neutrophilia seen with the 
true in cats and horses. Neutropenia in cows is interpreted
 inflarnmatory response in various species.
differently. Because of the minimal neutrophil reserve in
this species, the expected response in the acute bovine
Species
Marrow Reserve
Regenerative
inflammatory leukogram is neutropenia. Acute inflamma-
Capacity
tory lesions in cows consume neutrophils from the blood
Dog
Relatively high
Rapid
and marrow within a matter of hours. The result may be
Cat
Intermediate
Interrediate
profound neutropenia that lasts for a few days. After that
Horse
Intermediate
Intermediate
time, repopulation of blood with neutrophils, with a left 
Cow
 Relatively low
 Slow
shift, occurs as the marrow production increases.
Species
 Range of Possible Neutrophilia
(neutrophils/μL)
Factors modulating the magnitude of
Dog
20,000-120,000
neutrophilia in the inflammatory response
1e3
20,000-60,000
The type of inflammatory lesion may influence the balance
Horse
15,000-30,000
between consumption and marrow release. Acute inflam-
Cow
10,000-25,000
mation is a lesion with increased local blood flow and swell-
ing. This results from inflammatory mediators that promote
Species
Interpretation of Neutropenia
 During Acute Inflammation
local vascular dilation. Chemotactic factors released within
Dog
Very severe lesion
the lesion in conjunction with the vascular events have
Cat
Very severe lesion
ample opportunity to promote consumption of neutrophils.
Horse
Probable severe lesion
An example is cellulitis associated with a bite wound, which
Cow
 Usual findings, regardlless of severity 
results in a balance between consumption and production
that is reasonably well matched. The blood inflammatory
pattern then consists of mild to moderate neutrophilia with
a variable left shift, depending on the severity of the lesion.
Acute peritonitis due to gut rupture is an example of a major
consumer of neutrophils that may exceed the marrow
capacity for production; in this example, it is possible to see
expected. At one or more time points, the concentration of
neutropenia with a prominent left shift.
bands and other left shift cells may be greater than that of
Chronic, walled-off inflammatory lesions, on the other
segmented neutrophils.
hand, may result in very high neutrophil concentrations.
The balance between neutrophil consumption and deliv-
Examples include pyometra in dogs or a chronic, walled-off
ery by bone marrow is affected by species differences, as
abscess that does not resolve. These are also known as
outlined in Table 12.1. Species may vary in the amount of
 closed-cavity inflammatory lesions (as opposed to diffuse
neutrophil reserve and in the proliferative capacity of the
inflammation; discussed above). These lesions continue to
marrow. Dogs have the largest reserve and the greatest
stimulate the marrow to achieve maximal production;
ability to produce neutrophils; cows and other ruminants
however, the rate of consumption is curtailed by the nature
form the other extreme. Cats and horses are somewhat
of the lesion, thus tipping the balance toward production
intermediate in their capacities to deliver cells to blood.
exceeding consumption. In these cases, neutrophil concen-
These differences translate into magnitudes of neutro-
trations may approach 70,000-120,000 cells/μL in dogs.
philia that can occur with inflammatory disease in each
species. They also influence how neutrophil concentrations
Excitement response: Epinephrine release
are interpreted with respect to chronicity and severity of the
The excitement response is an immediate change associated
process in various species. For example, in chronic, closed-
with epinephrine release and is also known as the "fight-or-
cavity inflammatory processes, neutrophilia may go as high
flight" response. Epinephrine release results in cardiovascu-
as 120,000 cells/μL in dogs. but a corresponding process in
lar events that, in turn, result in increased blood flow
cows will result in a maximum of approximately 25.000
through the microcirculation, particularly in muscle. Stren-
cells/μL. Cats and horses will be intermediate, as indicated
lous exercise just before bleeding may have the same effect.
in Table 12.1.
This results in a shift of leukocytes from the marginated pool
Similarly, bone marrow behavior influences how neutro-
to the circulating pool, as depicted in the neutrophil traffick-
penia is interpreted during acute inflammation. Because of
ing model (Fig. 12.17). On the leukogram, this manifests as
the canine ability to deliver cells to blood, neutropenia only
an approximate doubling of leukocytes and is noted in the
occurs with inflammatory states involving severe consump-
neutrophils and/or lymphocytes. Within the neutrophil pop-
tion. Neutropenia caused by inflammation may be regarded
ulation, no left shift occurs, because mature cells in the
134
CHAPTER 12 Interpretation of Leukocyte Responses in Disease
response may be detected in the leukogram by changes in
Stem Cell
 System
multiple cell types.
The most consistent change is lymphopenia. Steroids may
 Proliferative
induce lymphocyte apoptosis and may alter patterns of recir-
Pool
Myeloblast
culation. The second most consistent change is an approxi-
Progranulocyte
mate doubling of the circulating neutrophils. Steroids cause
Myelocyte
decreased stickiness and margination, resulting in slightly
longer than normal retention in the circulation. As a result.,
Maturation &
hypersegmentation may be observed. When the resting neu-
a1
Storage
Metamyelocyte
trophil concentration is in the upper 50th percentile of the
Pool
Band neutrophll
normal range, neutrophilia is expected. A left shift will not
Neutrophll 
occur unless inflammation is superimposed. Eosinopenia is
the next most consistent change. Monocytosis is variable.
but occurs most consistently in dogs. The importance of
interpreting the steroid leukogram is to look for an underly-
ing physiologic disturbance (if it has not yet been recog-
nized) and to avoid interpreting a simple steroid pattern as
inflammation. An inflammatory condition may frequently 
p0
Circulating
Marginating
Tissues
Pool
Pool
cause a combined inflammatory and steroid response. The
Blod
inflammatory component will take priority in determination
of the magnitude of neutrophilia and any associated left
Figure 12.17 Modified neutrophil trafficking model used to illustrate
shift. The steroid component may only recognizable by the
the exciterment response. Note that the change involves cell movement 
concurrent presence of lymphopenia.
from the marginating pool to the circulating pool, resulting in an
 Lastly, it is important to note that a steroid response not
approximate doubling of resting leukocyte concentrations. Marrow
being present in a very sick animal should prompt the con-
delivery and tissue consumption are unchanged.
sideration of hypoadrenocorticism (i.e., Addison disease).
Summary: Approach to neutrophilia
In summary. neutrophilia has three causes. Thus, it is useful
microcirculation being flushed to the circulating pool cause
to develop an orderly approach to looking at the leukogram
the neutrophilia.
The excitement response is recognized most frequently in
philia. The flowchart in Figure 12.18 develops this approach.
cats. Lymphocytosis up to a maximum of approximately
When neutrophilia is identified, one should next examine
20, 000 cells/μL is the prominent feature of the feline excite-
the leukogram for the presence of a left shift. If a left shift
ment response. Mature neutrophilia may occur if the resting
is present, the interpretation is inflammation. If a left shift
neutrophil concentration was at the upper end of normal
is not present, the lymphocyte concentration should be
before initiation of the excitement response. In large animals.
examined. If lymphopenia is found with a neutrophilia and
the excitement response is recognized in association with
no left shift, the interpretation is steroid response. If the
exercise before bleeding or events that may induce excite-
lymphocyte concentration is upper normal or increased
ment, such as trucking or movement through chutes for
within certain limits, the interpretation of excitement
blood collection. The excitement response is least common
response should be considered. Keep in mind that clear
in dogs. because this species is usually accustomed to physi-
neutrophilia with a left-shift inflammatory pattern may
cal handling related to blood collection.
have a superimposed steroid response; this is identified by
the presence of lymphopenia in conjunction with the nell-
Stress response: Corticosteroid release or
trophil inflammatory pattern.
administration
This is likely the most common leukocyte response. Physi-
Lymphocytosis
ologic stress is a body response mediated by release of adre-
Lymphocytosis has two common causes. The first is the
nocorticotropic hormone by the pituitary gland and resultant
excitement response (discussed above), and the second is
release of cortisol by the adrenal gland. This occurs in
lymphocytic leukemia. The approach to interpreting lym-
response to major systemic illnesses, metabolic disturbances.
phocytosis involves analysis of both cell concentration and
and pain. Examples of conditions eliciting the stress response
cell morphology (Fig. 12.19). The lymphocyte morphology
include renal failure, diabetic ketoacidosis, dehydration,
should be critically examined when lymphocytosis is present.
inflammatory disease, and pain associated with trauma. The
If the cell concentration is only modestly increased and the
135
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Neutrophilia
 possibility of excitement during blood collection also may be
helpful. When lymphocyte concentration is of this magni-
Step 1: Examlne data fo
tude with normal morphology. the confirmation of the diag-
oands & left shilf
Left Shift
nosis of leukemia is usually difficult. It involves exclusion
No Left Shift
and more extensive diagnostics; see Chapter 13. The higher
Step 2: Examlne
ymphocyte data
 the concentration, the greater the probability that the cause
Lymphs normal or
is a lymphoproliferative disorder with leukemia.
Lymphopenia
modestly increased
A common misconception is that lymphocytosis may
4
 occur with chronic inflammatory diseases. This concept
Inflammation
 Steroid
Excitement
likely is extrapolated from the knowledge that inflammatory
Response
Response
disease results in an immune system response that includes
lymphoid hyperplasia. This process does occur, but the
Combined Inflammation
expansion is confined to lymphoid tissues and rarely mani-
& Steroid Response
fests as lymphocytosis in blood. An exception is the chronic
Figure 12.18 Summary flow chart for interpretation of neutrophilias.
form of canine ehrlichiosis, which has been documented to
When neutrophilia is seen, the observer should examine the data for a
left shift (Step 1). If a left shift is present, then the interpretation is 
The monoclonal gammopathy is expected to be superim-
inflarnmation. If no left shift is present, then the observer should exammine
posed on an underlying polyclonal gammopathy. When the
the lymphocyte data (Step 2). Lyrnphopenia in conjunction with a mature
 neutrophilia indlicates a steroid response. If the lynphocyte concentration
lymphocytosis is examined, a high proportion of large gran-
ullar lymphocytes (see Fig. 10.4) may be observed. In dogs.
is normal to increased, an exciterment response should be considered.
Also, note that an inflarmmatory pattern may have a superimposed 
chronic ehrlichiosis should be considered with lymphocyte
steroid response that is recognized as lymphopenia occurring in
concentrations up to about 30,000 cells/μL.
conjunction with the inflarnmatory pattern.
 Abnormal lymphocyte morphology in conjunction with
lymphocytosis makes the diagnosis of leukemia less difficult.
Abnormal morphology generally means lymphocyte forms
Lymphocytosis
that are normally not found in blood. These cells have one
or more features of a cell undergoing proliferation, as
opposed to the small, resting lymphocyte that is ordinarily
Up to:
20,000 cells/μL- cats
> 20,000 cells/μL - cats
seen in blood (Fig. 12.20). These features may include a
12,000
Small, normal cells
    n r   
alcells
chromatin pattern resulting in a lighter-staining nucleus, a
visible nucleolus, and increased cytoplasm (Figs. 12.20 and
12.21). If cells with abnormal features for blood, e.g. pro-
ExcltementResponse
WellDlfferentlated
 Poorly-Differentlated
Lymphocytlc Leukemla
 Lymphocytlc Leukemla
lymphocytes and/or lymphoblasts, are present in the circula-
tion, leukemia is a diagnostic consideration even with
normal to mildly increased lymphocyte concentrations.
Lymphoproliferative disorders and lymphocytic leukemia
(anel)
Consicler Chronic
are presented in more detail in Chapter 14.
Canine Ehrlichiosis
Bovine persistent lymphocytosis may occur in cattle
 infected with bovine leukemia virus (BLV). Persistent lym-
This flow chart may be useful for distinguishing the excitement response
phocytosis is defined as a lymphocyte concentration of
 frorm lymmphocytic leukemmias based on lymphocyte concentration and 
 greater than 7500 cels/μL on two or more hermograms. The
morphology guicdelines. Inflarnmatory disease is rarely associated with
lymnphocytosis; however, chronic canine ehrlichiosis is an exception. See
of a continuum in BLV-infected cows that eventually may
text for discussion
 progress to a diagnosis of lymphocytic leukemia or lympho-
sarcoma. Historically. hemograms, with an emphasis on the
cells are morphologically small, normal-appearing lympho-
lymphocyte concentration, have been used as a screening
cytes, then an excitement response should be considered. As
test for BLV infection.
a guideline, this modest increase is suggested to be a lym-
Neutropenia
20,000 cells/μL in dogs and cats, respectively. If the concen-
Neutropenia resulting from acute inflammatory
trations exceed this guideline or the animal was not excited.
consumption
then a lymphocytic leukemia should be considered. Repeat-
Neutropenia resulting from overwhelming consumption by
ing the hemogram the next day while making note of the
an inflammatory lesion was discussed earlier (with the
136
CHAPTER 12 Interpretation of Leukocyte Responses in Disease
inflammatory response). Neutropenia resulting from con-
sumption is associated with a left shift. Toxic changes are
also expected within a few days of the onset of the process.
An alternative form of consumptive neutropenia is immune-
mediated neutropenia in which immunoglobulin that rec-
ognizes epitope(s) on the neutrophil surface or adsorbed
onto the surface results in destruction of both circulating
neutrophils and late stages of maturation within the marrow.
This may result in profound neutropenia not associated with
a demonstrable inflammatory lesion.
Neutropenia resulting from stem cell injuries
The various stem cell injuries may be considered modifica-
tions of the neutrophil trafficking model in Figure 12.22.
Stem cell injuries have numerous causes, ranging from very
acute, transient injury of variable duration to permanent.
irreversible injuries. Stem cell injuries are nonspecific in that 
Figure 12.20 Lymphocyte mmorphology in relationship to evaluation of
all cell lines of marrow are involved. Evidence of marrow
 yrmphocytosis. Norrnal blood lymphocyte mnorphology consists of smmall,
failure manifested in blood is related to the duration of the
resting lyrmphocytes (arrowhead). Note that the dliameter is less than that 
injury in relationship to the circulating time or life span of
of adjacent neutrophils, the chromatin is condensed, and cytoplasm is
 5cant. An abnormal lymphocyte (arrow) in blood suggests a
various cell types. Because neutrophils are renewed in blood
bymnphoproliferative disorder involving blood. Note the increased size,
most rapidly, neutropenia develops first with a stem cell injury.
 increased cytoplasm, and more fine chromatin pattern. This cell also ha5
Thrombocytopenia is seen second, because platelets last
 a visible nucleolar ring in the nucleus. Wright-Giemsa stain, high
magnification.
Stem Cell
System *
Rroliferative
Pool
的
Pool
Maturation &,
Storage/
Mood
Metamyelocyte
Band neufrophll
Neutrophll 
Pool
Blood
Circulating
Marginating
Tissues
Figure 12.21 The left pane shows large. abnormal lymphocytes (arrow)
Pool
Pool
from a dog with lyrmphoblastic leukemia (~70,000 lyrmphocytes/μL). Note 
the fine, granular chrommatin pattern as well as the occasional, faint
nucleoli and the large size. The right panel shows two lyrnphoblasts
(arrowheads) from a cat with lymphoblastic leukemia. Note the large cell 
Figure 12.22 Modified neutrophil trafficking model used to illustrate 
neutropenias caused by stem cell injury. Injury occurs to the stem cell 
size, fine chromatin pattern, and promminent nucleolar rings. Wright-
Giemsa stain, high magnification.
5ystem, which results in a lack of recruited cells to proceed through the 
proliferative and maturation stages. The end result is interruption in the 
supply of neutrophils to blood. Because tissue consumption is not
P uiyam snno Aeu sjood poolg aua ul euadanau punojoud 'paidnatu!
few clays or less.
137
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
approximately 7 days in the circulation. Nonregenerative
Neutropenia
anemia occurs last because of the relatively long erythrocyte
life span.
Not anemic
Neutropenia caused by reversible stem cell
injuries
Neo
Several acute, transient stem cell injuries are caused by the
tropism of viruses for rapidly dividing cells. Canine parvovi-
rus and feline panleukopenia are notable examples: these
Left Shift
NoL
tShift
Chronic Marrow
result in injury to intestinal lining. lymphoid cells, and the
Aunjul
bone marrow stem cell system. Profound neutropenia is
 Acute Inflammation
Acute Viral Infection
attributable to two mechanisms. First, stem cell injury results
Acute Marrow Injury
in transient failure of production. Second, neutrophil con-
Figure 12.23 Summary approach to interpretation of neutropenia. This
sumption increases at the site of gastrointestinal injury. The
flow chart may be useful for distinguishing the various causes of
stem cell injury involves all marrow cell lines, but is so
 neutropenia. When confronted with neutropenia, the observer should
transient that marrow repopulation occurs before thrombo-
first exarmine the platelet and erythrocyte data for evidence of production
cytopenia and nonregenerative anemia can develop. If
problerms. If these cellines appear to have normal production, then a
anemia is observed, it likely is caused by blood loss into the
 selective neutropenia is present. The observer should next exammine the
gastrointestinal tract. Acute neutropenia persists for only
data for a left shift. If a left shift is found, then the interpretation is5
24-48 hours. During the short period of neutropenia, a left
 severe, acute inflammation (e.g., 5ee Fig. 12.16). If no left shift is found,
shift is not observed. As the marrow repopulates, a left shift
then an acute failure to produce neutrophils should be considered (as in
with progressively increasing neutrophil concentration is
Fig. 12.22). If the neutropenia is accompanied by evidence of failure to
produce other cellines (e.g.. platelets and/or erythrocytes), then a more
observed. An inflammatory pattern, consisting of neutro-
chronic marrow injury should be considered. The presence of neoplastic
philia and left shift, is usually observed during recovery.
 cells may indicate an underlying hematopoietic cell neoplasm and is also
Reversible stem cell injury of varying duration also has
a possible cause of marrow failure. See text for discussion.
numerous causes. These generally are present for days or
longer; thus, varying degrees of thrombocytopenia and non-
regenerative anemia accompany the neutropenia. One
group of causes is chemicals or drugs that injure rapidly
combination of neutropenia, nonregenerative anemia, and
dividing cells. Most chemotherapeutic drugs are in this cat-
egory. Estrogen overdosage and phenylbutazone administra-
stem cell injuries are considered in detail in Chapter 13.
tion are characterized toxicities in dogs. Very high, repeated
doses of estradiol may cause stem cell injury in dogs, but not
Approach to neutropenia
in cats. Historically, an alternate form of a long-acting.
 The approach to interpretation of neutropenia is summa-
potent estrogen—estradiol cypionate—has been used to
rized in Figure 12.23. The observer should first determine if
prevent unwanted pregnancies in dogs. This drug has been
the neutropenia is associated with a left shift. If a prominent
used safely in small doses to treat incontinence. Naturally
left shift is observed with toxic change, then an inflamma-
occurring estrogen toxicity may occur in ferrets if ovulation
tory disease is the cause of the neutropenia. If no left shift
is not stimulated. Phenylbutazone, a common medication
is seen, then the other cell lines should be assessed. If any
for pain and lameness that is used safely in horses, may
combination of thrombocytopenia, nonregenerative anemia.
cause marked stem cell injury in dogs. An example of an
or evidence of hematopoietic cell neoplasia is found, then
infectious cause is ehrlichiosis in dogs: ehrlichiosis may
marrow injury should be considered.
induce cytopenias, possibly by an immune-mediated mecha-
nism that appears to act on cells in the marrow.
Lymphopenia
Lymphopenia is usually attributable to a steroid response;
Neutropenia caused by irreversible stem cell
injuries
infections induce lymphopenia that is accompanied by nel-
 This category of stem cell injury may be regarded as a con-
tropenia; however, neutropenia is the more important
tinuum of proliferative abnormalities of the bone marrow
 finding. Combined immunodeficiency syndrome of Arabian 
stem cell system. The underlying nature and mechanism
foals is an inherited disorder with severe deficiency of both
of these injuries are poorly understood. Causes include
T- and B-cell lymphocyte functions. The lymphocyte con-
infection with feline leukemia virus, idiopathic hypoprolif-
centration may be used as a screening test for this disorder
erative disorders, myelodysplasias, and myeloproliferative
in newborn Arabian foals. A lymphocyte concentration of
disorders. Because these are long-standing disorders, any
greater than loo0 cells/μL is a finding that rules out the
138
CHAPTER 12 Interpretation of Leukocyte Responses in Disease
disease. If lymphopenia is found, more confirmatory tests
MacEwen G (1989) Hematopoietic tumors. Feline lymphoma and
may be performed.
leukemias. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds.), Small Anima!
Clinical Oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp. 479-95.
Monocytosis
MacEwen EG, Young KM (1989) Hematopoietic tumors. Canine
Monocytosis is a relatively unimportant change. It may
lymphoma and lymphoid leukemias. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen
EG (eds.), Small Animal Clinical Oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB
accompany both acute and chronic inflammatory responses.
Saunders, pp. 451-77.
Monocytosis that accompanies an inflammatory response is
Madewell BR (1986) Hematological and bone marrow cytological
interpreted as a response to increased demand for mono-
abnormalities in 75 dogs with malignant lymphoma. J Am Anim
nuclear cells in tissues. Monocytes in blood are regarded as
Hosp Assoc 22: 235-40.
immature cells that become macrophages after migration to
Morison WB (1998) Plasma cell neoplasms. In: Morrison WB.
tissue sites. Monocytosis also may occur in the steroid
Cancer in dogs and cats: medical and surgical management. Baltimore:
response, particularly in dogs.
Williams & Wilkins, pp. 697704.
Thrall MA (1981) Lymphoproliferative disorders. Ver Clin North Am
Eosinophilia
11: 321-47.
Eosinophilia is interpreted as a nonspecific response that
Young KM, MacEwen EG (1989) Hematopoietic tumors. Canine
requires consideration of parasitism, hypersensitivity, or an
Small Animal Clinical Oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
unusual  lesion  producing eosinophil  chemoattractants.
pp. 495-505.
 Tissue-invading parasitisms are frequently associated with
eosinophilia. Notable examples include heartworm disease
Pelger-Huet anomaly
and hookworm infestation in dogs. Inflammation at epithe-
Latimer KS, Duncan JR, Kircher IM (1987) Nuclear segmentation,
lial surfaces rich in mast cells (e.g. skin, respiratory tract,
ultrastructure, and cytochemistry of blood cells from dogs with
gastrointestinal tract) may be associated with eosinophilia.
Pelger-Huet anomaly. J Comp Patho! 97: 6l-72.
particularly if a component of hypersensitivity is present.
Latimer KS, Rakich PM, Thompson DF (1985) Pelger-Huet anomaly
Examples include fleabite allergic dermatitis, inhalant aller-
in cats. Ver Patho! 22: 370-74.
gen disease or asthma-lilke syndromes, feline hypereosino-
philic syndromes, and poorly characterized gastroenteritis
Birman cat anomaly
that may have an allergic component.
phil granulation in Birman cats. Am J Ver Res 45: 2170-4.
Basophilia
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Basophilia is uncommon. In fact, basophils are so rare in
Kramer J, Davis WC, Prieur DJ, Baxter J, Norsworthy GD (1975)
normal animals that they usually are not encountered in the
An inherited disorder of Persian cats with intracytoplasmic inclu-
100-cell microscopy differential. The interpretation of baso-
sions in neutrophils. J Am Ver Med Assor 166: 1l03-4.
philia is unknown or not clear. It most frequently accompa-
nies eosinophilia. When this happens, it is described as
MPS, alpha-mannosidosis, and related anomalies
eosinophilia and basophilia, but it is eosinophilia that is
Alroy J, Freden GO, Goyal V, et al. (1989) Morphology of leukocytes
from cats affected with alpha-mannosidosis and mucopolysac-
interpreted as indicated earlier.
charidosis VI (MPS VI1). Ver Pathol 26: 294-302.
Haskins M, Giger U (1997) Lysosomal storage diseases. In: Kaneko
J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML (eds.), Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic
Suggested reading
Animals. 5th ed. New York: Academic Press, pp. 741-60.
Skelly BJ, Franklin RJM (2002) Recognition and diagnosis of lysosomal
General
storage diseases in the cat and dog. J Ver Intern Med 16: 133-41.
)
Warren CD, Alroy J (2000) Morphological, biochemical and molec-
6th ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
ular biology approaches for the diagnosis of lysosomal storage
diseases. J Ver Diagn Invesr 12: 483-96.
Leukemia and proliferative disorders
Jain NC (1993) Classification of myeloproliferative disorders in cats
Canine ehrlichiosis and lymphocytosis
using criteria proposed by the Animal Leukaemia Study Group:
Weiser MG, Thrall MA, Fulton R, et al. (1991) Granular lymphocy-
a retrospective study of 181 cases (1969-1992). Comp Haematol Int
       s
1: 125-34.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27: 848.
Jain NC, Blue JT, Grindem CB, et al. (1991) Proposed criteria for
classification of acute myeloid leukemias in dogs and cats—a report
Neutropenias
of the animal leukemia study group. Ver Clin Parho! 20: 63-82.
Brown MR, Rogers KS (2o0l) Neutropenia in dogs and cats: a ret-
Leifer CE, Matus RE (1985) Lymphoid leukemia in the dog: acute
rospective study of 261 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 37: 131-9.
lymphoblastic leukemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Vet
McManus PM, Litwin C, Barber L (1999) Immune-mediated neu-
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 15: 723-39.
tropenia in two dogs. J Ver Intern Med 13: 372-4.
139
13
Molecular Diagnostics of Hematologic
Malignancies
Anne Avery
Colorado State University
cell receptor for antigen is an antibody, and the T cell recep-
Clonality
The development of cancer is the result of a series of genetic
diversity, so only antibody genes will be discussed.
mutations that render a cell resistant to growth controls. The
The antigen combining regions of an antibody (the vari-
cell divides unchecked, resulting in a tumor mass that is
able region) is generated by bringing together three different
derived from that single original cell, and harboring the
genes—V (variable) genes, D (diversity) genes, and J (junc-
unique DNA sequences of the original cell. In most cancers.
tional) genes. In the dog. there are 80 variable regions genes
the unique DNA sequences consist of the genetic mutations
found on chromosome 8—each gene is approximately 200-
that resulted in the development of cancer—oncogenes. In
300 bases long. but the genes are separated by thousands of
addition to oncogenes, cancers of lymphocytes (lymphoma
bases of noncoding DNA. Dogs have 6 D genes, ranging from
and leukemia) have another form of unique DNA sequence.
12 to 30 bases, and 6 J genes of approximately 50 bases.2
During normal lymphocyte development, the genes that
The arrangement of the genes is shown schematically in
encode antigen receptors (immunoglobulin for B cells and
Figure 13.1.
T cell receptor for T cells) are assembled at random from a
The arrangement of genes in Figure 13.1 is called the germ
pool of gene segments. Therefore, the antigen receptor gene
line configuration. This is the arrangement of genes found
in each developing B and T cell is unique. When these cells
in all cells of the body except fully developed B cells. The
divide, as a result of antigenic stimulation or cancer, the
way that B cells alter this configuration is described next.
daughter cells inherit the unique antigen receptor genes.
During the development of a B cell, the V, D, and J genes
The detection of oncogenes and unique lymphocyte genes
of the antibody heavy chain are brought together so they
-Bu suaiap iog loi suep inaod Aiaa e sh saia
form one contiguous gene in a process called recombination.
nancy and  for making predictions about prognosis and
Recombination is essentially random, so that any V can be
trea tment.
combined with any D and any J. While V regions genes have
similar sequences, they are not identical. The same is true
Lymphocyte development and generation of
for D and J genes—they are similar to one another, but not
antigen receptor genes
identical.
In order to understand how the unique DNA sequences in
This random recombination alone creates a tremendous
lymphocytes can be used for diagnostic purposes, it is first
number of different genes, but in addition, nucleotides can
important to understand how these sequences are gener-
be added between segments during the process, or trimmed
ated. Lymphocytes develop in the bone marrow (B cells) and
from the ends of V, D, and J genes. The process is again
the thymus (T cells) from a lymphocyte precursor that is also
random. Thus any given B cell will have not only a unique
found in the bone marrow. The job of these cells is to iden-
concatenation of V, D, and J genes, but within this new gene
tify the millions of different foreign antigens carried by
will be further diversity as a result of nucleotides being
potential pathogens. In order to accomplish this, lympho-
added and trimmed. The end result is that virtually every
cytes have developed a system to generate enormous diver
newly developed B cell will carry a unique DNA sequence.
sity in the antigen binding portion of their receptors. The B
The length of the new VDJ gene will also be different because
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
140
CHAPTER 13 Molecular Diagnostics of Hematologic Malignancies
veterinarian because his submandibular lymph nodes are
A
swollen. The enlarged lymph nodes can be due to antigenic
stimulation by a heavy burden of oral pathogens. Other
clinical factors, however, may raise concern for lymphoma—
Vregion
D region
J genes
these can include age, breed, and cytologically suspicious
n -40
n=6
9-u
cells. In order to distinguish a purely reactive process from
a neoplastic one, it is possible to determine if the lympho-
B
DNA excision
cytes are mainly derived from a single clone (neoplastic) or
Nucleotide trimming
multiple lineages. The assay used to make this distinction is
Addition of nucleotides
called a clonality assay, and can also be called PARR (PCR
 for antigen receptor rearrangements).
Principles of the PARR assay
Figure 13.1 A. Arrangement of irmmunoglobulin gene segments on 
The PARR assay measures the size of all the VDJ genes in a
canine chromosome 8. There are approximately 40 functional variable
collection of lymphocytes. If all the lymphocytes have the
region gene segments (V, blue), 6 diversity segments (D. green), and
same sized VDJ gene, the lymphocytes are considered clonal.
approximately 6 joining segments (J. pink). Grey and dotted lines indicate
If, however, there are multiple sized VDJ genes, then the
noncoding DNA. This diagram is not to scale. Excerpted from Bao et af.2
B. When V, D, and Jregions genes rearrange, the resulting product is a
population is polyclonal. To accomplish this, DNA is extracted
from the lymphocyte in question—for example in the case
different length in each B cell because variable nummbers of nucleotides 
(purple) can be added during the joining process. Nucleotides could al50
above, a dog with enlarged submandibular nodes and dental
be trimmed from the ends of the V, D, and J segrents during the
disease, lymphocytes would be collected by aspiration from
proce55
the submandibular node. PCR primers that will amplify the
entire VDJ gene will be added as shown in Figure 13.2.
The resultant DNA products are separated by size using
of the addition and trimming of nucleotides. The same is
any one of a variety of methods. A dominant single sized
true for T cells, because the T cell receptor beta gene is also
product indicates that the population of cells was derived
cormprised of multiple V, D, and J genes. The antibody light 
from a single clone. On the other hand, the presence of
chain genes, and T cell receptor alpha, gamma, and delta
products of multiple sizes indicates that a heterogenous
 genes all undergo a similar process, with the exception that
population of lymphocytes is present, and the process is
none of these genes contains a D segment.3
most lilkely reactive. Figure 13.2 shows the results of the
Lymphocyte division
onstrate what each of these two results would look like. In
When mature lymphocytes with their unique antigen recep-
practice, only 1% of the cells in any given sample need to
tors encounter an antigen recognized by those receptors.
be neoplastic for the result to be interpreted as clonal. This
they are stimulated to divide. The progeny cells contain the
is because the remaining nonneoplastic cells are so hetero-
same antigen receptor gene. Similarly. if a lymphocyte
geneous that the PCR products from these varied cells are
becomes neoplastic at some time during its development and
outcompeted by homogeneous product from the neoplastic
divides unchecked, all of the progeny cells of this cancer will 
cell. This idea is not necessarily intuitive, but has been born
have the same antigen receptor gene.
olt experimentally.
The response to a pathogen will involve hundreds to
thousands of molecularly different B and T cells. This is
Interpretation and uses of PARR
beca use even the simplest pathogen is comprised of multiple
The PARR assay is used when there is suspicion of lym-
proteins, which can be recognized by the antigen receptors
phoma by cytology or histology. but not a definitive diagno-
of many different lymphocytes. Even a single protein has
sis. Some common reasons for carrying out the assay are:
many different antigenic structures, and can stimulate the
enlarged lymph nodes where the cytology or histology
division of multiple lymphocytes. Cancer, on the other hand.
cannot definitively conclude that lymphoma is present,
is characterized by the unrestricted division of a single cell.
pleural or peritoneal fluid characterized by occasional suspi-
called clonal proliferation. Thus a population of lymphocytes
cious looking cells, and the presence of atypical appearing
which are all the progeny of a single clone is most likely
 lymphocytes on a peripheral blood smear.
cancer, and a population of lymphocytes that have multiple
In most cases the assay is performed by using multiple sets
different types of cells (called polyclonal) is most lilkely reac-
of PCR primers—some of which detect antibody VDJ regions.
tive. The ability to distinguish a clonal from a polyclonal
and some of which detect T cell receptor genes. B cell lym-
phomas will be characterized by single sized PCR products
tions. For example, a dog with dental disease presents to his
when the antibody primers are used, but multiple products
141
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100105110115120125130135140145
2,500
2,000
1,500-
1,000
500-
40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100105110115120125130135140
C
10,000
9,000
8,000
000%
6,000
6
5,000
F
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
Number of bases
Figure 13.2 Placement of PCR primmers, and separation of PCR products by size. A. PCR primers placed as indicated by the arrows will amnplify multiple
sized PCR products when used on a reactive lymph node (B), and a single sized PCR product when used on a cells derived from a case of B cell
lyrnphoma (C). Sarmples are separated on the basis of size (x axis). The height of the peak (y axis) indicates the armount of the PCR product.
or no products at all when T cell receptor primers are used.
primers that the primers will not bind. If the patient's tumor
T cell lymphomas, conversely, will be characterized by single
uses one of these V or J genes, then no amplification of
sized products when T cell receptor primers are used, and
tumor DNA will be seen. Therefore, as with many tests, the
multiple or no products when antibody primers are used.
PARR assay cannot be used to rule out neoplasia, only to
Thus the nature of the clonal PCR product is a clue to the
 support a positive diagnosis.
lineage of the neoplasm. As with any assay, there are excep-
tions to this rule, but for the majority of cases, the clonally
rearranged gene reflects the lineage of the tumor. Plasma
Detection of oncogenes
cell tumors and multiple myeloma are B cell origin tumors
and will be positive with this assay.
Cancer involves a collection of mutations in the DNA of a
Not all cases of lymphoma and leukemia can be detected
 cell that accumulate as the cell divides. These mutations are
by PARR. This is because there are lilkely to be V and J
 generally found in genes that control the susceptibility to
regions genes whose sequences differ enough from the PCR
 cell death, or pathways that stimulate growth. They can be
142
CHAPTER 13 Molecular Diagnostics of Hematologic Malignancies
A
bcr
abl
DNA
e1
b1
b2
a1
a2
a3
a4
mRNA
cDNA
B
bcr-abl fusion gene
DNA
e1
a2
a3
a4
mRNA
cDNA
Figure 13.3 Translocation of the abl gene to the bcr gene creates a fusion gene which can be detected by PCR. A. In nonleukemnic cells, primers
located as indlicated (arrows) will not amplify any product, because they anneal to two distinct cDNAs. B. When bcr and abl are brought together by a
translocation event, the primers both anneal to the samme cDNA, and will armplify this product. E1, b1 etc. refer to exon numbers.
the result of single nucleotide mutations, duplications and
gene is duplicated, such that a given sequence is repeated in
 deletions within genes, and large scale chromosomal rear-
tandem. One of these mutations in found in exon 8, where
rangements. In human medicine, the presence of certain
a 12 base segment is duplicated, creating a slightly larger
oncogenes indicates a better or poorer prognosis. For
version of the gene.? The mutation is readily detectable by
example, some cases of acute myeloid leukemia in people
PCR amplification of exon 8, since it will result in a larger
are characterized by an internal tandem duplication of a
product. Figure 13.4 shows the placement of PCR primers.
protein called nucleophosmin.
and what the product will look like. Mast cell tumors will
 Detection of this mutation indicates a favorable prognosis.
also harbor internal tandem duplications in exon ll which
Detection of oncogenes can also be used to monitor treat-
can be detected the same way (Fig. 13.4).
ment using sensitive PCR methods. Almost all cases of
 Mast cell tumors do not usually present a diagnostic chal-
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in people carry the
lenge. but there are occasions where poorly granulated mast 
bcr-abl translocation. This translocation brings abl gene on
cell tumors might be difficult to distinguish from other
chromosome 9 next to the bcr gene on chromosome 22.
round cell neoplasms. In such cases the presence of a c-kit
creating a novel fusion gene called bcr-abl. The fusion gene
internal tandem duplication would help identify a round cell
can be detected by PCR using one primer that binds to the
tumor as mast cell in origin. The more common reason for
bcr gene, and another primer that binds to the abl gene. If
detecting this mutation, however, is to guide therapy. There
a product can be amplified using these two primers, the
are two types of chemotherapy protocols used for mast cells:
fusion gene is present (Fig. 13.3). This observation allows
antimicrotubule drug vinblastine coupled with corticoste-
for the monitoring of residual tumor cells after chemother-
roids, or one of different class of drugs. the tyrosine kinase
apy. and can detect as few as l tumor cell in a background
inhibitors. When the c-kit gene is mutated, resulting in
of a million normal cells.
permanent phosphorylation, tyrosine kinase inhibitors are
more effective than vinblastine. When there is no evidence
of a c-kit mutation, vinblastine is more effective. Thus detec-
Oncogenes in veterinary medicine
tion of the mutation has now become a routine part of the
Approximately 20% of canine mast cell tumors harbor a
diagnosis of mast cell tumors for owners who wish to pursue
mutation in a gene called c-kit.? C-kit is the tyrosine kinase
therapy for their dogs.
receptor for the growth factor called stem cell factor. The
Although there are currently no other diagnostics which
mutations, which fall into three different categories, result
employ the detection of oncogenes in companion animal
in the c-kit gene being permanently phosphorylated, result-
medicine, the presence of the bcr-abl translocation has been
ing in a constitutive "on" signal. Thus the cells continuously
demonstrated in two cases of chronic myelogenous leuke-
receive a growth signal.
mia.13 This finding opens the door for bcr-abl detection to
The most common mutations in this gene are called inter-
be used in the diagnosis of CML in dogs. Such a test would
nal tandem duplications, in which a small segment of the
be useful in establishing that a high, mature neutrophil
143
sEcTloNIl Hematology of Common DomesticSpecies
Exons 11,12
Exons 1-9
105 110 115120 125130 135140 145150 155 160 165170175
TM
Exons 13-21
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
wild typegene
4,000
2,000
0
105110115120125130 135140 145150 155160165170175
10,000
8,000
B
gene with ITD
6,000
4,000
2,0001
0f
32.7
172.6
Figure 13.4 PCR amplification of c-kit exon 11. The c-kit gene consists of 21 exons. Internal tandem duplications can be found in exons 11 or 12
(purple), and can be detected by PCR amplification using primers that surround these exons. A: Wild type c-kit gene and the PCR product resulting frormn
armplification of DNA from normal tissue, or a mast cell without the mutation. B: c-kit gene with ITD, and the PCR products resulting from armplification
of a mast cell tumor containing a mutated gene. Both wild type and larger products are visible, because nontumor cells are always included in clinical
sarmples, and because there is one wild type copy of c-kit in the tumor cells.
count is the result of CML rather than chronic infection—a
tially over a period of three years in one patient were all
distinction that at present can sometimes be hard to make.
derived from the same clone. Each time the tumor arose, it
was completely excised. The clinical implications of this
finding are that the original tumor was never completely
Uses of molecular diagnostics in research
eradicated, even though no evidence of the disease could be
detected between the three events.11
The PARR assay and detection of c-kit mutations have been
A refinement of the PARR assay has been used to detect
used to answer a number of clinical questions that provide
minimal residual disease (MRD) in patients with lymphoma.
insight into these diseases. These applications provide a
For MRD detection, the VDJ region genes are sequenced.
model for employing future tests that might become
and PCR primers made that will detect only the tumor-
available.
they will not bind to any VDJ region genes other than the
 One way in which both the PARR assay and c-kit detec-
one carried by the tumor, and are thus able to detect tumor
tion have been used is to compare the relatedness of two
d  n  as i  i 
tumors arising sequentially in the same patient. The PARR
is a prognostic exercise—patients with leukemia and lym-
assay was used to investigate a case of multiple myeloma in
phoma whose disease is eradicated (no MRD detected by
a dog which had previously been treated for B cell lym-
sensitive methods such as PARR) have a better prognosis.
phoma. Since both of these tumors are derived from B cells.
While MRD detection on a routine basis is probably cost
it was of interest to determine if the original lymphoma had
prohibitive in veterinary medicine, it may be useful for con-
differentiated into the plasma cell tumor, and this kind of
ducting clinical trials of new chemotherapies. A drug can be
progression had not yet been reported in the human or
assessed by its ability to reduce the tumor burden after treat-
veterinary literature. The PCR product of the VDJ region in
ment as assessed by MRD detection, rather than waiting a
both the B cell lymphoma and the myeloma were the same
year or more to determine remission and survival times.
size, suggesting the same clone gave rise to both tumors.
Sequencing subsequently confirmed this idea. Thus the
PARR assay uniquely identifies the clonal that gave rise to
Flow cytometry
a tumor, and can be used to investigate the relatedness of
 In the context of hematologic malignancy, flow cytometry
The internal tandem duplication in exon ll of the c-kit
is used to identify proteins on the surface of lymphocytes.
gene is slightly different in every tumor. This observation
although the technology has a large variety of other uses.
was used to show that three mast cell tumors arising sequen-
As discussed above, lymphoma and leukemia are the result
144
CHAPTER 13 Molecular Diagnostics of Hematologic Malignancies
of unchecked expansion of a single cell. The progeny cells
When a cell passes through the beam, several aspects of the
resemble the original cancerous clone. Therefore another
interaction between the cell and the light are recorded by
way to determine if a population of lymphocytes is neoplas-
detectors. First, the cell scatters light in several ways. The
tic would be to show they are all the same phenotype—all
forward light scatter is an estimate of the size of the cells—
B cells, CD4 T cells or CD8 T cells. This is not equivalent to
large cells produce greater forward light scatter. The com-
showing that the cells are all derived from the same clone.
plexity of a cell's cytoplasm is indicated by the side scatfer.
but in practical terms, homogenous expansion of a single
Cells such as eosinophils and neutrophils, with granular
lymphocyte subset is usually neoplastic, because reactive
cytoplasm, have high side scatter, whereas lymphocytes
processes will result in the expansion of many different
which have little cytoplasm, have low side scatter (Fig.
lymphocyte subtypes. Thus if the lymphocytes in a subman-
13.5).
dibular lymph node aspirate consist of 98% B cells. the
The other important parameter detected by the flow
process in that node is neoplastic. If the lymph node aspirate.
cytometer is the amount and color of the fluorescent mol-
however, consists of 30% B cells, 50% CD4 T cells and 20%
ecules bound to the cell. That characteristic is determined
CD8 T cells this finding is more consistent with some kind
by which, if any, monoclonal antibodies specific for CD
of reactive process—response to infection or autoimmune
antigens have bound. The laser light is a single wavelength
disease, or response to a metastatic tumor of nonlymphoid
of light, which excites the fluorescent dye. That dye then
origin.
as green, red, blue, etc. A detector records the amount of 
Cell surface antigens
fluorescence for each cell that passes in front of the laser.
and stores it together with forward and side-scatter informa-
Most proteins found on the surface of hematopoietic cells
tion. The amount of fluorescence is proportional to the
number of antibody molecules on the cell, which is propor-
tional to the number of CD proteins recognized by that
reflects the fact that different proteins are expressed at dif-
antibody. This principle is illustrated in Figure 13.5.
ferent points in the life of a cell). CD3, CD4, CD5, and CD8
are all proteins found on the surface of T cells, and were
among the earliest identified. CD2l and CD22 are proteins
Clinical applications of flow cytometry
found on B cells, but not on T cells. Monoclonal antibodies
 Flow cytormetry is most useful when you want to determine
specific for virtually all CD antigens are available for both
if an expanded population of lymphocytes is neoplastic
people and mice, and a significant repertoire is also available
(homogeneous) or reactive (heterogeneous). It can also
for dogs. horses, cattle, and sheep. There are fewer antibod-
provide prognostic information in some cases.
ies for cats. These antibodies are generally (but not always)
species specific—an antibody to canine CD4 will not recog-
nize feline CD4, and vice versa.
 In order to determine how many CD4 T cells, CD8 T cells.
Example 13.1. Homogeneous lymphocyte
 and B cells there are in any given collection of lymphocytes.
expansion
commercially available monoclonal antibodies are incubated
with the cells in question (for example cells from a lymph
An 8-year-old female spayed mixed breed dog presents with
node aspirate). The antibodies are conjugated to fluorescent
lethargy and inappetance. Her CBC shows mild anemia (PCV 38),
molecules which come in a large array of different colors.
normal neutrophil and monocyte counts, slightly elevated 
Thus if the antibody to CD4 is conjugated to a red molecule.
eosinophil counts, and a lymphocyte count of 10,0o0 cells/μL
cells that have red fluorescence are CD4+ T cells. If the anti-
Differentials for lymphocytosis in dogs include: lymphocytic 
body to CD8 is conjugated to a green molecule, cells that
leukemia or blood involvement of lymphoma, thymoma,
 have gren fluorescence are CD8+ T cells. A flow cytometer
 Addison's disease and Ehrlichia canis. Other causes of
is used to count the number of cells bearing different fluo-
Iymphocytosis in dogs are very rare.
rescent molecules, and the process of enumerating cells of
How cytometry is a good diagnostic test in this case, because
different subtypes is called immunophenotyping.
it will tell you the phenotype of the lymphocytes. The results
showed that 85% of the lymphocytes were CD8 T cells (resulting
in a CD8 T cell count of 8500 cells/μL, normal in dogs is
Principles of flow cytometry
450-1000 cells/μL) (Fig. 13.6). B cells and CD4 T cells were within
Flow cytometry is the analysis of cells and particles in liquid
normal range. This homogeneous expansion of CD& T cells is 
suspension. Flow cytometers are equipped with one or more
most consistent with T cell leukemia. In rare cases, Ehrtichia canis
lasers, which emit light of a single wavelength. The suspen-
can also cause this kind of CD8 T cell expansion, but E. canis can
sion to be analyzed is focused into a narrow stream which
easily be ruled out by serology
passes in front of the laser one particle or cell at a time.
145
Neutrophils
14
12
104
10
8
8
6
4
 neutrophils
2
103
01
100
101
102
103
104
CD4
102
catt
S
monocytes
Lymphocytes
10
48
lymphocytes
36
170
340
510
680
850
1023
12
Forward Scatter (size)
100
101
102
103
10
CD4-
Figure 13.5 A. Light scatter properties of canine peripheral blood. Each dot represents a cell, and each cell is plotted along the X and Y axes based on
their forward and sicde light scatter properties. Light scatter values do not have units. In this exarmple, forward scatter is a linear scale, and side scatter a
log scale. Side scatter is also often depicted on a linear scale. B. Expression of CD4 on neutrophils and lymphocytes. Peripheral blood was stained with 
anti-CD4 conjugated to a green fluorescent molecule. The level of fluorescence is shown on the x axis, and the height of the histograr indicates how 
aul anlisod ta ane youm jo lle isowle '( ui aluio pau ayl ui slian au) slldonau soys weosiy dot aul jaal reyt e anuansaion sin Aueu
bottom histograrn shows lyrnphocytes (green circle in A), approxirnately half of which express CD4.
10475.50%
104
1.05%
103
10
+
10
101
101
12.70%
10.75%
10°十
10°+
256
512
768
102
100
101
102
103
104
FS LIN
CD4
Figure 13.6 Flow cytommetry study of a case with CD8 T cell leukemia. The panel on the left indicates the light scatter properties of the peripheral 
blood, and the panel on the right indlicates staining for CD4 (x axis) and CD8 (y axis) on lymphocytes (green circle). The graph shows that the majority of 
jewou yoiu) 7n/sian oos jo punon g e ui bunsau '7n/slian ooe'll sem juaed siyn ui iunon aoydu ayl sllan 1 8a ane (%s's) satoyduk
CD8 count in dog5 is 1 000 cells/μL).
146
Example 13.2. Heterogeneous lymphocyte expansion
A dog presents as above (same signalment and blood work). In this
reactive or physiologic process. Addison's disease would be a
case, however, the results show that there are 2000Bcells/μL
consideration in this case, although there are likely other conditions
(0061 yby jewou) 7sla 1 ta 000t (7sla00 yby (e1ou)
which can cause reactive lymphocytosis in dogs which have not yet
 si aaui as s ul (oo yy lu) slan 1  oot pue
been defined. Thymoma would be less of a consideration in this
sn yhnouiiy siasgns aooudual le po uoisuedxa snoauaboaiau
case, because in thymoma, only CD4 and CD8 T cells are
finding doesn't rule out leukemia, it is more consistent with a
increased.
Example 13.3. Pleural effusion
A 10-year-old male neutered cat presents with a pleural effusion.
(Fig. 13.7), with an equal mixture of CD4 and CD8 T cells (not 
The effusion was not chylous but contained a very high number of
shown). This finding supports a reactive process, rather than a
small, mature lymphocytes. Flow cytometry on this fluid revealed
neoplastic one, because the population is heterogeneous.
that 47% of the lymphocytes were B cells, and 48% were T cells
Example 13.4. Cells with an abnormal phenotype
leukemia or lymphoma, despite the very mild lymphocyte 
and a lymphocyte count that is just outside the normal range
expansion. This result also illustrates a unique power of flow
(5500lymphocytes/μL). The remainder of the blood work is normal
cytometry—the ability to evaluate more than one antigen at a time
Flow cytometry shows that the dog has a population of T cells that
oy Injasn Aueined s! uoienieaa jo puly sul lin uaaib Aue uo
has an abnormal phenotype: these cells express the T cell antigen
establishing the presence of lymphoma or leukemia even when 
CD3, but do not express the pan-leukocyte antigen CD45. This is 
there is no lymphocyte expansion, and for detecting residual
aberrant phenotype is only associated with neoplasia and not with
neoplastic cells in treated patients (minimum residual disease
reactive processes and allows for a definitive diagnosis of T cell
detection).
104
10 147.33%
0.23%
103
103
50
5
102
102
10
10
4.50%
47.939
100
100
256
512
768
1024
100
101
102
103
104
 FS LIN
CD5
Figure 13.7 Flow cytometry from a cat with pleural effusion. The light scatter properties of the cells (left panel indicate they are mostly small 
A ayn uo (uabique ian g e) lzao-ue yam buuieis pue 'sixe x ayl uo (uabiue ian 1 e) sa-lue yhm buiuieis smoys iybu ayl uo jaued aul satroyduy
'ssanoid anoeal e 4lim juarsisuon aow s buipuy siul slian 1 pue a yiog jo suoodoud jenba ae aayt jeyl atenipui shupuy aul 'sixe
147
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Table 13.1 Examples of celular antigens useful for cytommetry and
Immunocytochemistry and cytochemistry
irmmmunocytochemistry in cell lineage identification. For technical
reasons, somme antibody reagents are typically limited to use in flow
As described above, flow cytometry is ideal for determina-
suoejdde ool ot pauwil aue auos pue (s+, Aq paiepui) Apawoio
tion of cell population marker profiles using marker specific
u! pazn aq Aeu 'uoeubisap ou yim 'siayho (.#, Ag pajeniun
antibodies when cells to be tested are present in a suspen-
either procedure. Laboratories should be consulted for specific
sion, such as blood or bone marrow. Cytometry also provides
 applications and interpretation5.
the advantage of quantitation of cell subpopulations in the
sample. However, on occasion it may be practical to quali-
Cell Type
Antigen Expression 
tatively evaluate marker profiles by microscopic examina-
T cells 
CD3, CD5*
T cell subsets
and cytochemistry. These techniques can be applied to air-
CD4*, CD8*
dried slides prepared from blood, bone marrow, and tissue
B cells 
CD20#, CD21*, CD79a, BLA.36
Monocytes
CD14*,CD18
aspirates. They may also be applied to histologic sections
 All leukocytes
CD45*
where the technique is termed immunohistochemistry.
 Antigen-presenting cells 
CD1
 All cells except neutrophils 
MHC II*
cell lineage in hematopoietic neoplasia, but can also be used
 Sterm/precursor cells
CD34
to aid characterization of normal cell types in unusual
Dendritic cells
CD1, CD11, CD18
animal species. The techniques can be used to determine cell
Neutrophils (canine)
CD4*, CD18
lineage that is indistinguishable by routine blood cell micros-
Megakaryocytes
CD41. CD61
copy: an example is the distinction between T- and
B-lymphocytes. The technique is also useful for determina-
tion of cellineage when the population is poorly differenti-
ated such that features typically present by routine
microscopy are absent. The determination of cell lineage is
Table 13.2 Examples of leukocyte cytochermical stains useful in cell
important for selecting tailored therapy and rendering prog-
lineage identification. Cells are typically positive for stains listed, and 
nosis. As experience in diagnosis and treatment of prolifera-
may be positive for stains in parentheses.
tive disorders grows. tailored therapy and prognosis
knowledge will be refined.
Cell Type
Expected Positive Stain 
(Possible Positive Stain)
should start with a routine morphologic evaluation, typically
  s      
 Neutrophils 
PER, SBB, CAE, PAS (ACP)
that suggest a specific cell lineage. However, many blast cell 
 Eosinophils—canine 
PER, SBB, ACP (PAS, LAP)
 populations are poorly differentiated and have no specific
 Eosinophils—feline 
ACP, LAP (PAS)
Basophils
CAE (ACP, LAP, PAS)
identifying features. Identification of lineage then progresses
Monocytes—canine
NSE, ACP (PER, SBB, LAP, PAS)
to evaluation of a battery of immunocytochemical markers
Monocytes—feline 
NSE (ACP PER, SBB, PAS)
and cytochemical stains. The laboratory should be consulted
Lymphocytes—canine 
NSE (ACP, CAE, LAP, PAS)
for details regarding sample requirements and interpretive
Lyrmphocytes—feline 
NSE (ACP)
guidelines for these techniques.
Immunocytochemistry uses specific antibodies to detect
 PER = peroxidase, SBB = Sudan black B. CAE = chloroacetate esterase
antigen markers that may be present on cells. Cells are incu-
 ACP = acid phosphatase, LAP = leukocyte alkaline phosphatase.
bated with a primary antibody that binds to the antigen of
NSE = nonspecific esterase, PAS = periodic acid-Schiff.
interest. This is followed by addition of a secondary antibody
conjugated to an enzyme or fluorochrome that is used to
generate a positive readout signal. The secondary antibody
binds to the primary antibody on cells positive for the
Lymphoma is the most common hematopoietic prolifera-
antigen of interest. Examples of common antigenic markers
tive disorder. Once lymphoma or lymphocytic leukemia is
for identification of various cell types are summarized in
diagnosed, it is useful to determine if the neoplastic cells are
Table 13.1. Cytochemistry involves procedures using special
T or B cells. The primary antibodies used in ICC for deter-
stains or substrates in microscopy to detect the presence of
mining if a lymphoma is T or B cell are anti-CD3 or anti-
specific biochemical content or enzyme activity within cell
CD79a, respectively. Both of these antibodies recognize
populations. Examples of cytochemical stains and expected
cytoplasmic portions of the antigen, but the ICC process
reactions are summarized in Table 13.2.
results in permeabilization of the cell that allows the anti-
148
CHAPTER 13 Molecular Diagnostics of Hematologic Malignancies
bodies to bind to intracellular antigen. In some cases, cells
3. Blom B, Spits H (2006) Development of human lymphoid cells.
may label for a particular marker with ICC although they
Annual Review of Immunology 24:287-320.
are negative for the same marker by flow cytometry. This
4. Avery A (2009) Molecular diagnostics of hematologic malignan-
occurs if the particular antigen is present only in the cyto-
cies. Topics in Companion Animal Medicine 24(3): 144-50.
5. Grimwade D, Hills RK et al. (20l0) Refinement of cytogenetic
plasm and is not being expressed on the cell surface, in
which case ICC may provide crucial diagnostic information.
 classification in acute myeloid leukemia: determination of prog-
nostic significance of rare recurring chromosomal abnormalities
Further differentiation of lymphocyte subrype (for example
among 5876 younger adult patients treated in the United
CD4 or CD8 expression) is not possible with this method as
Kingdom Medical Research Council trials. Blood ll6(3):
it is currently applied. Nonetheless, if a clinician is simply
354-65.
trying to distinguish B cell from T cell lymphoma and does
6. Wong S, Witte ON (2004) The BCR-ABL story: bench to bedside
not have access to fresh sample, this method can be useful.
and back. Annual Review of Immunology 22: 247-306.
7. London CA, Galli SJ, et af. (1999) Spontaneous canine mast cell
Summary
c-kit. Experimental Hematology 27(4): 689-97.
8. Letard S, Yang Y, er al. (2008) Gain-of-function mutations in the 
extracellular domain of KIT are common in canine mast cell
Molecular diagnostic techniques such as clonality, detection
tumors. Molecular Cancer Research: MCR 6(7): 1137-45.
of oncogenes, and flow cytometry can be used to diagnose
9. Breen M, Modiano JF (2008) Evolutionarily conserved cytoge-
lymphoma and leukemia. Many of these assays are widely
 so o s [  s a
available and now used routinely. They can provide objec-
 humansman and his best friend share more than companion-
tive confirmation of diagnoses made by cytology and histol-
ship. Chromosome Researrh 16(l): 145-54.
ogy. and can help clarify an equivocal diagnosis made by
10. Burmett RC, Blake MK, er al. (2004) Evolution of a B-Cell lym-
 more subjective methods. It is lilkely that a great many more
fo junor enaou iae eaau adnn on ed
 molecular diagnostic assays will become available within a
Veterinary Internal Medicine 18(5): 768-71.
few years because rapid sequencing technologies allows for
11. Zavodovskaya R, Chien MB, et al. (2004) Use of kit interma]
much more efficient identification of oncogenes and other
tandem duplications to establish mast cell tumor clonality in 2
dogs. Journa! of Veterinary Interna! Medicine 18(6): 915-17.
genetic alterations in cancer.
12. Yamazaki J, Baba K, er al. (2008) Quantitative assessment of
 minimal residual disease (MRD) in canine lymphoma by using
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Vererinary Immunology @
References
-1-971ooudounuu
13. Cruz Cardona JA, Milner R, et al. (201 l) BCR-ABL translocation
1. Delves PJ, Roitt IM (20o0j The immune system. First of two
in a dog with chronic monocytic leukemia. Vererinary Clinica!
parts. New England Journal of Medicine 343(1): 37-49.
Pathology 40(1): 40-7.
2. Bao Y, Guo Y, er al. (20l0) Molecular characterization of the VH
repertoirein Canisfamiliaris.Veterinary Immunology Immunopa-
thology 137(1-2): 64-75.
149
4
Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
Mary Anna Thrall' and Glade Weiser?
'Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine
²Colorado State University
Cytologic evaluation of a bone marrow aspiration biopsy
millimeters, all while keeping pressure on the stylet to
specimen is helpful in animals with unexplained hemato-
logic abnormalities when a diagnosis cannot be established
plugging (Fig. 14.2). The stylet then is rermoved, the syringe
based on examination of the blood. Examples of such abnor-
attached, and negative pressure applied, but only until
malities include nonregenerative anemia, neutropenia,
marrow becomes visible in the syringe barrel. Aspiration of
thrombocytopenia, gammopathy, and suspicion of neoplas-
a larger volume results in contamination of marrow with
tic marrow disease (e.g. lymphoma). In horses. bone
blood. Once the marrow is collected, it should be placed in
marrow aspirates are useful to determine if anemias are
an EDTA (disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate) tube, or
 regenerative, because equine species do not release imma-
slides made very quickly. because clotted samples are non-
ture erythrocytes into the peripheral blood. Contraindica-
diagnostic. Alternatively, two or three drops of 10% EDTA
tions to bone marrow aspiration are few, but marrow
solution can be placed in the syringe before aspiration. Pull
aspirates from the ribs or sternum of horses with clotting
films are prepared by placing a drop of marrow on a glass
disorders have resulted in death because of hemothorax or
slide, gently placing a spreader slide directly atop the drop
cardiac tamponade. Hemorrhage usually can be prevented
with little or no manual pressure, briefly allowing the drop
to spread, and then pulling the two glass slides apart (Fig.
aspiration site for several minutes.
14.3). Slides are air-dried and then stained with a
Romanowslky (i.e., Wright-type) stain. Because the prepara-
tions usually are quite cellular, staining time should be
Technique
increased beyond that used for blood films.
If marrow cannot be aspirated even though multiple sites
The sites that most commonly are used for bone marrow
 are attempted, a core biopsy is indicated. Core biopsies are
aspiration in dogs are the proximal end of the femur at the
collected using a Jamshidi marrow biopsy needle. An infant-
trochanteric fossa, the iliac crest, and the proximal humerus
or pediatric-sized needle should be used for small animals.
(Fig. l4.l). The trochanteric fossa and humerus are the
After collection, the core of marrow can be gently rolled
preferred sites in cats, and the ilium, ribs, or sternum usually
onto the surface of a glass slide for cytologic evaluation
are aspirated in horses, cattle, and camelids. If general anes-
before placing the core in formalin solution for fixation.
thesia or sedation is not used, a local anesthetic is indicated.
Both the subcutis and periosteum should be infiltrated with
anesthetic. Bone marrow biopsy needles (16-22 G) are com-
Cells encountered in bone marrow films
mercially available (Fig. 14.l): conventional hypodermic
needles without stylets tend to plug with bone and are not
Erythroid series
suitable. After surgical preparation of the skin, the needle is
Erythroid precursors tend to have round nuclei, coarse chro-
introduced. In thick-skinned animals, the skin may be
matin, and moderate to deep blue cytoplasm that becomes
incised to facilitate introduction of the needle. Once the
more pink in color as hemoglobin is produced by more-
needle is against cortical bone, it should be rotated until
differentiated cells. The developmental stages of the ery-
firmly seated in the bone and then advanced a few more
throid series, from immature to mature, are the rubriblast,
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
150
CHAPTER 14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
Figure 14.1 Left. Examples of commercially available bone mmarrow 
Figure 14.3 Two-slide technique for preparing bone marrow films. The 
needles with stylets. Right. Correct placerment of bone marrow needle in 
drop of marrow is allowed to spread slightly before pulling the two glas5
the trochanteric fossa.
slidles apart.
2
3
4
6
Figure 14.2 The bone marrow needle rmust be held with pressure
Figure 14.4 Top. Bone marrow aspirate frorm a dog showing nummerou5
against the stylet to keep the stylet in place within the needle, thus
erythroid precursors with round nuclei, coarse chromatin, and blue- to
 preventing bone plugs.
hemmoglobin-colored cytoplasm. Bottom. Maturation stages of erythroid
precursors, fromm irnmature to mmature. 1, rubriblast; 2. prorubricyte: 3.
rubricytes; 4, metarubricytes; 5. polychromatophilic erythrocyte: 6, mature 
prorubricyte, rubricyte, metarubricyte, polychromatophilic
erythrocyte. Wright stain.
erythrocyte, and mature erythrocyte (Fig. 14.4).
 Rubriblasts are the most immature cells that are recogniz-
 Rubricytes are the most mature stage of maturation in
 able in the erythroid series. These cells are relatively large.
which mitosis can still occur. These cells have smaller nuclei,
have round nuclei, slightly coarse chromatin, and nucleoli.
very coarse chromatin, and blue to blue-pink (i.e., polychro-
The nucleus:cytoplasm ratio is high, with a scant amount
matophilic) cytoplasm.
of deeply basophilic cytoplasm. A clear Golgi zone may be
 Metarubricytes are the most mature cells of the erythroid
present as well.
series that still contain a nucleus. The nucleus is very small,
Prorubricytes, which are the next stage in erythrocyte
dark, and dense, and the cytoplasm is either polychromato-
maturation, have a round nucleus, slightly more coarse chro-
philic or the red-orange color of mature erythrocytes. Nuclei
matin, and no visible nucleolus. The cytoplasm is slightly less
are extruded from metaruribricytes, thereby resulting in
blue, and it is also more abundant than that of the rubriblast.
polychromatophilic erythrocytes.
151
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Polychromatophilic erythrocytes are anucleate, blue-pink
Myeloblasts are subclassified into type I and type II. Type
in color, and larger than mature erythrocytes. They also may
I myeloblasts, which are the most immature cells that are
contain nuclear remnants (i.e., Howell-Jolly bodies). When
still recognizable in the granulocytic series, are large cells
stained with supravital stains (e.g., new methylene or bril-
with round to oval nuclei, finely stippled or smooth nuclear
liant cresyl blue), their mRNA and organelles clump. thereby
chromatin, one or more nucleoli, a small amount of mod-
resulting in blue-staining dots and fibrils (i.e., reticulum)
erately blue cytoplasm, and no azurophilic granules. The
throughout the cells. When stained in this manner, poly-
nucleus usually is centrally located, and the nuclear outline
may be slightly irregular. The nucleus:cytoplasm ratio is
Mature erythrocytes are red-orange in color. Evaluation
high (>l.5), and the cell size is approximately 1.5-3.0 times
of mature erythrocyte morphology in bone marrow prepara-
greater than the red cell diameter. The cytoplasm has a
tions usually is not indicated, but it can be diagnostically
"ground-glass" appearance and, rarely, contains small vacu-
useful in that abnormalities such as red cell parasites, sphe-
axa ' adi on ies Aaa ane sis l ad 5o
rocytes, or hypochromasia occasionally may be observed.
that some small, azurophilic granules (primary granules) are
scattered in the cytoplasm and the nucleus may be central
Granulocyte (myeloid) series
or eccentric.
Granulocytic precursors tend to have irregularly shaped and.
Promyelocytes are cells with smooth or slightly stippled
sometimes, eccentric nuclei, with fine to stippled chromatin
nuclear chromatin, with or without a nucleolus, and many
patterns and abundant, lavender-colored cytoplasm. At
distinct azurophilic granules dispersed in slightly to moder-
certain stages of maturation, they contain azurophilic (i.e.
ately blue cytoplasm. The nucleus is central or eccentric.
red-purple) to pink granules within the cytoplasm. As the
Prominent nucleoli may be present, even in cells with a high
cells mature, the nuclei elongate, from amoeboid or round
concentration of granules. A clear Golgi zone may be present
in shape to kidney-bean or horseshoe shaped to segmented.
as well.
The developmental stages of the myeloid series, from imma-
Myelocytes, which are the last maturation stage in which
ture to mature, are the myeloblast, progranulocyte (promy-
mitosis can occur, are smaller than progranulocytes, have
elocyte), myelocyte, metamyelocyte, band granulocyte, and
round to oval nuclei, light blue cytoplasm, and no primary
segmented granulocyte (Fig. 14.5). When the maturation
granules within the cytoplasm. In these cells, the primary
process is hastened, whether resulting from inflammation
 granules have been replaced by secondary (i.e., specific)
or other causes, the cytoplasm of the myeloid precursors at
 granules, which are difficult to see in neutrophil precursors
all stages of maturation is more basophilic and sometimes
but are very distinct in eosinophil and basophil precursors.
vacllolated.
Eosinophil precursors contain pink (i.e., eosinophilic) gran-
ules, and basophil precursors contain azurophilic to dark
purple granules (Fig. 14.6).
2
3
七
5
6
Figure 14.5 Top. Bone marrow aspirate from a dog showing numerou5
granulocytic (rmyeloid) precursors. Note the irregularly shaped nuclei, fine 
chromatin patterns, and lavender-colored cytoplasm. Bottom. Maturation 
Figure 14.6 Left. Various maturation stages of eosinophil precursors 
stages of rmyeloid precursors, fromm irnmature to mmature. 1, myeloblast; 2.
(arrows). Right. Various maturation stages of basophil precursors
promyelocyte: 3. myelocyte; 4, metarmyelocyte; 5, band neutrophil; 6,
(arrowheads). Granules may obscure the nucleus, thus making
segrmented neutrophil. Wright stain.
idlentification of specific maturation stage clifficult. Wright stain.
152
CHAPTER 14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
Metamyelocytes have kidney bean-shaped nuclei. The
Megakaryocyte series
cytoplasm is similar in appearance to that of myelocytes.
Megalkaryocytes are very large cells, and their cytoplasmic
Band granulocytes have nuclei that are curved and elon-
fragments become platelets, which are important in the clot-
gated, with parallel sides. Some chromatin clumping is
ting process. Although these cells undergo mitosis, they do
present, and the cytoplasm is similar to that of myelocytes
not divide, thus becoming very large and multinucleated,
and metamyelocytes.
with as many as l6 or more nuclei. The nuclei are not sepa-
Segmented granulocytes have lobulated or marlkedly con-
rate entities, however, and they appear as a large, multilobu-
stricted nuclei, with large and dense chromatin clumps. The
lated structure in the center of the cell. The developmental
cytoplasmic characteristics are generally similar to those of
stages of the megakaryocyte series, from immature to
myelocytes, metamyelocytes, and bands.
mature, are the megakaryoblast, promegakaryocyte, and
megakaryocyte (Fig. 14.8)
Monocyte series
Megakaryoblasts are first recognizable when their size
Cells of the monocyte series are relatively few in concentra-
exceeds that of other types of precursors. The nuclei usually
tion, and they are very difficult to distinguish from those of
appear to be more dense than those of other types of blast
the myeloid series in normal marrow. A distinctive feature
cells, and the cytoplasm usually is deeply basophilic.
is their irregular nuclear outlines. Monoblasts appear similar
Promegakaryocytes have from two to four nuclei, which
to myeloblasts, and promonocytes appear similar to myelo-
usually are connected by thin strands of nuclear material
cytes and metamyelocytes. Mature monocytes have the
 and deep blue agranular cytoplasm. They also usually are
l  ld  s s  a
several-fold larger than rubriblasts or myeloblasts.
14.7). Monocyte precursors usually are recognizable only in
Megakaryocytes are very large (diameter, 50-200 μm).
animals with monocytic leukemia.
with numerous nuclei that form a lobulated mass of nuclear
Monoblasts are large cells with round, irregular or folded
material. The cytoplasm stains more lightly than that of
nuclei and finely reticular nuclear chromatin, one or more
promegakaryocytes.
As megakaryocytes mature, they
prominent nucleoli, and a moderate amount of basophilic.
become larger gain more nuclei, and contain cytoplasm that
becomes granular and, sometimes, light pink in color. Naked
site of nuclear indentation. The nucleus:cytoplasm ratio
nuclei of megakaryocytes commonly are observed in bone
usually is less than that of myeloblasts.
marrow films.
Promonocytes are large cells with cerebriform nuclei and
prominent nuclear folds, stippled or lacy chromatin, and no
Other cells
distinct nucleolus. They also have more abundant and less
Small lymphocytes in bone marrow appear as they do in
basophilic "ground-glass" cytoplasm than that of monoblasts.
 peripheral blood, with a round and usually indented nucleus.
a diffuse chromatin pattern without visible nucleoli, and
Figure 14.7 Bone marrow aspirate from dog with granulocytic and
monocytic hyperplasia. Monocyte precursors (arrows) are difficult to
Figure 14.8 Various maturation stages of megakaryocyte series. Large
arrows, megakaryoblasts; arrowhead, promegakaryocyte; small arrow,
is more coarse in granulocytic precursors. P progranulocyte. Wright stain
mature mnegakaryocyte. Wright stain.
153
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 14.9 Plasma cells (arrows) have a variable appearance.
Figure 14.10 Left. Vacuolated plasma cells (Mott cells) containing
depending on thickness of preparation and degree of flattening of the
packets of innmunoglobulin (Russell bodies). Right. Osteoclast, which can 
Wseldoo juepunge aney ol eadde Ajensn sllan ewseld pauaeld slian
be differentiated from a megakaryocyte because the osteoclast nuclei are
and obvious, clear Golgi areas. Inset. Higher mmagnification of a plasma
 separate rather than lobulated. Wright stain.
cell. Note the coarse chromatin and clear Golgi area. Lymphocytes
(arrowheads) have a smmall arnount of cytoplasm. Wright stain.
of macrophages is highly variable. The nuclei usually are
scant, light blue cytoplasm. They are slightly smaller than
round to slightly kidney bean in shape, and the nucleoli
neutrophils (Fig. 14.9). Plasma cells are differentiated lym-
usually are small and inconspicuous. The cytoplasm is gray-
phocytes that produce immunoglobulin, and they are similar
blue and usually vacuolated; small, pink granules may be
in size to neutrophils. The appearance of plasma cells is very
present in the cytoplasm as well. Macrophage nuclei may
similar to that of rubricytes, except that the cytoplasm of
contain several small nucleoli. Macrophages commonly
plasma cells is light blue and more abundant, with a clear
phagocytize cellular debris, including nuclei that have been
Golgi zone adjacent to the often eccentric nucleus some-
extruded from metarubricytes, and they often contain
times being apparent (Fig. 14.9). The nuclei are round, with
hemosiderin, which is a red cell breakdown product con-
very coarse and dense chromatin, and nucleoli are inappar-
taining iron.
ent. The cytoplasm of plasma cells occasionally may contain
Osteoblasts and osteoclasts may be seen in the bone
either very eosinophilic material (i.e., "flame cells") or
marrow aspirates from young animals and from those in
round, clear to light blue structures that represent immuno-
which bone remodeling is occurring. Osteoclasts are very
globulin (i.e., Russell bodies). Plasma cells that contain
large, multinucleated cells that may appear similar to mega-
Russell bodies are called Mott cells (Fig. 14.10).
karyocytes, but their nuclei are individual and not con-
Lymphoblasts rarely are seen in the bone marrow aspi-
nected to each other (unlike those of megalkaryocytes). The
rates from normal animals, and their presence often is indic-
cytoplasm is basophilic, and may contain a few pink to azu-
ative of a lymphoproliferative disorder. Lymphoblasts are
rophilic granules. Osteoclasts are specialized macrophages
small to large cells with a round to oval nucleus, finely
that derive from monocytes, and they function in the lysis
stippled to slightly course nuclear chromatin, one or more
of bone (Fig. 14.l0). Osteoblasts are similar in appearance
nucleoli, and a small to moderate amount of pale blue cyto-
to plasma cells but are larger (Fig. 14.ll). They have eccen-
plasm without azurophilic granules. The nuclear outline
tric, round to oval nuclei that appear to be falling out of one
may appear to be slightly indented or irregular. The
end of the cell; they also have abundant basophilic cyto-
nucleus:cytoplasm ratio usually is greater than that of
plasm and a clear Golgi area. Small pink or azurophilic
myeloblasts. Lymphoblasts are distinguished from myelo-
granules may be present in the cytoplasm as well.
blasts by the slightly more coarse chromatin, less cytoplasm.
Mast cells are easily recognized in the bone marrow, and
and the absence of azurophilic granules. Lymphoblasts may
although rarely observed, they normally are present at very
appear similar to rubriblasts, but the nuclei of lymphoblasts
low concentrations. Mast cells are large, round, and discrete
are less perfectly round.
 cells with abundant small metachromatic granules in the
Macrophages derive from monocytes and are present at a
cytoplasm (Fig. 14.ll). They usually can be distinguished
low concentration in normal bone marrow. The appearance
from basophil myelocytes, because mast cell granules are
154
CHAPTER 14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
kemia. Moreover, ALP activity is present in some types of
lymphoid cells as well as in cells with monocytic differentia-
tion in animals with acute myelomonocytic leukemia. Cyto-
chemical staining of blood and bone marrow films can
facilitate the classification of neoplastic cells, but in many
cases, negative staining occurs, perhaps because of abnor-
malities in hematopoietic differentiation that are associated
with the neoplastic process.
Immunophenotypic analysis is based on using monoclo-
nal antibodies that are directed against antigens on the
surface of hematopoietic cells to determine the phenotypic
profile of those cells, thus identifying the cell type. Very little
 ao p rsu s   as
analysis using the antibodies makes the technique relatively
simple to perform. Briefly, monoclonal anti bodies directed
against cell surface proteins are conjugated to fluorescent
molecules and then mixed with the cells, after which the
Figure 14.11 Left. Osteoblasts, which have a similar appearance to
cells are analyzed by flow cytometry. Flow cytometry pro-
plasma cells but are larger, with a less condensed chromatin pattern and
vides information regarding the size of the cells, expression
less dlistinct cytoplasmic margins (arrow). Right. Mast cells with abundant
cytoplasmnic granules that tend to obscure the round nucleus
of any particular surface protein, and concentration of the
(arrowheads). Wright stain
surface protein. Phenotypes of both normal and neoplastic
cells are continuously being classified as more monoclonal
antibodies become available. Immunophenotyping likely
will eventually replace cytochemistry for use in the classifi-
smaller and more numerous. Mast cells are more apparent
cation of hematopoietic cells. See Chapter l3 for more
and, possibly, increased in concentration in bone marrow
discussion.
that is hypocellular, such as that which may be seen with
ehrlichiosis. When mast cells are abundant, infiltration by
mast cell neoplasia is likely.
Evaluation and interpretation of bone
Fibrocytes and fibroblasts are seen only infrequently, even
marrow films
 in aspirates from animals with myelofibrosis, because they
 do not exfoliate easily. The nuclei are round to oval, and the
Bone marrow films must be evaluated and interpreted
cytoplasm is lightly basophilic and spindle-shaped.
in conjunction with the analysis of concurrent complete
blood count (CBC) data. For example, if an animal has a
decreased platelet concentration (i.e., thrombocytopenia).
Cytochemistry and immunophenotyping
the megakaryocyte concentration is particularly important
to evaluate.
of cell identifcation. These stain reactions are based on
Cellularity
various cell types having different amounts, distribution.
 The low-power (xl0) objective should be used to scan the
and types of enzyme activities. The stains most commonly
slide at xlo0 magnification to assess the degree of cellularity
used include peroxidase, Sudan black B, chloroacetate ester-
and amount of fat that is present (Fig. 14.12). Hemodiluted
ase, C-naphthyl acetate esterase, C-naphthyl butyrate ester-
marrow samples are difficult to evaluate for cellularity.
ase, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Peroxidase, Sudan
Normal marrow cellularity varies, but in general, approxi-
black B, and chloroacetate esterase are myeloid (i.e., granu-
mately 50% of the marrow consists of fat and 50% of cell.
locytic) markers. The nonspecific esterases c-naphthyl
Cellularity is increased when production in either the
acetate esterase and c-naphthyl butyrate esterase, which
myeloid or the erythroid cell line is increased in response to
can be inhibited by sodium fluoride, and are monocyte
cell loss, destruction, or consumption. Abnormal causes of
increased cellularity include lymphoprolifera tive and myelo-
have a few small, round granules that stain positive for
proliferative disorders as well as other neoplastic disorders.
Sudan black B. Reactivity for ALP is somewhat confusing.
Overall cellularity may be decreased with disorders such as
however, because ALP positivity is rare in the immature
 myelofbrosis, certain infectious agents (including Ehrlichia 
neutrophils of normal animals but ALP-positive myeloid
sp. in dogs and feline leukemia virus [FeLV]), estrogen toxic-
cells are common in animals with acute myelogenous leu-
ity (in dogs and ferrets). drug toxicities (including some
155
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
the cellularity cannot be determined by examination of the
marrow aspirate.
Megakaryocytes
Using the low-power (10x) objective, the megakaryocyte
concentration should be estimated as either increased (i.e.,
hyperplasia}.(
decreased (i.e.,l
hypoplasia). or adequate.
 Interpretation of this estimate depends on the platelet con-
centration in the peripheral blood. Areas with high cellular-
ity normally contain at least a few megakaryocytes. and
unless the sample is markedly hemodiluted, at least 5-10
megakaryocytes should be present on the slide. In animals
with increased platelet consumption (e.g. animals with dis-
seminated intravascular coagulopathy) or destruction (e.g..
megakaryocyte concentration in the marrow should be
increased. Animals with megakaryocytic hyperplasia may
Figure 14.12 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog. low magnification.
have as many as 50 or more megakaryocytes in cellular areas
 The degree of cellularity is adequate to increased. Cellularity is judged by
of the slide. Increased concentrations of megakaryoblasts.
the density of sheets of cells, as exemplified in this figure, or by
promegakaryocytes, and smaller, more immature megakary-
estirmating the ratio of fat to cells in particles. Wright stain, low power.
ocytes typically are seen with megakaryocytic hyperplasia.
 In thrombocytopenic patients with megakaryocytic hyper
plasia, the platelet size usually is increased because of the
early release of platelets: this increase in size is analogous to
the increased size of immature erythrocytes. Animals that
are thrombocytopenic because of the lack of platelet produc-
tion have very few—or even no—megakaryocytes in the
marrow film. Megakaryocytic hypoplasia without erythroid
and myeloid hypoplasia is rare and may be caused by
immune-mediated destruction of megalkaryocytes.
Myeloid :erythroid ratio
Using the xl0 objective, appropriate areas that are not to0
thick and in which cells are not broken can be chosen for
further examination of the bone marrow using the x50 or
xl00 oil objectives (to magnify 500- and 1000-fold, respec-
      
myeloid precursors can be identified, and the myeloid :ery-
throid (M:E) ratio can be estimated (Fig. 14.14). Usually.
Figure 14.13 Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with generalized
estimation of this ratio is just as informative as actual quan-
marrow hypoplasia, low magnification. Right. Nummerous adipocytes are
tification. To quantify the M:E ratio, 300-500 nucleated
present, with very little hermatopoietic cellularity. Left. Broken adipocytes
cells are classified as being either myeloid or erythroid. This
and stroma are present, with few hemmatopoietic cels. Wright stain, low
classification should be performed while examining several
power
different areas, because some fields may be predominantly
 granulocytic and other areas predominantly erythroid.
 Normal M :E ratios differ with the species, but in general,
commonly used chemotherapeutic agents). chemicals that
are toxic to the marrow, radiation, and immune-mediated
tion of either cell line shifts the M:E ratio, and such shifts
disorders in which stem cells are destroyed (Fig. 14.13). A
must be interpreted in light of the CBC results, particularly
decrease in cellularity is termed hypoplasia, and a complete
the packed cell volume and the neutrophil concentration.
absence of cells is termed aplasia. Hypoplasia of only one cell
For example, if the M:E ratio is increased, the animal is
line is relatively common, whereas aplasia usually involves
anemic, and the blood neutrophil concentration is normal.
all cell lines. Erythroid or myeloid aplasia is rare. Histopatho-
then the ratio is increased because of a decrease in red cell
logic evaluation of a core biopsy specimen is indicated when
production rather than an increase in neutrophil produc
156
CHAPTER 14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
Figure 14.14 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog. Both mmyeloid and 
erythroid precursors are present, with a normal myeloid erythroid ratio of
ratio is markedly increased because of increased granulocyte production 
approximately 1. Wright stain.
(myeloid hyperplasia). Wright stain.
sia is rare but, when present, usually is associated with
 myelodypslasia or myeloproliferative disorder.
Increased M:E ratio
An increased M : E ratio may be indicative of increased gran-
ulocyte production (i.e., myeloid hyperplasia), decreased in
red cell production (i.e., erythroid hypoplasia), or both (Fig.
14.16). Granulocytic hyperplasia usually results from inflam-
mation, but it also may be seen in animals with immune-
mediated destruction of neutrophils and in those recovering 
from viral-induced marrow damage. such as parvovirus
infections in dogs (i.e., parvoviral enteritis) and cats (i.e.
panleukopenia). Causes of erythroid hypoplasia are dis-
cussed in Chapter 7 and include renal failure, endocrinopa-
thies, and anemia of inflammatory disease. Anemia of
inflammatory disease (i.e., anemia of chronic disease) is one
of the more common causes of mild erythroid hypoplasia in
Figure 14.15 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with regenerative
domestic animals. Granulocytic hyperplasia and increased
 anemia. The myeloid: erythroid ratio is cecreased because of increased
iron stores (i.e., hemosiderin) also usually are seen in the
red cell production (erythroid hyperplasia). Wright stain.
marrow from these patients. Pure red cell aplasia is rare but.
when present, usually is caused by immune-mediated
destruction of very early erythroid precursors.
tion. Conversely. if the animal is not anemic and the neu-
trophil concentration is increased, then the increased M:E
Orderliness of maturation
ratio results from an increased neutrophil production rather
The orderliness and completion of maturation in erythroid
than a decreased erythrocyte production.
and myeloid cells should be determined. Blast cells divide to
ultimately produce 16-32 mature cells. Thus, approximately
Decreased M:E ratio
80-90% of the cells should be more mature forms (i.e.,
A decreased M:E ratio may be indicative of increased red
metamyelocytes, bands, and neutrophils in the myeloid
cell production, such as that seen with a regenerative anemia
series, and rubricytes and metarubricytes in the erythroid
(i.e., erythroid hyperplasia); a decreased neutrophil produc-
series). and polychromatophilic erythrocytes should be
tion (i.e., myeloid hypoplasia); or a combination of the two
present. Orderly progression of maturation usually is referred
(Fig. 14.15) . Myeloid hypoplasia without erythroid hypopla-
to as a "pyramid," with the few immature forms comprising
157
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 14.17 A normmal "pyrammid." ilstrating an orderly maturation of
Figure 14.18 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with imrmune-mediated 
myeloid precursors. A few very inmature cells form the top of the
 neutropenia. Marked myeloid hyperplasia is evident, with an increased 
 pyramid, with numerous mmore mmature cells forming the bottom.
 proportion of rmore irnmature granulocyte precursors and few mature
 granulocytes because of the immune-mediated destruction of more
mature cells. Note that the cytoplasm is basophilic and vacuolated, likely
the top and the numerous more mature forms comprising
because of the increased rate of cell production. Wright stain.
the broad bottom (Fig. 14.17).
 Disorderly maturation of erythroid and myeloid precur-
sors commonly is seen in animals with leukemia and myelo-
dysplasia, but it also may be seen in animals with
 nonneoplastic conditions. An apparent arrest in maturation 
of the erythroid series, often at the rubricyte stage of matl-
rity, may be seen in animals with immune-mediated destruc-
tion of immature erythroid cells. These animals do not have
a typical regenerative response, such as that usually seen in
animals with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Metarul-
bricytes and polychromatophilic erythrocytes often are
decreased to absent in the marrow from such patients.
A similar apparent arrest of maturation in the granulocytic
series, which often occurs in conjunction with marked
myeloid hyperplasia, commonly is seen in marrow aspirates
from animals with immune-mediated neutropenia (Fig.
14.18). This "arrest" may appear at any stage of granulocytic
maturity, but it often occurs at the metamyelocyte stage.
Marrow from animals with immune-mediated destruction
can appear similar to that from patients with granulocytic
Figure 14.19 Bone marrow aspirate frorm a cat. Macrophages (arrows)
are increased and have phagocytized many erythrocytes. This degree of 
leukemia, but the concentration of myeloblasts usually is
 phagocytic activity is abnormal and suggestive of either immune-
lower in those with immune-mediated disease. Other condi-
 medliated destruction of red cells or hermophagocytic syndrome. Wright
tions that cause disorderly maturation of granulocytes
stain .
include marked inflammatory disease (with consumption of
more mature forms) and recovery from viral-induced
neutropenia.
rophages may be increased in animals with immune-
mediated disorders, and macrophages that have phagocytized
Macrophages and iron stores
nucleated red cells, platelets, and neutrophils occasionally
Macrophages (i.e., histiocytes) normally are present in small
are observed (Fig. 14.19). Other causes of increased cell
concentrations (<1% of nucleated cells), and phagocytosis
destruction, such as marrow necrosis secondary to drugs.
of red cells and nuclear debris by macrophages occasionally
toxins, or radiation, may result in increased macrophage
may be seen in normal animals. The concentration of mac-
concentration. In these cases, other morphologic evidence
158
CHAPTER 14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
of necrosis, such as pyknosis and increased cytoplasmic vac-
The presence or absence of hemosiderin (i.e., iron stores)
lolation, usually is observed.
in macrophages should be noted (Fig. 14.2l). Special stains
A marked increase in the concentration of macrophages
for iron, such as a Prussian blue stain (Fig. 14.2l), usually
may be seen in animals with hemophagocytic syndrome.
are not necessary. because hemosiderin can be readily visu-
which also is called hermophagocytic histiocytosis and is a
alized with use of Romanowsky stains. Hemosiderin rarely
condition characterized by a benign, histiocytic proliferation
is seen in the marrow aspirates from normal cats, but it
secondary to infectious, neoplastic, or metabolic diseases.
usually is abundant in that from normal dogs and horses.
One retrospective study' found hemophagocytic syndrome
  s     n  s
in 3.9% of dogs that had bone marrow aspiration. This syn-
marrow, and animals with anemia of inflammatory disease
drome is associated with cytopenia of at least two cell lines
may have increased iron stores.
and greater than 2% hemophagocytic macrophages in the
marrow. It must be distinguished, on the basis of red cell
Other cells
morphology (i.e., lack of spherocytes and agglutination) and
The presence and percentage of other types of cells, such as
a negative Coombs test, from the much more commonly
lymphocytes and plasma cells, should be noted as well. In
occurring immune-mediated diseases. Macrophages are a
animals that have been antigenically stimulated, the plasma
prominent cellular component in the marrow from animals
cell concentration may be markedly increased, and the
     s  
plasma cells may be present in small groups. Normally.
normal and well differentiated, with amoeboid nuclei and
approximately 2% or less of the marrow cells are plasma
abundant, light blue cytoplasm. Many macrophages are
cells. Approximately 15% or less of the cells observed in a
observed with phagocytized hematopoietic cells within their
bone marrow film from healthy dogs may be lymphocytes.
cytoplasm (Fig. 14.20). Dogs with hemophagocytic syn-
whereas as much as 20% of the cells may be lymphocytes
drome often exhibit fever icterus, splenomegaly, hepato-
in normal cats. The concentrations of plasma cells and lym-
megaly, and diarrhea, and those with infection-associated
 phocytes in the bone marrow film usually vary from one
hemophagocytic syndrome are thought to have a better
area of the film to the next.
survival rate than dogs with other causes of hemophagocytic
syndrome. An increased concentration of macrophages also
Microorganisms
is seen in animals with malignant histiocytosis, which is a
Microorganisms occasionally may be found in bone marrow
neoplastic proliferation of histiocytes (see below) .
aspirates. Bacteria very rarely are seen, but Histoplasma
capsulatum (Fig. 14.22). Toxoplasma gondi (Fig. 14.23). Leish-
mania donovani (Fig. 14.24). Cytauxzoon felis. and rarely.
Ehrlichia sp. can be observed. Red cell parasites such as
(arrow) that has phagocytized erythrocytes a5 well as nucleated
erythrocytes. Upper right. A macrophage (arrowhead) that ha5
phagocytized erythrocytes, a large nucleated cell, platelets, and cellular
Figure 14.21 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog. Upper left. A clump of
debris. Lower right. A macrophage (arrowhead) that has5 phagocytized a
hernosiderin (storage iron; arrow) fror a broken macrophage. Wright
neutrophil and contains hemmosiderin. Phagocytosis of platelets and
 5tain. Lower left. A macrophage (arrowheadl) containing hermosiderin.
immature cells may be seen with irmmune-mediated dlisease and with
Wright stain. Right. Prussian blue iron stain, showing the presence of
hermophagocytic syndrome. Wright stain.
blue-staining iron (small arrows).
159
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 14.22 Bone marrow aspirate from a cat. Macrophages (arrows)
Figure 14.24 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog. Note the broken
contain numerous Histoplasma capsulatum organisms, which are round 
 mononuclear cells with numerous Leishmania donovani organisms. These
yeast cells with a well-defined, thin capsule. Wright stain. (Specirnen
organisms are oval, with a typical, dark-staining, rod-shaped structure
 courtesy of Antech Diagnostics.)
(kinetoplast). Wright stain.
viral injury. drugs or chemicals, and chemotherapeutic
drugs. such as doxorubricin, that injure rapidly dividing
cells. Although neutropenia is recognized initially. throm-
bocytopenia and nonregenerative anemia may occur if
the injury lasts for more than l-2 weeks. In general, if the
animal does not have complications associated with the
cytopenias, the stem cell system can be expected to recover
and repopulate the blood with normal concentrations of
cells.
Some drugs and chemicals apparently are directly cyto-
toxic to stem cells. Drugs that have been associated with
 stem cell injury in animals include estrogen (in dogs and
ferrets), phenylbutazone (in dogs), and albendazole, which
is a broadspectrum anthelmintic (in dogs and cats). Estrogen
toxicosis may occur in bitches given exogenous estrogen for
mismating. termination of pseudopregnancy. or urinary
incontinence. Myelosuppression may occur either from
Figure 14.23 Bone marrow aspirate frorm a cat. Macrophages (large
administration of excessive amounts of estrogen or from an
 arrows) contain trophozoites of Toxopfasma gondi. Incdividual
idiosyncratic sensitivity to estrogen. Endogenous estrogen,
 trophozoites (arrowheads) have a characteristic crescent shape and a
central nucleus. Wright stain.
either because of Sertoli cell tumors in male dogs or cystic
ovaries in female dogs, also may result in bone marrow sup-
pression. Because ferrets are induced ovulators, marrow
Mycoplasma sp. or Babesia sp. also may be observed in marrow
suppression from endogenous estrogen is a common and
aspirates.
potentially fatal disorder in this species. The mechanism of
estrogen toxicosis is unclear but is thought to result from
secretion, by thymic stromal cells, of an estrogen-induced
Stem cell disorders of marrow
substance that inhibits stem cells. Marrow suppression is
preceded by an initial thrombocytosis and neutrophilia.
Reversible stem cell injuries
Other drugs may induce cell destruction by immune-
Reversible injury is transient in nature and, therefore.
mediated mechanisms. In dogs, trimethoprim-sulfadiazine.
usually manifests as neutropenia because of the short half-
cephalosporin, and phenobarbital have been associated with
life of neutrophils in blood (see Chapter ll). Causes include
pancytopenia that may be immune-mediated. Methimazole.
160
CHAPTER 14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
are best regarded as being a continuum, from lack of cell
ciated with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in approxi-
production on one extreme to uncontrolled, neoplastic pro-
mately 20% of the cats given this drug. Stem cell injury that
liferation at the other. In the middle of this continuum is
is drug related and immune-mediated usually responds to
dysplastic cell production, which usually is associated with
discontinuation of the drug. Idiopathic immune-mediated
 one or more cytopenias and with subtle morphologic abnor-
stem cell injury usually responds to immunosuppressive
malities of the blood cells. Many cases likely begin as dys-
therapy: however, it may take several weeks to respond and.
plasia and then, with time. progress to either hypoplasia or
often, requires long-term treatment for resolution.
neoplasia. The stage observed at the initial examination is 
Myelofibrosis may develop in response to various types of
variable. depending on when during the course of the
disease the animal is presented to the veterinarian. (More
poietic cells presumably may damage the microvasculature
detailed descriptions of the points on this continuum are
of the marrow, thereby leading to necrosis and subsequent 
presented in Chapter 15.)
fibrosis. Myelofibrosis also has been associated with myelo-
 proliferative and lymphoproliferative disorders, other types
Aplasias or hypoplasia
of neoplasia, chronic hemolytic anemia secondary to pyru-
Marrow aplasia is a relatively rare disorder in dogs and cats.
vate kinase deficiency. radiation, and other unidentified
Causes include chronic ehrlichiosis. Parvovirus, and FeLV
causes.
infections; drug and toxin exposure; and idiopathic causes.
Diagnosis is based on cytopenias in the blood and hypoplas-
Irreversible stem cell injuries
tic to aplastic bone marrow, with the marrow space replaced
In contrast to reversible stem cell injuries, irreversible inju-
by adipose tissue. Treatment is dependent on determining 
ries result from an intrinsic defect in proliferative behavior
the underlying cause of the bone marrow failure, and the
or regulation of stem cell entry into differentiated hemato-
outcome is variable. The hematologic result may be either 
  ae  s r i a si
somewhat selective, severe, and nonregenerative anemia
being irreversible, because they do not spontaneously correct
(i.e., pure red cell aplasia or hypoplasia) or pancytopenia in 
themselves and therapeutic intervention almost never cor-
which neutropenia and thrombocytopenia accompany the
rects the proliferative abnormality (with the exception of
anemia (i.e., aplastic anemia). Establishing the morphologic
bone marrow transplantation, in which defective stem cells
diagnosis depends on the examination of marrow particles
are replaced by normal donor stem cells). The causes of this
or histopathology to distinguish the hypocellularity from a
form of stem cell injury are not well understood. The best-
hemodiluted marrow sample. Plasmacytosis of the marrow,
characterized causative association in domestic animals.
in conjunction with the lack of hematopoietic cells, is often
however, is infection with FeLV in cats. In other domestic
present with chronic ehrlichiosis, and is sometimes so
animals, the cause almost always is unknown. Chronic
marked that it must be distinguished from multiple myeloma
exposure to benzene-related chemical compounds is an
(see Chapter 14). Most cases of pure red cell aplasia in dogs.
employment hazard in humans and, rarely, may cause
as well as those that are not associated with FeLV in cats.
 similar injury in animals. Radiation also may induce such
likely are immune-mediated, and many respond to immu-
 an injury in a number of species. Manifestations of stem cell
nosuppresive therapy.
injury are highly variable (Fig. 14.25). These manifestations
Dysmyelopoiesis
Dysmyelopoiesis is defined as a hematologic disorder char-
Irreversible Stem Cell Injury
acterized by the presence of cytopenias in the blood and
e.g, FelV Induced Injury
dysplastic cells in one or more hematologic cell lines in the
blood or bone marrow. The causes of dysmyelopoiesis
include acquired mutations in hematopoietic stem cells
(myelodysplastic syndromes) congenital defects in hemato-
Myelodysplasia
Aplasia or
Myeloproliferative
poiesis, and secondary dysmyelopoietic conditions associ-
Hypoplasia
plsease
ated with various diseases, drugs. or toxins. Causes of
Absent or
Dysplastic Production
Neopiastc Production
secondary   dysmyelopoiesis  include  immune-mediated
Insufficient Production
hematologic diseases, lymphoid malignancies, and exposure
to chemotherapeutic drugs. Secondary dysmyelopoiesis is
Low
Decreased
Increased
Hlgh
also referred to as nonneoplastic syndromes of ineffective
Marrow Cellularity
hematopoiesis in which dysmorphic maturation of cells
Figure 14.25 Organizational diagrarn of irreversible stem cell disorders.
occurs. Without methods to confirm clonality by cytogenetic
Myelodysplasia may progress to neoplasia over time. Expected cellularity
analysis, the diagnosis of neoplastic myelodysplasia in dogs
of proliferative abnormalities are indicated at the bottom.
is based on light microscopic examination of bone marrow
161
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
films (see Chapter 15). The characteristic morphologic and
erythrocytes and leukocytes. The bone marrow as well as
cytochemical features of neoplastic myelodysplasia and non-
neoplastic ineffective hematopoiesis in dogs are discussed
commonly are involved. Positive reactivity of neoplastic cells
elsewhere in detail.2
to histiocytic markers (e.g., lysozyme and α,-antitrypsin)
can be demonstrated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). This
immunohistochemical reactivity aids in the differentiation
Neoplastic disorders involving bone
of neoplastic histiocytic cells from lymphoid and epithelial
marrow other than lymphoproliferative
neoplasms, and it is important for establishing a definitive
or myelopoliferative disorders
diagnosis of the neoplasm. The cellularity of bone marrow
aspirates containing neoplastic histiocytes is consistently
Mast cell leukemia may be seen in dogs and cats with sys-
very high. These histiocytes are pleomorphic, large, discrete.
temic mastocytosis secondary to mast cell tumors (Fig.
and markedly atypical mononuclear cells, and the nuclei are
14.26). Although examinations of bone marrow aspirate
round to oval or reniform. Features of malignancy include
commonly are performed to stage mast cell tumors, involve-
marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, prominent nucleoli,
          
observed. Buffy coat examination for mast cells also rarely
leukocytes, other tumor cells, and moderate amounts of
is useful, because circulating mast cells occasionally may be
lightly basophilic, vacuolated cytoplasm (Fig. 14.27). The
seen in animals without mast cell tumors. The current rec-
presence of multinucleated giant cells also is supportive of
ommendation is that bone marrow aspiration not be per-
the diagnosis. Other findings vary and may include ery-
formed for routine staging but may be indicated for those
throid hypoplasia, with prominent cytophagia of marrow
dogs having either an abnormal CBC or presenting for tumor 
elements, or generalized marrow hypoplasia, with neoplas-
regrowth, progression or new occurrence.
 Malignant histiocytosis is a rapidly progressive—and ulti-
tosis. Hematologic abnormalities such as anemia and mild to
mately fatal—proliferative disorder of the mononuclear
marked thrombocytopenia also may be present, correlating
phagocyte system that has been described in adult dogs.
with marrow changes.
including Bernese mountain dogs and other breeds. An
Epithelial and mesenchymal tumors rarely metastasize to
increased incidence of the disorder has been suggested to
the bone marrow. Epithelial tumors (i.e., carcinomas) tend
occur in the golden retriever and flat-coated retriever breeds.
to form groups of cohesive cells that are easy to distinguish
The disorder often is characterized by the systemic prolifera
from normal hematopoietic cells (Figs. 14.28 and 14.29),
tion of large, pleomorphic, single and multinucleated histio-
Metastatic sarcomas are more difficult to diagnose, however.
cytes with marked cellular atypia and phagocytosis of
and are characterized by large, discrete, spindle-shaped cells
Figure 14.26 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with poorly
Figure 14.27 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with malignant
dlifferentiated mast cell leukemia. Almost all the cells present are mast
histiocytosis. Note the large, neoplastic histiocytic cells with prominent,
cells with metachromatic cytoplasmic granules. This dog also had mast
irregularly shaped nucleoli (arrows). Most of the other nucleated cells in
cells on the blood filn. Wright stain.
the field are srmall lymphocytes. Wright stain 
162
CHAPTER 14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
Figure 14.28 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with metastatic
Figure 14.29 Bone marrow aspirate shown in Figure 14.28, high
marnmary carcinorma, low magnification. The islands of cells (arrows) are 
magnification. Note the large epithelial cells that exhibit numerous criteria 
neoplastic epithelial cells and can be differentiated from the normal 
of malignancy, including nuclear molding, binucelate cells, and prominent 
hematopoietic cells by their tendency to adhere to each other. Wright
nucleoli. Wright stain.
 stain. Low power.
Figure 14.30 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with metastatic hemmangiosarcoma. Spindle-shaped neoplastic cells (arrows) exhibit numerous criteria
of malignancy, including variability in nuclear size, variability in cell size, ropy chromatin, and prominent nucleoli. Note that some cells have fine,
 azurophilic granules in their cytoplasm. Wright stain. (Specirmen courtesy of Dr. Kyra Sommers, Idexx.)
that meet multiple criteria for malignancy (Fig. 14.30).
2. Blue JT (2003) Myelodysplasia: differentiating neoplastic from
 These cells must be distinguished from fibroblasts that may
nonneoplastic symdromes of ineffective hematopoiesis in dogs.
be observed in myelofibrosis.
Toxicol Pathol 31 Suppl: 44-8.
Suggested reading
References
 General approach to bone marrow aspiration and
interpretation
1. Weiss DJ (2007) Hemophagocytic syndrome in dogs: 24 cases
Grindem CB, Neel JA, Juopperi TA (2002) Cytology of bone marrow.
{1 996-2005). J Am Ver Med Assoc 230: 697-701.
Ver Clin North Am Smal! Anim Pract 32: 1414-74.
163
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Harvey JW (l984) Canine bone marrow: normal hematopoiesis.
Jacobs G, Calvert C, Kaufman A (1998) Neutropenia and thrombo-
biopsy techniques, and cell identification and evaluation. Comp
cytopenia in three dogs treated with anticonvulsants. J Am Ver
Cont Educ Pracr Ver 6: 909-27. (This manuscript was also published
Med Assoc 212: 681-4.
in the compendium collection: Vererinary Laboratory Medicine.
Jonas RD, Thrall MA, Weiser MG (1987) Immune-mediated hemo-
 61 's  A  
lytic anemia with delayed erythrogenesis in the dog. J Am Anim
Latimer KS, Andreasen CB (l992) Bone marrow. In: Cowell RI,
Hosp Assoc 23: 201-4.
Tyler RD (eds.), Cyrology and Hemarology of the Horse. Goleta, CA:
Kuehn NF, Gaunt SF (1985) Clinical and hematologic findings in
American Veterinary Publishing Company pp. 209-19.
canine ehrlichiosis. J Am Ver Med Assor 186: 355-8.
Lewis HB, Rebar AH (1979) Bone Marrow Evaluation in Vererinary
Morgan RV {l982) Blood dyscrasias associated with testicular
Pracrire. St. Louis: Ralston Purina.
tumors in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 18: 970-5.
Mylonakis ME, Day MJ, Leontides LS, er al. (2005) Type of smear
Mylonakis ME, Day MJ, Siarkou V, et al. (2010) Absence of myelo-
may influence thrombopoietic cell counts in the bone marrow of
sun na Aq pannpu uossaddnsoaau y sop u s
dinically healthy dogs. Ver Clin Parho! 34: 358-61.
infection. J Comp Patho! 142: 328-31.
Tyler RD, Cowell RL, Meinkoth JH (1999) Bone marrow. In: Diag-
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Hurvitz AI (1 988) Methimazole treatment
nostic Cyrology and Hematology of the Dog and Cat. 2nd ed. St. Louis:
of 262 cats with hyperthyroidism. J Ver Interm Med 2: 150-7.
Mosby. pp. 284-304.
Reagan WJ (1993) A review of myelofibrosis in dogs. Toxico! Patho!
21: 1649.
Nonneoplastic disorders of bone marrow
 Rebar AH (1993) General responses of the bone marrow to injury.
Bermard SL, Leather CW, Brobst DF, et al. (1983) Estrogen-induced
Toxicol Patho! 1993; 21: 118-29.
bone marrow depression in ferrets. Am J Ver Res 44: 657-6 1.
Rinkardt NE, Kruth SA (1996) Azathioprine-induced bone marrow
Bloom JC, Theim PA, Sellers TS, et al. (1988) Cephalosporin-induced
toxicity in four dogs. Can Ver J 37: 612-13.
immune cytopenia in the dog: demonstration of erythrocyte-.
 Sherding RG, Wilson GP, Kociba GJ (198l) Bone marrow hypopla-
neutrophil-, and platelet-associated IgG following treatment with
sia in eight dogs with Sertoli cell tumor. J Am Ver Med Assor 178:
cefazedone. Am J Hemato! 28: 71-8.
497-500.
Blue JT (2003) Myelodysplasia: differentiating neoplastic from non-
Sontas HB, Dokuzeylu B, Turna O, et al. (2009) Estrogen-induced
neoplastic syndromes of ineffective hematopoiesis in dogs. Toxico!
myelotoxicity in dogs: A review. Can Ver J 50: 1054-8.
Pathol 31 Suppl: 44-8.
Boosinger TR, Rebar AH, Denicola DB, et al. (1982) Bone marrow
disseminated intravascular coagulation in a dog. J Small Anim
alterations associated with canine parvoviral enteritis. Ver Patho!
Pract 39: 203-6.
19: 558-61.
Stokol T, Blue JT (1999) Pure red cell aplasia in cats: 9 cases (1989-
 Bowen RA, Olson PN, Behrendt MD, et al. (1 985) Efficacy and toxic-
1997). J Am Ver Med Assor 214: 75-9.
ity of estrogens commonly used to terminate canine pregnancy.
Stokol T, Blue JT, French TW (2000) Idiopathic pure red cell aplasia
J Am Ver Med Assoc 186: 783-8.
and nonregenerative immune-mediated anemia in dogs: 43 cases
Brockus CW (1998) Endogenous estrogen myelotoxicosis associated
{1988-1999). J Am Ver Med Assoc 216: 1429-36.
with functional cystic ovaries in a dog. Ver Clin Pathol 27: 55-6.
Stokol T, Randolph JF, Nachbar S, er al. (1997) Development of bone 
Deldar A, Lewis H, Bloom J, er al. (1988) Cephalopsorin-induced
marrow toxicosis after albendazole administration in a dog and
changes in the ultrastructure of canine bone marrow. Ver Parho!
cat. J Am Ver Med Assor 12: 1753-6.
25: 211-18.
Walker D, Cowell RL, Clinkenbeard KD, et al. (1997) Bone marrow
 Farris GM, Benjamin SA (1993) Inhibition of myelopoiesis by con-
mast cell hyperplasia in dogs with aplastic anemia. Ver Clin Patho!
ditioned medium from cultured canine thymic cells exposed to
26: 106-11.
estrogen. Am J Ver Res 54: 1366-73.
Walton R, Modiano JF, Thrall MA, et al. (1 996) Bone marrow cyto-
Foglia Manzillo V, Restucci B, Pagano A, et al. (2006) Pathological
logic fndings in four dogs and one cat with hemophagocytic
changes in the bone marrow of dogs with leishmaniosis. Ver Rer
syndrome. J Ver Intern Med 10: 7-14.
158: 6904.
Watson ADJ, Wilson JT, Tumer OM, er al. (1980) Phenylbutazone-
Fox LE, Ford S, Alleman AR, er al. (1993) Aplastic anemia associated
'It6e7 :oI aay ia saop e ul paioadsns serseosp pooa paonpu
Weiss DJ (1985) Histopathology of canine nonneoplastic bone
tion in two dogs. Ver Clin Pathol 22: 89-92.
marrow. Ver Clin Parhol 15: 7-11.
Fry MM, Forman MA (2004) 5-Fluorouracil toxicity with
Weiss DJ (1985) Idiopathic aplastic anemia in the dog. Ver Clin Parho!
severe bone marrow suppression in a dog. Ver Hum Toxicol 46:
14: 23-5.
178-80.
Weiss DJ (2003) New insights into the physiology and treatment of
Giger U, Werner LL, Millichamp NJ, er al. (1985) Sulfadiazine-
acquired myelodysplastic symdromes and aplastic pancytopenia.
induced allergy in six Doberman pinschers. J Am Ver Med Assoc
Ver Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33: 1417-34.
186: 479-84.
Weiss DJ (2005) Recognition and classification of dysmyelopoiesis
Hoff B, Lumsden JH, Valli VEO (1985) An appraisal of bone
in the dog: a review. J Ver Inrerm Med 19: 147-54.
  d r u sop s po sse  s 
Weiss DJ (2006) A retrospective study of the incidence and the
34-42.
classification of bone marrow disorders in the dog at a veterinary
Holland M, Stobie D, Shapiro W (1996) Pancytopenia associated
teaching hospital (1996-2004). J Ver Inrerm Med 20: 955-61.
with administration of captopril to a dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 208:
1683-7.
{1996-2005). J Am Ver Med Assoc 230: 697-701.
164
CHAPTER 14 Laboratory Evaluation of Bone Marrow
Weiss DJ (2008) Bone marrow pathology in dogs and cats with
Brown DE, Thrall MA, Getzy DM, et al. (1994) Cytology of canine
malignant histiocytosis. Ver Clin Patho! 23: 1l8-22.
pure red cell aplasia. J Comp Patho! 148: 46-53.
Court EA, Earnest-Koons KA, Carr SC, er al. (1993) Malignant his-
Weiss DJ, Adams LG (1987) Aplastic anemia associated with
tiocytosis in a cat. J Am Ver Med Assor oi203: 1300-2.
 trimethoprim-sulfadiazine and fenbendazole administration in a
Endicott MM, Charney SC, McKnight JA, et al. (2007) Clinicopatho-
dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 191: 1119-20.
logical fndings and results of bone marrow aspiration in dogs
Weiss DJ, Armstrong PJ, Reimann K (1985) Bone marrow necrosis
with cutaneous mast cell tumours: 157 cases {1999-2002). Ver
in the dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 187: 549.
Comp Oncol 5: 31-7.
Weiss DJ, Evanson OA, Sykes J {l999) A retrospective study of
McManus PM (1999) Frequency and severity of mastocytemia in
canine pancytopenia. Ver Clin Pathol 28: 83-8.
dogs with and without mast cell tumors: 120 cases (1995-1997).
Weiss DJ, Greig B, Aird B, et al. (1992) Inflammatory disorders of
J Am Ver Med Assoc 215: 355-7.
the bone marrow. Ver Clin Pathol 2l: 79-84.
Moore PF, Rosin A {1986) Malignant histiocytosis of Bermese moun-
Weiss DJ, Henson M (2007) Pure white cell aplasia in a dog. Ver Clin 
tain dogs. Vet Pathot 23: 1-10.
Pathol 36: 373-5.
Walton RM, Brown DE, Burkhard MJ, et al. (1997) Malignant his-
Weiss DJ, Klausner JS (l990) Drug-associated aplastic anemia in
dogs: eight cases (1984-1988). J Am Ver Med Assoc 196: 472-5.
tochemical features. Ver Clin Parho! 26: 56-60.
Neoplastic disorders involving bone marrow other than
proliferative disorders
Boone L, Radlinsky MA (20o0) Bone marrow aspirate from a dog
with anemia and thrombocytopenia. Ver Clin Pathol 29: 59-61.
165
15
Lymphoproliferative Disorders and
Myeloid Neoplasms
Mary Anna Thrall
Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine
Leukemias may also be further classifed as either acute
Overview of myeloproliferative and
or chronic based primarily on the maturity or degree of
lymphoproliferative disorders (leukemia)
neoplastic cell differentiation as well as by the clinical course.
The neoplastic cells in acute leukemias are immature (i.e.,
Leukemia, which is a neoplastic proliferation of hematopoi-
blasts). and the patient survival time usually is quite short.
etic cells within the bone marrow, is defined by the presence
By definition, 20% or more blast cells in the marrow is
of neoplastic blood cells in the peripheral blood or bone
diagnostic of acute myeloid leukemia. The percentage of
marrow, and is classified broadly into myeloid neoplasms
blast cells in the blood, however, is quite variable in these
and lymphoproliferative disorders. The diagnosis of these
patients. Chronic leukemias are characterized by the pre-
disorders is established based on finding characteristic cells
dominance of mature, more well-differentiated cells in the
in the blood or bone marrow and associated hematologic
blood and marrow, and the patient survival time usually is
abnormalities. Specific cell types are identified by their mor-
longer. Neoplastic cells commonly can be found in organs
phologic appearance in Wright-stained blood and bone
other than the bone marrow in patients with leukemia. The
marrow films, cytochemical staining properties, electron
spleen commonly is involved, and the liver and lymph nodes
microscopic appearance, and monoclonal antibody binding
also may contain neoplastic cells (Fig. 15.2). Genetic muta-
to surface antigens. In some cases, cells may appear so mor
tions similar to those seen in people have been described in
phologically undifferentiated that classifying the disorder
dogs with lymphoid and myeloid leukemia. In one study of
into either the myeloproliferative or the lymphoproliferative
category may be difficult (Fig. 15.1). Myeloid neoplasms
kemia, 33 had acute myeloid leukemia, 6l had chronic
include neoplastic proliferation of erythrocytes, granulocytes.
lymphocytic leukemia, and 65 had Grade V lymphoma with
monocytes, and megakaryocytes. Multiple cell lines may
involvement of bone marrow. Anemia, neutropenia, and
be neoplastic if the affected stem cell is multipotential;
thrombocytopenia were more common and severe in dogs
an example is myelomonocytic leukemia, in which both
with acute leukemias than in dogs with Stage V lymphoma
neutrophils and monocytes have been  neoplastically
or chronic leukemias. Similar results were observed in a
transformed. Lymphoproliferative disorders include acute
-    so  o   s
lymphoblastic leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and
mia, 22 had acute myeloid leukemia, and 17 had chronic
multiple myeloma.
lymphocytic leukemia. Golden retriever dogs in the study
Leukemias are also classified according to the concentra-
population were overrepresented in comparison with a
tion of neoplastic cells that are circulating in the blood. With
control population of dogs.
leukemic leukemias, many neoplastic cells are circulating.
  s    s a
count. In pa tients with subleukemic leukemias, however, the
Myeloid neoplasms
nucleated cell count is near normal, with only a few neoplas-
tic cells circulating. No circulating cells are observed on blood
Myeloid neoplasms are cancers of hematopoietic cells, and
films from patients with aleukemic leukemia. Establishing
are distinct from cancers of lymphoid cells. They manifest as
the diagnosis of leukemia when few or no cells are circulating
either a lack of normal blood cells, or an increase in neo-
usually is based on examination of the marrow aspirate.
 plastic cells in blood. While lymphoid leukermia may pre-
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall. Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
166
CHAPTER 15 Lymphoproliferative Disorders and Myeloid Neoplasms
 Figure 15.1 Bone marrow aspirate from a cat. Large undifferentiated
Figure 15.3 Left. Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with myelodysplasia.
cells (arrows) are difficult to classify based on their morphologic
Note the three rubricytes with cysynchrony of nuclear and cytoplasrmic
appearance. Cells may be lymphoblasts or type 1 myeloblasts. Wright
maturation (arrows) and the more normal-appearing metarubricyte
stain.
aun aton eiseidspoau yam ien e o wl poola iy (peaymoe)
alateld buueadde-euou aul pue (smoue lews) stalateld lesid/e juei
(srmall arrowhead). Wright stain.
Myelodysplastic syndromes
?
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a variable manifestation
with some subtle, morphologic changes in blood cells. The
hematologic manifestations almost always involve some
form of cytopenia, and this may include any single abnor-
mality or combination of nonregenerative anemia, throm-
bocytopenia, and neutropenia. Cellularity of marrow is
variable. The marrow may be hypocellular, of normal cel-
lularity, or hypercellular, thereby making it difficult to dis-
tinguish this condition from a myeloproliferative disorder.
Characteristic morphologic abnormalities include  large.
highly variable erythroid precursor size and dysynchrony of
nuclear and cytoplasmic maturation events (Fig. 15.3). The
disturbed erythroid production in cats commonly leads to
Figure 15.2 Lynph node aspirate from a dog with granulocytic 
establishment of marked macrocytosis and increased eryth-
leukemnia (M2). Most of the large blast cells cannot be differentiated from
rocyte volume heterogeneity (i.e., anisocytosis) seen as a
yrmphoblasts based on their morphology. but some are differentiating
toward promyelocytes (P). Note the small lynphocyte (arrow). Wright
widening of the erythrocyte histogram. Cats that are positive
stain .
for FeLV infection may have mean red cell volumes of 70fL
or greater (reference interval, 40-55 fL). Macrocytosis also
has been reported in dogs with myelodysplasia. Other fea-
dominantly affect bone marrow, it is not referred to as a
  an   o un s
myeloid neoplasm. Myeloid neoplasms include cancers asso-
(Fig. 15.3). Megakaryocyte differentiation may be altered as 
ciated with both rapid and gradual disease progression. Per-
well, with both hypo- and hyperlobulation of nuclei (Fig.
centage of blast cells in marrow is used to distinguish rapid
15.4). Neutrophils of unusually large diameter may be
(acute) from gradual (chronic). The rapidly progressing
observed, with nuclear changes that may include both
myeloid cancers are referred to as acute myeloid leulkemias.
hyper- and hyposegmentation (Fig. 15.5). Very early precur-
and the myeloid cancers with more gradual progression are
sors are not found in blood.
classified as either myelodysplastic syndromes or myelopro-
Several prognostic scoring systems based on number of
liferative neoplasms (formerly termed "chronic leukemias").
bone marrow blast cells, cytogenetic findings. number of
167
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
centages in marrow that are equal to or greater than 5% but
less than 20%. MDS with refractory cytopenia (MDs-RC)
which has blast cell counts less than 5%, can have an indo-
lent course, and MDS-ER (M:E ratio <l.0) which has a poor
prognosis and short survival time. In general, high blast
-      s
phologic atypia are usually considered negative prognostic
markers.
Other differential diagnoses for hypercellular marrow and
cytopenias include the recovery stage of marrow damage.
such as might be seen with parvovirus infection; immune-
mediated disease, with destruction of more mature cells; and
consumption of neutrophils due to an overwhelming inflam-
matory process.
Myelodysplastic syndromes have been reported in cats.
dogs and one horse. Cats with myelodysplasia almost always
 are positive for FeLv. Clinical signs usually include lethargy.
Figure 15.4 Left. Bone mmarrow aspirate frorm a cat with rmyelodysplasia
anorexia, and weight loss. Animals may die within weeks of
Note the dysplastic megakaryocyte (arrow) and the granulocytic precursor
diagnosis, without progression to leukemia, but overt leul-
with retained primary granules (arrowheadl). Right. Dysplastic
megakaryocytes with hypolobulation of the nuclei (arrows). Wright stain.
kemia is a common sequela.
Overview of acute myeloid leukemias and
myeloproliferative neoplasms
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a neoplasm of hemato-
poietic cells resulting in rapid progression of disease. Myelo-
proliferative neoplasms (MPN) comprise various types of
clonal neoplastic conditions of hematopoietic tissue charac
terized by gradual disease progression. In general, these neo-
plasms are characterized by bone marrow hypercelularity.
loss of orderliness in maturation, and a tendency for neo-
 plastic cells to be released into the blood. Myeloid neoplasms
are more common in cats than in other domestic animals
and, as mentioned, usually are associated with FeLV infec-
tion. Hematopoietic precursors are infected by FeLV, and
viral proteins are thought to interact with host cell products
that are important in cell proliferation, resulting in recom-
bination or rearrangement events involving host gene
Figure 15.5 Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with myelodysplasia. Left
sequences that encode products involved in the normal
and lower right. Note the giant hypersegmented neutrophils (arrows) and
regulation of cell growth. Feline immunodeficiency virus
megaloblastic erythrocyte precursor (small arrow head). Upper right. Note
(FIV) also appears to be associated with stem cell disorders
the giant hypersegmented neutrophil (small arrow) and the neutrophil of 
of cats, although FIV does not directly infect myeloid or
normal size (large arrowhead). Wright stain.
erythroid precursors. The mechanism probably relates to
infection of other cells in the bone marrow microenviron-
ment or to the virus or viral antigen affecting hematopoiesis
hematopoietic lines affected by cytopenia, and transfusion
in some way.
dependence have been developed for use in humans with
Clinical signs usually relate to the crowding out of normal
myelodysplastic syndrome. Classification schemes used for
hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow, but they may also
animals are quite simple in comparison. The Animal Leuke-
result from the infiltration of different organs by neoplastic
mia Study Group in 1991 recommended two MDS catego-
cells. Lethargy, weakness, pallor, bleeding, shifting leg lame-
ries: MDS (M:E>l.0) and MDS-Erythroid (M:E<l.0). Since
ness, and bone pain frequently are seen, as are hepato-
that time, recommendations for three subtypes have been
megaly and splenomegaly. Typical CBC findings include an
made. MDS with excess blasts (MDS-EB) has blast cell per-
increased nucleated cell count, neoplastic cells in the periph-
168
CHAPTER 15 Lymphoproliferative Disorders and Myeloid Neoplasms
eral blood, nonregenerative anemia, and thrombocytopenia.
200 cells are differentiated to calculate an M:E ratio and to
although thrombocytosis may be present, particularly in
determine the percentages of blast and other cell types. Blast
cats. Other abnormal laboratory findings are variable.
cell percentages in the bone marrow are calculated in rela-
depending on the type and degree of organ dysfunction
 u  s   sn iau e o 
 The response of these disorders in dogs and cats to therapy
Lymphocytes, macrophages, mast cells, and plasma cells are
-ed 'lood si sisousoid aun pue 'suuoddesp s Allensn
 excluded for all-nucleated-cell counts, and erythrocyte pre-
larly in animals with acute myeloid leukemia. Chemothera-
cursors are excluded for nonerythroid cell counts. At the
peutic drugs may produce remissions of very short duration
time of this study. 30% blasts in the marrow was considered
(e.g., usually a few weeks). Types of recommended chemo-
the lowest percentage that could be present and still diag-
therapy differ with the type of leukemia and the species. A
nose AML. Our physician counterparts, in collaboration
veterinary oncologist should be consulted for advice on new
with oncologists, have since constructed a new World Health
protocols for therapy. Bone marrow transplantation offers
Organization (WHO) standard, which lowered the blast
the potential for a complete cure, but is expensive and
threshold from 30% to 20% for diagnosing acute myeloid
requires intensive care. Cats that are negative for FeLV and
leukemia (AML). The AML alphanumeric designations (M1.
FIV and have a sibling that can serve as a marrow donor are
M2, etc.) described below have been discon tinued in humans
reasonably good candidates for bone marrow transplanta-
as numbers of subtypes have increased. The system estab-
tion. Animals with myeloproliferative neoplasms have a
lished in 1991 has been revised below to lower the blast
longer survival time after the diagnosis is established, but
threshold to 20%. The alphanumeric designations and blast
they almost always eventually develop a terminal blast crisis
   s a aa  
and die.
cal pathologists and oncologists as to their accuracy and
usefulness.
Cytochemical stains and immunophenotyping. as dis-
Classification of acute myeloid leukemias
cussed earlier, may be useful adjuncts in the classification of
leukemia (Figs. 15.6 and 15.7). The clinical relevance of
Acute myeloid leukemia is morphologically and biologically
cytomorphologic. cytochemical, and immunophenotypic
variable. Most cases of AML in humans are associated with
characterization of acute myeloproliferative diseases remains
 genetic abnormalities that affect myeloid cellular prolifera-
to be determined, although given the importance of karyo-
tion and maturation. Thus, cytogenetic analysis is a routine
typing in human AML, prognostically significant chromo-
component of the diagnosis in people, and plays a significant
somal abnormalities are likely present in animals with AML.
role in treatment modality and prognosis. The classification
Moreover, the classification of leukemia in a patient may
scheme in humans consists of the following groupings: AML
with
1  myelodysplasia-related  changes;
 thera py-related
myeloid neoplasms, and AML not otherwise categorized.
Subgroups of "AML not otherwise categorized" are sub-
grouped according to the type of cell involved. AML that
 a   i  h  i  o
"AML with myelodysplasia-related changes.," but most of
the cases in domestic animals are comparable to "AML not
otherwise categorized."
Traditionally, acute myeloid leukemias in domestic animals
have been characterized as being granulocytic (i.e., myeloid.
neutrophilic), myelomonocytic (i.e., neutrophils and mono-
cytes), monocytic, eosinophilic, basophilic, megakaryocytic.
erythremic myelosis (i.e., erythrocytes), or erythroleukemia
(i.e., erythrocytes and granulocytes). Diagnostic criteria
have varied considerably. however, and agreement on
nomenclature and classification of hematopoietic neoplasms
has been lacking. Because of potential differences in response
to various treatment protocols and prognosis, in 199l an
Figure 15.6 Blood film from a dog with myelomonocytic leukemia (M4)
animal leukemia study group standardized the definitions
stained with chloracetate esterase (CAE), a granulocyte marker. Note the
for acute myeloid leukemias by using a human classification
metarmyelocyte and neutrophil with red-staining granules in the
scheme based primarily on the number and morphology of
cytoplasm (arrows). Several monocytes (arrowheadl) are present that do
blast cells in Wright-stained blood and bone marrow films.
'is ua a jo Asano uaias) i y aiod uieis tou
To classify a myeloproliferative or myelodysplastic disorder.
Colorado State University.)
169
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
change as the disease progresses; for example, erythremic
myelosis may convert to erythroleukemia or acute myelog-
enous leukemia. A classification scheme showing histori-
cally used terminology. current terminology. and a summary
of bone marrow findings is presented in Table 15.1.
Undifferentiated leukemia
The diagnosis of undifferentiated leukemia is established
when approximately 100% of the cells in the bone marrow
are blast cells that cannot be properly classified according
to the usual morphologic and cytochemical criteria. The
diagnosis can be based on electron microscopy. ultrastruc-
tural cytochemistry, or immunophenotyping. Included in 
this category are cases of what previously were termed retic-
uloendotheliosis in cats, in which a predominance of blast
 cells have pseudopodia, eccentric nuclei, and sometimes.
features of both erythroblasts and myeloblasts (Figs. 15.8
Figure 15.7 Blood filr from dog with myelomonocytic leukemmia (M4)
stained with α-naphthyl butyrate esterase (ANBE), a mmonocyte marker.
and 15.9). Some cells may contain azurophilic granules. If
Note the brown-staining granules in the monocytes (arrows) and the
the neoplastic cells do not appear to be maturing toward
neutrophil (arrowhead) that does not stain with ANBE. (Specimen
erythroid or myeloid cells, they are categorized as being
courtesy of Dr. Wendy Sprague, Colorado State University.)
Undifferentiated.
Table 15.1 Classification of leukermia5.
Historical Terminology
FAB Subtype
 Description
Acute leukemias (>20% blasts in marrow)
 Reticuloendotheliosis 
AUL
Acute undifferentiated leukemia, myeloid and erythroid features
 Granulocytic leukemia
M1 
 Myeloblastic leukemia with differentiation
 Granulocytic leukemmia 
M2
Myeloblastic leukemia with neutrophilic differentiation
Myelornonocytic leukemia 
M4 
 Combination of myeloblasts and monoblasts
 Monocytic leukemia
M5a
 Monocytic leukemia without differentiation 
 Monocytic leukemia
M5b
 Monocytic leukermia with differentiation
Erythroleukemia
M6
 Commbination of nyeloblasts and rubriblasts
Erythremic myelosis 
M6Er
 Erythroid leukemia
 Megakaryoblastic leukermia
M7
Increased megakaryoblasts in blood and marrow
Chronic myeloid leukemias (<20% blasts in marrow)
Chronic granulocytic leukemia 
 Mature neutrophilia, left shift, similar to granulocytic hyperplasia
 Chronic mmyelomonocytic leukemia
 Commbination of mature neutrophilia, left shift, and monocytosis 
Chronic monocytic leukemia 
 Mature monocytosis in blood and bone marrow 
 Chronic eosinophilic leukemia 
Eosinophilia with left shift, basophilic predomminance in marrow 
 Chronic basophilic leukermia 
 Basophilia with left shift, basophilic predominance in marrow 
Essential thrombocythermia 
 Marked increase in platelets, megakaryocytic hyperplasia in rnarrow
Polycythermia vera (erythrocytosis)
 Mature erythroid proliferative disorder, erythroid hyperplasia
Lymphoid leukemia
Acute lymphoblastic leukemmia 
Lymphoblasts in blood or bone marrow 
 Chronic lyrmphocytic leukemia
Lymphocyto5is, >30% lyrnphocytes in marrow
FAB, French-Arnerican-British.
170
CHAPTER 15 Lymphoproliferative Disorders and Myeloid Neoplasms
Figure 15.8 Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with undifferentiated 
Figure 15.10 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with granulocytic
leukenia. The cells have features of both erythroid and mnyeloid
(rmyeloblastic) leukermia (M1). Almost all the cels present are type 1
precursors. Cytoplasmic pseudopodia (large arrows) typically are present.
myeloblasts (arrows). A type Il nyeloblast with cytoplasmic prirnary
Note the cell with obvious erythroid characteristics (arrowhead) and the
 granules (arrowhead) is present as well. Type I myeloblasts are
cell with mnyeloid features and prirmary granules (small arrow). Wright
morphologically similar to lymphoblasts, and without the presence of
stain .
 more differentiated cells, irmmunophenotyping may be necessary to
correctly classify the leukemnia. Wright stain.
cells. Differentiated granulocytes (promyelocytes to neutro-
phils and eosinophils) comprise less than lo% of the non-
erythroid cells.
Myeloblastic leukemia with maturation (M2)
Myeloblasts constitute from more than 20% to less than
90% of all nucleated cells, with a variable number of type
II myeloblasts being present (Figs. 15.1l and 15.12). Dif-
ferentiated granulocytes comprise more than lo% of the
nonerythroid cells. usually with a predominance of
promyelocytes.
Myeloblastic leukemia with maturation and
atypical granulation of promyelocytes (M3)
 Figure 15.9 Left. Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with 
Although myeloblastic leukemia with matura tion and atypi-
undlifferentiated leukemia. Note the cytoplasmic pseudlopodlia that has
cal granulation of promyelocytes is one of the classifications
detached from the cell (arrowhead). When present in blood, these
for human leukemia, no such cases have been reported in
cytoplasrnic fragrments may be mistaken for platelets. Note the rubricyte
(small arrow) as well. Right. Blood film from a cat with undifferentiated 
domestic animals. This type of myeloblastic leukemia is
leukemmia. Note the typical undifferentiated cell with primary granules and 
characterized by either hypergranular, hypogranular, or
 an eccentric nucleus (large arrow). Wright stain.
microgranular promyelocytes with folded, reniform, or
bilobed nuclei.
Myeloblastic leukemia (M1)
Myelomonocytic leukemia (M4)
The predominant cell in the bone marrow in animals with
Myeloblasts and monoblasts together constitute more than
myeloblastic leukemia is the type I myeloblast; type II
20% of all nucleated cells, and differentiated granulocytes
myeloblasts are only seen infrequently (Fig. 15.l0). Both
and monocytes comprise more than 20% nonerythroid cells
types of blasts comprise more than 90% of all nucleated
(Figs. 15.13 and 15.14).
171
SEcTloN IIl Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 15.11 Bone marrow aspirate fromm a cat with granulocytic
Figure 15.13 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with myeloronocytic
 (rnyeloblastic) leukernia (M2). Numerous type Il mnyeloblasts with 
poau pue (smae) sosinad aouo yoa (i euanal
 cytoplasmnic granules are present, as is a cell in mitosis (arrowhead). Note
 precursors (arrowheadl) are present. Wright stain.
 that cells are more differentiated than those seen in rmarrow aspirates of
 patients with M1. Wright stain.
Figure 15.14 Blood filrm from a dog with myelomonocytic leukemia
(M4). Top. Note the monoblasts (large arrows) and normal-appearing.
Figure 15.12 Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with granulocytic
segmmented neutrophils (smmall arrows). Botom. Note the segmented 
(rmyeloblastic ) leukemia (M2). Note that most of the cells present are 
neutrophil (small arrow), monocyte (large arrow), and type Il myeloblast
type ll myeloblasts or progranulocytes (arrow). Most of these cells have
(arrowhead). Wright stain.
clear Golgi areas. A few more differentiated myeloid precursors are
present as well. Wright stain.
more than 20% to less than 80% monoblasts and promono-
cytes with prominent differentiation to monocytes (Figs.
Monocytic leukemia (M5)
15.17 and 15.18). The granulocytic component is less than
The predominant population is monocytic, as determined by
20%.
the characteristic nuclear morphology and confirmed by
cytochemical staining for nonspecific esterase. Monoblasts
Erythroleukemia (M6)
and promonocytes constitute more than 80% of nonery-
The erythroid compartment in M6 is more than 50%. and
throid cells in M5a (Figs. 15.15 and 15.16), while M5b has
the myeloblasts and monoblasts combined are less than 20%
172
CHAPTER 15 Lymphoproliferative Disorders and Myeloid Neoplasms
Figure 15.15 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with monocytic
Figure 15.17 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with monocytic
leukemia (M5a). Alrmost all the cells present are undifferentiated
leukenia (M5b). Note the numerous monocytes in various stages of
monoblasts. These cells appear to be morphologically similar to
maturation (large arrows), the segrmented neutrophil (arrowhead), and 
pue buid/ouaydounuui ing 'siselqojauu I ad/t pue siselgoyd
the plasma cell (small arrow). Wright stain
cytochermistry dletermined this was a very undlifferentiated type of 
monocytic leukemia. Wright stain.
Figure 15.18 Blood filrm from a dog with monocytic leukemia (M5b).
Note the numerous monocytes (large arrow), and compare the blue color
Figure 15.16 Blood film from a dog with monocytic leukermia (M5a).
of the cytoplasm and density of the nuclear chromatin with that of a
Cells were classified as monoblasts based on the presence of other cells
 segmented neutrophil, which has more dense nuclear chromatin and pink
that appeared to be differentiating to monocytes as well as on the results 
Cytoplasrn (arrowhead). Wright stain .
of cytochemical analysis and irnmunophenotyping. Wright stain.
of all nucleated cells. The M6 classification is recognized
myelosis, which is a myeloproliferative disorder of erythroid
when either of the following criteria are met: myeloblasts
precursors, may fall under the designation of M6Er or MDS-
and monoblasts constitute more than 20% of nonerythroid
Er, because the erythroid component constitutes more than
cells, or blast cells (including rubriblasts) constitute more
 50% of all nucleated cells and the blast cell concentration.
than 20% of all nucleated cells. An M6Er designation is used
(including rubriblasts) may constitute more than 20% (i.e.,
to define the latter situation when there is a predominance
M6ER) or less than 20% (i.e., MDS-Er) (Figs. 15.19 and
of rubriblasts in the erythroid component. Erythremic
15.20).
173
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 15.19 Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with erythrernic
Figure 15.21 Blood film from a dog with megakaryoblastic leukemia
myelosis (M6Er). Almmost all the cells present are erythroid precursors.
(M7). Top. Note the numerous megakaryoblasts (arrowheadl), one of
Note the rubriblasts (large arrows) and the nonerythroid blast
which is in mmitosis. Also note the abundant vacuolated cytoplasm with
(arrowhead), which probably is a myeloblast. Wright stain.
ruffled borders. Bottom. Note the broken megakaryoblast (arrowhead).
Wright stain
megakaryoblasts may also stain positive for acetylcholine
esterase, a specific cytochemical marker for this cell line.
 This leukemia is rare in animals. While most cases of AML
 are rapidly fatal in domestic animals, one dog survived 2
years while being treated with chemotherapy for acute
megalkaryoblastic leukemia.
Chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms
Myelopoliferative neoplasms in people are classified as
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML),. chronic neutrophilic
leukemia (CNL), polycythemia vera (PV), essential throm-
bocythemia (ET), primary myelofibrosis (PMF). chronic
eosinophilic leukemia (CEL) and CEL not otherwise speci-
Figure 15.20 Blood film from a dog with erythroleukemia (M6). Note
fied (CEL, NOS), mastocytosis, and myeloproliferative neo-
the rubriblast (arrowheadl) and myeloblast (arrow). Also note the typical
plasm unclassifiable (MPN,U). The phenotypic diversity
lack of polychromasia, because the erythroid precursors do not mature
among these neoplasms is attributable to various genetic
norrmally. Wright stain.
mutations. Best characterized among these mutations is a
gene mutation located in the Philadelphia chromosome that
is associated with CML. Other mutations have been discov-
Megakaryoblastic leukemia (M7)
-ou aada j s ia a j is n an
More than 20% of all nucleated cells or nonerythroid cells
plasms. CML in people is a clonal stem cell disorder with
is comprised of megakaryoblasts in the M7 stage. An
proliferations involving several or all of the hematopoietic
increased concentration of megakaryocytes may be present
 cell lineages, and is characterized by neutrophilia, baso-
as well, and megakaryoblasts usually are detected in the
philia, and eosinophilia. CNL in people is rare, and charac-
blood (Fig. 15.2l). Animals often are thrombocytopenic.
terized by a marked leukocytosis composed of segmented
although thrombocytosis has been reported. Immunohisto-
neutrophils and band forms. Polycythemia and essential
chemical techniques to detect reactivity for factor VIII-
thrombocythemia have a relatively indolent course that
related antigen and platelet glycoprotein IIa sometimes are
results in a slight decrease in lifespan. Polycythemia in
necessary to definitively identify megakaryoblasts. Primitive
people may transform to AML. Primary myelofibrosis is
174
locytic precursors, with progressive myelofibrosis. CEL and
CEL, NOS result in persistent blood, bone marrow and tissue
eosinophilia and must be distinguished from hypereosino.
philia. Mastocytosis in people results from clonal expansion
of mast cells, and is divided into localized or diffuse cutane-
ous mastocytosis, and systemic mastocytosis with variable
involvement of bone marrow. Systemic mastocytosis has
three possible manifestations: accumulations of mast cells in
lymph nodes, spleen, liver, and GI tract with an indolent
course; mast cell leukemia with a rapid course, and mast cell
sarcoma with development of mast cell leukemia. Most of
the unclassifiable myeloproliferative neoplasms are early
stages of other types of myeloproliferative neoplasms that
have not developed diagnostic features. This section presents
a brief discussion of these rela tively rare disorders in animals.
Polycythemia vera, which is a chronic myeloproliferative
Figure 15.22 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with chronic
disorder of erythrocytes, is discussed in Chapter 9.
myelogenous leukemia. Note the increased concentration of rnyeloblasts
In animals, the diagnosis is usually based on clinical and
(arrows). Although somme degree of maturation to segrmented neutrophils
morphologic features. Cells are usually relatively normal to
is occurring. the maturation appears to be disorderly. Very few erythroid
mildly dysplastic. The difficulty of making these diagnoses is
 precursors were present in the marrow, and none is present in this field.
that they are difficult to distinguish from hyperplasia, and
Wright stain
thus other causes for increased leukocytes, platelets, or
erythrocytes must be eliminated.
 Chronic granulocytic (myelogenous) leukemia
The disorder that has been historically described in dogs and
cats as CML more closely resembles human CNL, as neutro-
philia predominates, and there is an absence of eosinophilia
and basophilia. The morphologic equivalent of human CML
has not been described in detail in animals. These chronic
leukemias are rare in domestic animals and are character-
ized by marked neutrophilia, a left shift that often is disor-
derly, and anemia. A monocytosis may be present as well.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia has been reported more
frequently in dogs than in cats. Dysgranulopoiesis may be
present and include hypersegmented nuclei and giant meta-
myelocytes and bands (Fig. 15.22). These leukemias.
however, can be differentiated from myelodysplastic syn-
drome by the marked leukocytosis in the blood. Inflamma-
Figure 15.23 Blood filrm from a dog with chronic rmyelogenou5
 tory responses can mimic myeloprolifera tive neoplasms, and
leukemia in blast crisis. Note the cellin mitosis (upper left cormer) and the 
such "leukemoid reactions" often are misdiagnosed as lel-
myeloblast (arrow). The nucleated cell concentration in this dog wa5
kemias. Marrow examination may not be helpful in distin-
150,000 cells/μL. Wright stain
guishing the two, because marked inflammatory leukograms
can be associated with marked granulocytic hyperplasia and
a pronounced increase in the M:E ratio and the orderliness
erative neoplasms also usually develop much more severe
of maturation may appear disrupted. Histopathologic evalu-
anemia than animals with inflammatory disease.
ation of the spleen and liver is not always helpful, because
these organs may exhibit marked granulopoiesis with some
Eosinophilic leukemia
types of inflammatory disease. Animals with myeloprolifera-
Eosinophilic leukemia is rare but has been reported primar-
tive neoplasms usually eventually develop a disorderly left
ily in FeLV-negative cats. It is characterized by eosinophilia.
shift, and have a "blast crisis." during which myeloblasts
immature eosinophils in the blood, eosinophil predomi-
appear in the blood (Fig. 15.23). Animals with myeloprolif-
nance in the marrow (Fig. 15.24), and infiltration of various
175
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
appear atypical, with hypo- or hypergranularity. and giant
forms may be present. The concentrations of megakaryo-
cytes and megakaryoblasts usually are increased in the bone
marrow as well. The platelet concentration may be increased
secondary to many other disorders, such as iron deficiency
anemia, inflammation, antineoplastic drug therapy, cortico-
steroids, and neoplasia (particularly lymphoma).
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Although the term lymphoproliferative disorder can be used
to describe any abnormal proliferation of lymphoid cells, it
more commonly is used to describe neoplastic proliferations.
Tumors that derive from lymphocytes or plasma cells are
classifed as lymphoproliferative, or lymphoid neoplasms.
Lymphoproliferative disorders are more common than
Figure 15.24 Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with eosinophilic
myeloproliferative disorders in domestic animals, and they
leukemmia or hypereosinophilic syndrome. Note the eosinophil precursors
are more common in cats than in any of the other domestic
(large arrows) and the numerous, mature eosinophils (arrowheads). For
species. As with myeloproliferative disorders, cats with
 comparison, note the neutrophil (smmall arrow). Wright stain. (Specirmen
certain types of lymphoproliferative disorders usually test
courtesy of Antech Diagnostics.)
positive for FeLV, FIV, or both. Lymphoproliferative disorders
generally are categorized as primary lymphoid leukemia.
lymphoma, or plasma cell tumors, including multiple
organs with eosinophils. This disorder is difficult to differen-
myeloma and solitary plasma cell tumors. In turn, the leu-
tiate from feline hypereosinophilic syndrome, in which the
kemias can be classified as either acute or chronic, as dis-
same characteristics can be seen, although the eosinophilic
left shift may be more orderly with hypereosinophilic syn-
cussed earlier, and are termed acute lymphoblastic leukemia
or chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Use of polymerase chain
drome. Intestinal involvement is typical as well. Recent
reaction to detect antigen-receptor rearrangements can
reports are suggestive that the separation between the two
identify a clonal, neoplastic population of cells and usually
disorders may be artificial, and that they both may represent
a neoplastic proliferation of eosinophils. Clinical signs are
can differentiate nonneoplastic lymphoproliferative disor-
ders from those that are neoplastic.
similar to those seen in animals with other myeloprolifera-
Lymphoid leukemia differs from malignant lymphoma
tive disorders. Typically, however, they also include thick-
ened bowel loops. diarrhea. and vomiting. because the
primarily in the anatomic distribution. Solid neoplastic
masses are present in lymphoma, but are less common in
intestine usually is infiltrated. Most cats die within 6 months
patients with primary lymphoid leukemia. At least 10-25%
of the diagnosis being established, but hydroxyurea in com-
of dogs and cats with lymphoma develop leukemia, however.
bination with prednisone may prolong survival.
and some investigators report that approximately 65% of
dogs with multicentric lymphoma are leukemic at the time
Chronic basophilic leukemia
of presentation (if the determination of leukemia is based
Chronic basophilic leukemia is very rare, but has been
on the evaluation of blood, bone marrow aspirates, and
reported in dogs and cats. Abnormal blood findings include
marked basophilia with an orderly left shift of the basophilic
that arises in the bone marrow rather than in the lymph
series, anemia, and occasionally thrombocytosis. Multiple
nodes or spleen has a different biologic behavior, response
organs usually are infiltrated. Chronic basophilic leukemia
to thera py, and prognosis.
must be differentiated from mast cell leukemia. Basophils
have segmented nuclei, whereas mast cells have round
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
nuclei. Basophilic myelocytes, however, may be difficult to
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is characterized by the pres-
differentiate from mast cells, and animals with systemic mast
ence of lymphoblasts in the blood and bone marrow (Figs.
cell neoplasia may have a mild basophilia.
15.25 through 15.28). In both acute lymphoblastic leukemia
and the leukemic phase of multicentric lymphoma (Stage
Essential thrombocythemia
V), however, lymphoblasts can be found in the blood and
Essential thrombocythemia is a very rare chronic myelopro-
bone marrow, thereby making these two disorders difficult
liferative disorder that is characterized by a marked increase
to differentiate. A general rule is that if lymphadenopathy
in the platelet concentration (>l,000,000). Platelets may
is not present, the disorder most likely is acute lymphoblastic
176
CHAPTER 15 Lymphoproliferative Disorders and Myeloid Neoplasms
Figure 15.25 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with acute
Figure 15.27 Blood filrm from a dog with acute lyrphoblastic leukermia.
ymphoblastic leukemmia. Note that normal hematopoietic cells are absent,
Note the numerous large lyrnphoblasts. Wright stain.
having been replaced by lymphoblasts (arrow). Wright stain.
Figure 15.26 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with acute
Figure 15.28 Blood filrm from a dog with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
ymphoblastic leukemia. Numerous intermediate-sized lymphoid cells are
and a nucleated cell count of 300,000 cells/μl. All the cells present are
 present and have completely replaced the normal marrow elerments. Note 
lymphoblasts (arrow). Note the large size, high nucleus:cytoplasrm ratio,
the lymphoblasts (arrows) and lymphocytes (arrowheads). Wright stain.
and nucleoli with the nuclei. Wright stain.
leukemia rather than lymphoma. Approximately half of the
ogy, as described earlier. Occasionally, however, certain types
dogs with acute lymphoblastic leukermia, however. also
of lymphoblasts (e.g. large granular lymphoblasts) may
have lymphadenopathy. As with the myeloproliferative dis-
contain a few fine to coarse azurophilic granules (Fig. 15.29).
orders, clinical signs relate either to a lack of normal hema-
These cells may be difficult to distinguish from myeloblasts.
topoietic cells or to the infiltration of organs by neoplastic
in which case immunophenotyping (using monoclonal anti-
cells. Common findings include pale mucous membranes.
splenomegaly. and hepatomegaly, lethargy. and weight loss.
Common CBC abnormalities include anemia, thrombocyto-
helpful, because lymphoblasts typically are negative for most
penia, lymphocytosis, and lymphoblasts in the blood.
of the cytochemical stains except nonspecific esterase. Che-
Lymphoblasts usually can be differentiated from other
 motherapy, usually involving a combination of vincristine,
types of immature cells based on their chara cteristic morphol-
cyclophosphamide, and prednisone, may result in remission,
177
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Figure 15.29 Bone marrow aspirate frorm a dog with lymphoblastic
Figure 15.30 Blood film from a dog with chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
leukemmia. Note the presence of a few cells with azurophilic granules
Note the relatively small, normal-appearing lyrmphocytes (arrows). The
within the cytoplasrn (arrows), which are referred to as large granular
diagnosis of leukemia was based on the high concentration of small
lyrmphoblasts. These granules make this type of leukemnia dlifficult to
lymphocytes in the blood (40,000 cells/μL) and by polyrmerase chain
distinguish frorm M1 based on cell morphology alone. Wright stain.
 reaction results. Wright stain
though usually of short dura tion. The clinical course is usually
the result of chronic lymphocytic leukemia or lymphoma.
rapid, progressive and poorly responsive to therapy. Middle-
aged to older dogs are usually affected. Cats are usually
lymphocytosis is immunophenotyping by flow cytometry to
younger and FeLV positive. The majority of acute lympho-
determine the phenotypic diversity of the circulating cells.
blastic leukemias and leukemias associated with Stage V
Clonality testing using the polymerase chain reaction for
lymphoma in dogs have been thought to be of B-cell origin.
antigen receptor rearrangements assay is a useful second
although one study? found that the prevalence of B and T
step in cases in which the phenotype data are equivocal.
Once the diagnosis of malignancy has been established, the
chronic lymphocytic leukemia was not statistically different.
immunophenotype also provides prognostic information in
dogs (see Chapter 13).
Chronic lymphocyte leukemia (CLL)
Clinical signs and abnormalities found in ill animals are
In animals with chronic lymphocytic leukemia, the lympho-
similar to those seen in animals with other types of leuke-
cytes are small and appear well-differentiated (Fig. 15.30).
mia, including lethargy. anorexia, pale mucous membranes.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia is more common in dogs
lymphadenopathy.
 splenomegaly. and 
I hepatomegaly.
than in other domestic animals. This type of leukemia.
However, some animals are asymptomatic, and the lympho-
however, must be differentiated from physiologic lympho-
cytosis is discovered during a wellness exams or presurgical
cytosis in excited cats (usually kittens), in which the abso-
screening. The most striking CBC abnormality is the lym-
lute lymphocyte count may reach 20.000cells/μL. Other
phocytosis, which may range from increased slightly above
differential diagnoses include lymphocytosis induced by
the reference interval to greater than 300,000/μL. Anemia
chronic antigenic stimulation, such as that seen in dogs with
and thrombocytopenia may be present, but the anemia
chronic ehrlichiosis. Lymphocytosis is rare and usually mild
usually is not as severe as that seen in animals with acute
(<10,00olymphocytes/μL) with other types of antigenic
lymphoblastic leukemia. The concentration of small lym-
stimulation, however. Lymphocytosis predominated by large
phocytes in the marrow is greater than normal, being
granular lymphocytes (LGL) may be seen in animals with
reported to range from 25% to 93% of cells. Monoclonal
ehrlichiosis or chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Mild to mod-
 gammopathies occasionally are seen in animals with chronic
erate lymphocytosis has been reported as an infrequent
lymphocytic leukemia.
finding in cats infected with Bartonella henselae. The list of
 Four main phenotypic classifications have been described
major differentials for persistent nonneoplastic lymphocyte
in dogs with CLL: CD8+ T-cell, CD21+ B-cell, CD4-8-5+
expansion in dogs and cats is short and most of these condi-
(aberrant T-cell phenotype), and CD34+ (undifferentiated
tions are relatively uncommon. Persistent lymphocytosis of
progenitor). T-cell CLL is more common in dogs and cats
small, mature, or reactive lymphocytes is most commonly
than is B-cell CLL, many of the dogs with T-cell leukemia
178
have LGL leukemia, and T-cells tend to proliferate in the
for determining prognosis in dogs with CLL. Expression of
CD34 predicts poor outcome with much shorter survival
type, dogs presenting with a >30,000lymphocytes/μL have
significantly shorter median survival than those presenting
with <30,000 lymphocytes/μL. Within the T-cell leukemias.
dogs with CD4-8-5+ leukemia and dogs with the CD8+ T-cell
phenotype have a similar survival time. A CD2l+ B-cell
  s   r so i
shorter survival time than those with smaller circulating
cells. In another study, old dogs with B-CLL survived longer
than young dogs. and anemic dogs with T-CLL survived a
shorter time than dogs without anemia.
Therapeutic  intervention is controversial, because
untreated animals may live for months to years. Recom-
Figure 15.31 Bone marrow aspirate from a dog with plasma cell
  s  so    so
myeloma. Almost all the cells present are plasma cells. Note the more
combination of chlorambucil and prednisone; long remis-
wseldoto juepunge pue snapnu auanna ue yim lin euseld jeidk
sions and survival can be achieved. The median survival
(arrowhead),. Wright stain.
time for dogs is more than l year. Survival time has been
reported to be significantly different in untreated dogs with
chronic lymphocytic leukermia (~450 days), as compared to
that of dogs with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (~65 days).
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in cats is rarely associated
with FeLV infection.
Plasma cell myeloma (multiple myeloma)
Plasma cells derive from B-lymphocytes and typically secrete
immunoglobulins. Plasma cell myeloma is a relatively rare
lymphoproliferative neoplasm, in which plasma cells or their
precursors proliferate abnormally (Figs. 15.3l and 15.32).
As implied by the term multiple myeloma, plasma cells pro-
liferate in the bone marrow at multiple sites. The incidence
of multiple myeloma in cats is thought to be even less than
that in dogs and usually is not associated with FeLV or FIV
infections. These plasma cell proliferations may be detected
on bone marrow films, but plasma cells only rarely are seen
on blood films. When plasma cell leukemia is present, the
survival time usually is less. Markedly increased plasma cell
Figure 15.32 Left. Bone marrow aspirate frorm a dog with plasma cell
concentration in the bone marrow (>20% of all nucleated
myeloma. These plasma cells have eosinophilic-colored cytoplasrm that is
ruffled, and they sometirmes are referred to as flame cells. The cytoplasm
cells) often results from plasma cell neoplasia, but plasma
is flled with inmunoglobulin. Right. Bone marrow aspirate from a dog
cell proliferation also may occur secondary to chronic anti-
with plasrma cell myelorma. Note the variation in cell size, ranging from
genic stimulation. Neoplastic plasma cells often are seen in
the large, inmature plasma cell with loose chromatin (arrow) to the small
[ a a s   
cells with more condensed chromatin (arrowhead). Wright Stain.
or immature, with occasional multinucleated plasma cells
being present. Neoplastic cells may appear to be very well-
differentiated, however, in which case they are difficult to
thy, usually immunoglobulin G or A but, occasionally.
distinguish from normal plasma cells. Plasma cells occasion-
immunoglobulin M (Fig. 15.33). The immunoglobulins syn-
ally may have a ruffled eosinophilic cytoplasmic margin that
thesized by malignant plasma cells also are known as para-
appears similar to a flame; these are termed flaming plasma
proteins. Other diagnostic features include Bence-Jones
cells or flame cells (Fig. 15.32).
protein (i.e., light chains of immunoglobulins) in the urine
An important diagnostic and clinical manifestation of
and radiographic evidence of osteolysis (Fig. 15.34). Two or
plasma cell myeloma is a monoclonal or biclonal gammopa-
three of these four features traditionally are considered to
179
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
be essential for the diagnosis of plasma cell myeloma to
HLaboratories
be established. Dogs with chronic ehrlichiosis, however.
may very rarely have a monoclonal gammopathy. usually
within a polyclonal gammopathy, and a markedly increased
concentration of plasma cells in the bone marrow. Other
disorders in which monoclonal gammopathies have been
rarely reported include chronic lymphocytic leukemia, lym-
phoma, feline infectious peritonitis, and extramedullary
 plasmacytoma.
Clinical signs associated with multiple myeloma are
usually associated with plasma cell infiltration of the bone
marrow and other organs or with increased concentration
of circulating immunoglobulins. which may result in
increased viscosity of the blood (i.e., hyperviscosity syn-
drome). Lethargy. anorexia, lameness, bleeding from the
Albumin
nares, paresis. polyuria. and polydipsia are relatively
common. Fundoscopic changes such as retinal hemorrhages
Figure 15.33 Protein electrophoretograr frorm a dog with plasma cell
and engorged retinal blood vessels commonly are observed
myelorma and monoclonal garmmopathy. Note the monoclonal
as well. Renal disease is relatively common and usually
immunoglobulin (lgG) spike at the right. Albumin is represented by the
 srnaller spike to the left. Wright stain.
   r   
T3
14
Figure 15.34 (A) Lateral lumbar radiograph of a dog with multiple myeloma. There are numerous small lucencies in the spinous processes and larger
lucent lesions in the body of L3 and the larmina of L5 (white arrows) due to bone effacement from neoplastic cells. (B) Sagittal T2-weighted magnetic
resonance image of the thoracic spine of a dog with rmultiple myeloma. Effacemment of the 2nd thoracic vertebral body by neoplastic cells has led to a
pathologic fracture. Note the foreshortened irregular shape (black arrow) compared to the adjacent normal 1st, 3rd, and 4th thoracic vertebrae
(T1, T3, and T4, respectively). A portion of the fractured vertebra is protruding into the vertebral canal and causing spinal cord compression. The increased
signal (whiteness) of the spinal cord (white arrows) is due to edema and inflarnmation. Vertebral fracture causing paralysis or paresis is a relatively common
complication of multiple myelomma. (Courtesy Dr. Donald Thrall, North Carolina State University.)
180
tubular and glomerular function, but it sometimes occurs
Gioia G, Mortarino M, Gelain ME, er al. (20ll) Immunophenotype-
secondary to hypercalcemia with subsequent calcification of
related microRNA expression in canine chronic lymphocytic leu-
renal tissue. Central nervous system impairment may result
kemia.Ver Immunol Immunopatho! 142: 228-35.
Grindem CB (1 996) Blood cell markers. Ver Clin North Am Small Anim
in small vessels. Bleeding diatheses, which are seen in
Pracr 26: 1043-64.
Grindem CB, Stevens JB, Perman V (1986) Cytochemical reactions
approximately one-third of dogs with multiple myeloma.
in cells from leukemic dogs. Ver Pathol 23: 103-9.
may result from thrombocytopenia, but it also can result
Groshek PM, Dean GA, Hoover EA (1994) Monoclonal antibodies iden-
from the abnormal immunoglobulins interfering with plate-
tifying feline hemopoietic cell lineages. Comp Hemaro! 4: 181-91.
let function. Common findings in feline multiple myeloma
Jain NC, Kono CS, Madewell BR (1989) Cytochemical studies of
include atypical plasma cell morphology. hypocholesterol-
normal feline blood and bone marrow cells. Blur 58: 195-9.
emia, anemia, bone lesions, and multi-organ involvement.
Jain NC, Madewell BR, Weller RE, et al. (198 l) Clinical-pathological
In one retrospective study, all of the affected cats examined
fndings and cytochemical characterization of myelomonocytic
had noncutaneous, extramedullary tumors of the spleen,
leukemia in 5 dogs. J Comp Pathol 9l: 17-31.
liver, or lymph nodes.
Momoi Y, Nagase M, Okamoto Y, er al. (1993) Rearrangements of
Dogs with multiple myeloma that are treated with alkylat-
immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor genes in canine lymphoma/
leukemia cells. J Ver Med Sri 55: 755-80.
ing agents (e.g., melphalan or cyclophosphamide) often
Mortarino M, Gelain ME, Gioia G, et al. (2000) ZAP-70 and Syk
have survival times of from l to 2 years. Reported survival
expression in canine lymphoid cells and preliminary results on 
times in treated cats usually are less. Animals with multiple
leukaemia cases. Ver Immunol Immunopatho! 128: 395-401.
myeloma that are azotemic or have severe anemia, neutro-
Tasca S, Carli E, Caldin M, er al. (2009) Hematologic abnormalities
penia, or thrombocytopenia usually have a poorer prognosis.
and flow cytometric immunophenotyping results in dogs with hema-
Hypercalcemia, Bence-Jones proteinuria, plasma cell leuke-
topoietic neoplasia: 210 cases (2002-2006). Ver Clin Parho/ 38: 2-12.
mia, and extensive bony lesions also are associated with a
Villiers E, Baines S, Law AM, er af. (2006) Identification of acute
shorter survival time. In humans, stem cell transplantation
offers significantly improved prognosis and survival rates.
oxidase, MAC387, and a canine neutrophil-specific antibody. Ver
Clin Parho! 35: 55-71.
Myelodysplastic symdrome
References
Baker RJ, Valli VE (1986) Dysmyelopoiesis in the cat: a hematologi-
1. Tasca S, Carli E, Caldin M, et al. (2009) Hematologic abnormali-
man. Can J Ver Res 50: 3-6.
ties and flow cytometric immunophenotyping results in dogs
Boone LI, Knauer KW, Rapp SW, et al. (1998) Use of human recom-
with hematopoietic neoplasia: 210 cases (2002-2006). Ver Clin
binant erythropoietin and prednisone for treatment of myelodys-
Patho/38:2-12.
 plastic symdrome with erythroid predominance in a dog. J Am Vet
2. Adam F Villiers E, Watson S, er al. (2009) Clinical pathological
Med Assor 213: 999-1001.
and epidemiological assesment of morphologically and immu-
Breuer W, Hermanns W, Thiele J (1999) Myelodysplastic symdrome
nologically confirmed canine leukaemia. Ver Comp Onrol 7:
(MDS), acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and chronic myelopro-
181-95.
liferative disorder (CMPD) in cats. J Comp Parho! 12l: 203-16.
Linenberger ML, Abkowitz JL (l995) Haematological disorders
associated with feline retrovirus infections. Baillieres Clin Haemaro!
8: 73-112.
Suggested reading
McManus PM, Hess RS (1998) Myelodysplastic changes in a dog
with subsequent acute myeloid leukemia. Ver Clin Patho! 27: 112-15.
Cytochemistry, immunophenotyping, and PCR
Miyamoto T, Horie T, Shimada T, er al. (1999) Long-term case study
Cobbold S, Holmes M, Willett B (1994) The immunology of com-
of myelodysplastic symdrome in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:
 panion animals: reagents and therapeutic strategies with potential
475-81.
veterinary and human clinical applications. Immunol Today 15:
         ss
347-52.
two dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 187: 1038-40.
Comazzi S, Gelain ME, Martini V, et al. (20ll) Immunophenotype
 predicts survival time in dogs with chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Myeloproliferative and lynphoproliferative
J Ver Intern Med 25: 100-6.
disorders (general)
Dean GA, Groshek PM, Jain NC, et al. (1995) Immunophenotypic
Adam F, Villiers E, Watson S, er al. (2009) Clinical pathological and
analysis of feline hemolymphatic neoplasia using flow cytometry.
epidemiological assessment of morphologically and immunologi-
Comp Hematol 5: 84-92.
cally confirmed canine leukaemia. Ver Comp Onco! 7: 18l-95.
Facklan NR, Kociba GJ {1986) Cytochemical characterization of
 Breen M, Modiano JF (2008) Evolutionarily conserved cytogenetic
feline leukemic cells. Ver Pathol 23: 155-61.
Facklan NR, Kociba GJ (1985) Cytochemical characterization of
man and his best friend share more than companionship. Chromo-
leukemic cells from 20 dogs. Ver Patho! 22: 363-9.
some Res 16: 145-54.
181
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Durando MM, Alleman AR, Harvey JW (1994) Myelodysplastic
the dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 186: 681-5.
Grindem CB (1985) Utrastructural morphology of leukemic cells
Evans RJ, Jones DRE, Gruffydd-Jones T (2008) Essential thrombo-
from 14 dogs. Ver Pathol 22: 456-62.
cythaemia in the dog and cat: a report of four cases. J. Small Anim
Grindem CB, Perman V, Stevens JB (1985) Morphological classifica-
Pract 23(8): 457-67.
 tion and clinical and pathological characteristics of spontaneous
Fine DM, Tvedten HW (1999) Chronic granulocytic leukemia in a
Jeukemia in 10 cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21: 227-36.
dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 214: 1809-12.
Grindem CB, Stevens JB, Perman V (1 985) Morphological classifica-
Gelain ME, Antoniazzi E, Bertazzolo W, et al. (2006) Chronic eosino-
 tion amd clinical and pathological characteristics of spontaneous
philic leukemia in a cat: cytochemical and immunophenotypical
leukemia in 17 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2l: 219-26.
features. Ver Clin Pathol 35: 454-9.
Hutson CA, Rideout BA, Pederson NC (199l) Neoplasia associated 
 Gorman NT, Evans RJ ( 1987) Myeloproliferative disease in the dog
 with feline immunodeficiency virus infection in cats from South-
and cat: clinical presentations, diagnosis, and treatment. Ver Rec
erm Califormia. J Am Ver Med Assor 199: 1357-62.
121: 490-6.
Jain NC (1993) The leukemias. Im: NC Jain, Essentials of Vererinary
Grondin TM, Wilkerson MJ, Lurye JC, et al. (2006) Blood smear
Hemarology. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger pp. 319-48.
Jain NC (1993) The leukemias: general aspects. In: NC Jain, Essen-
 Hammer AS (1991 ) Thrombocytosis in dogs and cats: a retrospective
fials of Vererinary Hematology. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, pp.
study. Comp Haemaro! 1: 181-6.
307-18.
Hammer AS, Cuoto CG, Getzy D, et al. (l990) Essential thrombo-
 Jain NC, Madewell BR, Weller RE, et al. (198 l) Clinical-pathological
cythemia in a cat. J Vet Intern Med 4: 87-91.
fndings and cytochemical characterization of myelomonocytic
Harvey JW, Shields RP, Gaskin JM (1978) Feline myeloproliferative
Jeukaemia in 5 dogs. J Comp Pathol 91: 17-31.
 disease. Changing manifestation in the peripheral blood. Vet 
Macy Dw (1989) Hematopoietic tumors. Feline retroviruses. In:
Patho1 15: 437-48.
Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds.). Small Animal Clinical Oncology.
     a  
2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp. 432-51.
exemplified by six cats with eosinophilic enteritis. Ver Parhol 18:
Reagan WJ, DeNicola DB (1998) Myeloproliferative and lympho-
188-200.
proliferative disorders. In: Morrison WB. Cancer in Dogs and Cars:
 Hiraoka H, Hisasue M, Nagashima N, er al. (2007) A dog with myelo-
Medical and Surgical Management. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins,
 dysplastic syndrome: chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. J Ver Med
pp. 95-122.
Sri 69(6): 665-8.
Rinsky RA, Smith AB, Hormung R, et al. (1 987) Benzene and leu-
 Hisasue M, Nagashima N, Nishigaki K, et al. (2009) Myelodysplastic
kemia. N Eng! J Med 316: 104450.
 symdromes and acute myeloid leukemia in cats infected with
Savage CJ (1998) Lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative dis-
feline leukemia virus clone33 containing a unique long terminal
orders. Ver Clin North Am Equine Pracr 14: 563-78.
repeat. Inr J Cancer 124: 1133-41.
Shelton GH, Linenberger ML, Abkowitz JL (199l) Hematologic
Hisasue M, Okayama H, Okayama T, er al. (200l) Hematologic
abnormalities in cats seropositive for feline immunodeficiency
abnormalities and outcome of l6 cats with myelodysplastic syn-
virus. J Am Ver Med Assoc 199: 1353-7.
dromes. J Ver Intern Med 15: 471-7.
Weiss DJ (2006) A retrospective study of the incidence and the
Hopper PE, Mandell CP, Turrel JM, et al. (1989) Probable essential
classification of bone marrow disorders in the dog at a veterinary
thrombocythemia in a dog. J Ver Intern Med 3: 79-85.
teaching hospital (1996-2004). J Ver Interm Med 20: 955-61.
Huibregtse BA, Turner JL (1994) Hypereosinophilic syndrome and
eosinophilic leukemia: a comparison of 22 hypereosinophilic cats.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30: 591-9.
Myeloproliferative neoplasms and acute myeloid leukermia
 Jain NC (1993) Classification of myeloproliferative disorders in cats
 Blue JT (1988) Myelofibrosis in cats with myelodysplastic syndrome
using criteria proposed by the Animal Leukaemia Study Group:
and acute myelogenous leukemia. Ver Pathol 25: 154-60.
a retrospective study of 18l cases (1969-1992). Comp Haematol Int
 Blue JT (2003) Myelodysplasia: differentiating neoplastic from non-
1: 125-34
 neoplastic syndromes of ineffective hematopoiesis in dogs. Toxico!
 Jain NC, Blue JT, Grindem CB, et al. (199l) Proposed criteria for
Pathol 31 Suppl(44-8).
classification of acute myeloid leukemias in dogs and cats—a
Blue JT, French TW, Kranz JS (1988) Non-lymphoid hematopoietic
report of the animal leukemia study group. Ver Clin Patho! 20:
neoplasia in cats: a retrospective study of 60 cases. Cormef/ Ver 78:
63-82.
2142.
Juopperi TA, Bienzle D, Bernreuter DC, et al. (20ll) Prognostic
Boudreaux MK, Blue JT, Durham SK, et af. (1984) Intravascular
markers for myeloid neoplasms: a comparative review of the
leukostasis in a horse with myelomonocytic leukemia. Ver Parho!
literature and goals for future investigation. Ver Parhol 48:
21: 544-6.
182-97.
Clark P, Cormelisse CJ, Schott HC, er al. (1999) Myeloblastic leukae-
Leifer CE, Matus RE, Patnaik AK, et al. (1983) Chronic myelogenous
mia in a Morgan horse mare. Equine Ver J; 3l: 446-8.
leukemia in the dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 183: 686-9.
Colbatzky F, Hermanns W (1993) Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
McManus PM (2005) Classification of myeloid neoplasms: a com-
in one cat and two dogs. Ver Patho! 30: 186-94.
parative review. Ver Clin Patho! 34: 189-212.
Dunn JK, Heath MF Jefferies AR, et al. {l999) Diagnostic and
hematologic features of probable essential thrombocythemia in
Prognosnic Indicarors. Proc. American College of Veterinary Intemal
two dogs. Ver Clin Patho! 28: 131-8.
Medicine Forum. Annaheim, CA, USA. 575-7.
182
Messick J, Carothers M, Wellman M (1990) Identification and char-
 Breitschwerdt EB (2008) Feline bartonellosis and cat scratch disease.
acterization of megakaryoblasts in acute megakaryoblastic leuke-
Ver Immunol Immunopathol 123: 167-71.
mia in a dog. Ver Pathol 27: 212-14.
Comazzi S, Gelain ME, Martini V, er al. (20ll) Immunophenotype
Miyamoto T, Hachimura H, Amimoto A (1996) A case of mega-
karyoblastic leukemia in a dog. J Ver Med Sci 58: 177-9.
JVer Interm Med 25:100-6.
Ndikuwera J, Smith DA, Obsolo MJ, et al. (1992) Chronic granulo-
Couto CG, Ruehl W, Muir S (1984) Plasma cell leukemia and mono-
cytic leukaemia/eosinophilic leukaemia in a dog? J Small Anim
clonal (IgG) gammopathy in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 184:
Pracr 33: 353-7.
90-2.
Darbes J, Majzoub M, Breuer W, er al. (1998) Large granular lym-
Educ Prarr Ver 13: 549-55.
 phocyte leukemia/lymphoma in six cats. Ver Pathol 35: 370-9.
Pucheu-Haston CM, Camus A, Taboada J, et al. (1995) Megakaryo-
Hodgkins EM, Zink] JG, Madewell BR (1980) Chronic lymphocytic
blastic leukemia in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 207: 194-6.
leukemia in the dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 177: 704-7.
Puette M, Latimer KS (1997) Acute granulocytic leukemia in a
 Kyle KN, Wright Z (2010) Apparent feline leukemia virus-induced
slaughter goat. J Ver Diagn Invesr 9: 318-19.
chronic lymphocytic leukemia and response to treatment. J Feline 
Raskin RE (1996) Myelopoiesis and myeloproliferative disorders. Ver
Med Surg 12: 341-4.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pracr 26: 1023-42.
Leifer CE, Matus RE (1986) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in the
Ringger NC, Edens L, Bain P, et al. (1997) Acute myelogenous leu-
dog: 22 cases (1974-1984). J Am Ver Med Assoc 1986: 189:
kaemia in a mare. Ausr Ver J 75: 329-31.
21417.
Shimada T, Matsumoto Y, Okuda M, et al. (1995) Erythroleukemia
 Leifer CE, Matus RE (1985) Lymphoid leukemia in the dog: acute
 in two cats naturally infected with feline leukemia virus in the
lympho blastic leukemia and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Vet
same household. J Ver Med Sei 57: 199-204.
Clin North Am SmalAnim Pracr 15:723-39.
Sykes GP, King JM, Cooper BC (1985) Retrovirus-like particles
Ludwig H, Meran J, Zojer N (1999) Multiple myeloma: an update 
associated with myeloproliferative disease in the dog. J Comp
on biology and treatment. Annals Oncology 10(Suppl 6): 3l-43.
Pathol 95: 559-64.
MacEwen G (l989) Hematopoietic tumors. Feline lymphoma 
Takayama H, Gejima S, Honma A, et al. (1996) Acute myeloblastic
and leukemias. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds), Small Anima!
leukaemia in a cow. J Comp Patho! 1l5: 95-101.
Clinical Oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp.
Tarrant JM, Stokol T, Blue JT, et al. (200ly Diagnosis of chronic
479-95.
myelogenous leukemia in a dog using morphologic, cytochemical.
MacEwen EG, Young KM (1989) Hematopoietic tumors. Canine
and flow cytometric techniques. Ver Clin Patho! 30: 19-24.
lymphoma and lymphoid leukemias. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen
Toth SR, Onions DE, Jarrett O (1986) Histopathological and hema-
EG (eds.), Small Animal Clinical Oncology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB
tological findings in myeloid leukemia induced by a new feline
Saunders, 451-77.
leukemia virus isolate. Ver Parhol 23: 462-70.
 McManus P (2008) Lymphoma in veterinary medicine: no longer a
Watanabe Y, Sekine T, Yabe M, er al. (l989) Myeloproliferative
one-word diagnosis. Ver Clin Pathol 37: 360-2.
disease in a calf. J Comp Pathol 1l9: 83-7.
Madewell BR (1986) Hematological and bone marrow cytological
Jo uauan pe aoosaqd au oii siuasul man (eoo ra ssiam
  r d  ya sh s un se
Hosp Assoc 22: 235-40.
Ver Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33(6): 1317-34.
Madewell BR, Munn RJ (l990) Canine lymphoproliferative
Weiss DJ (2005) Recognition and classification of dysmyelopoiesis
disorders. An ultra structural study of 18 cases. J Vet Intern Med 4:
in the dog: a review. J Ver Intern Med. 19: 147-54.
63-70.
Weiss DJ (2006) Evaluation of dysmyelopoiesis in cats: 34 cases
Matus RE, Leifer CE, MacEwen G {1983) Acute lymphoblastic leu-
{1996-2005). J Am Ver Med Assoc 228: 893-7.
kemia in the dog: a review of 30 cases. J Am Ver Med Assor 183:
Weiss DJ, Aird B (200l) Cytologic evaluation of primary and sec-
859-62.
ondary myelodysplastic syndromes in the dog. Ver Clin Patho! 30:
Matus RE, Leifer CE, MacEwen G, et al. (1986) Prognostic factors
67-75.
for multiple myeloma in the dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 188:
Young KM (1985) Myeloproliferative disorders. Ver Clin North Am
1288-92.
Small Anim Pract 15: 769-81.
 Morris JS, Dunn JK, Dobson JM (1993) Canine lymphoid leukemia
Young KM, MacEwen EG (1989) Hematopoietic tumors. Canine
and lymphoma with bone marrow involvement: a review of 24
myeloproliferative disorders. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds.).
cases. J Small Anim Pract 34: 72-9.
Morrison WB (l998) Plasma cell neoplasms. In: Morrison WB.
pp. 495-505.
Cancer in Dogs and Cars: Medical and Surgicat Management. Baltimore:
Young KM, Vail DM (2007) Canine acute myeloid leukemia, chronic
Williams & wilkins, pp. 697-704.
myeloproliferative diseases, and myelodysplasia. In: Withrow SJ,
Mortarino M, Gelain ME, Gioia G, er al. (2000) ZAP-70 and Syk
Vail DM (eds.). Withrow and MacEwen's Smal! Anima! Clinica! Onco!-
 expression in canine lymphoid cells and preliminary results on
0gy. 4th ed. St Louis, MO, USA: Saunders Elsevier, pp. 756-9.
leukaemia cases. Ver Immunol Immunopatho! 128: 395-401.
Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF, et al. (2005) Multiple myeloma in
Lymphoproliferative disorders
16 cats: a retrospective study. Ver Clin Pathol 34: 341-52.
Avery AC, Avery PR (2007) Determining the significance of
 Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD (1989) Prevalence of leukemic blood and
persistent lymphocytosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 37:
bone marrow in dogs with multicentric lymphoma. J Am Ver Med
267-82.
Assoc 193: 1427-9.
183
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Schick RO, Murphy GF, Goldschmidt MH (1994) Cutaneous lym-
Therapy for neoplastic bone marrow disorders
phosarcoma and leukemia in a cat. J Am Ver Med Assor 204:
Cotter SM (1 983) Treatment of lymphoma and leukemia with cyclo-
606-9.
phosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone: I1. Treatment of cats.
 Thrall MA (l98l) Lymphoproliferative disorders. Ver Clin Norrh Am
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19: 166-72.
Small Anim Pracr 1l: 321-47.
-1   61)      5
Thrall MA, Macy DW, Snyder SP, et al. (1984) Cutaneous lympho-
plantation in a cat with acute myeloid leukemia. J Am Ver Med
W awapuas Aiezas suquasai sop e u ewaxnat pue euones
Assoc 208: 12804.
man. Ver Patho! 2l: 182-6.
Hamilton TA (1998) The leukemias. In: Morrison WB (ed.), Cancer
Vail DM (1989) Hematopoietic tumors. Plasma cell neoplasms. In:
in Dogs and Cars: Medical and Surgical Management. Baltimore: Wil-
Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG (eds.), Small Animal Clinical Oncology.
Jiams S wilkins, pp. 721-9.
2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp. 509-20.
Hamilton TA, Morrison WB, DeNicola DB (199l) Cytosine arabino-
Weiser MG, Thrall MA, Fulton R, er al. (199l) Granular lymphocy-
 side chemotherapy for acute megakaryocytic leukemia in a cat.
ssa       s
J Am Ver Med Assoc 199: 359-61.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 199l; 27: 84-8.
Helfand SC (1987) Low-dose cytosine arabinoside-induced remis-
Wellman ML, Couto CG, Starkey RJ, er al. (1989) Lymphocytosis of
sion of lymphoblastic leukemia in a cat. J Am Ver Med Assor 191:
-81  j   an u s e a
707-10.
Workman HC, Vemau W (2003) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in
 Thrall MA, Haskins ME (1997) Bone marrow transplantation. In:
dogs and cats: the veterinary perspective. Ver Clin North Am Smal!
August JR (ed.}. Consultations in Feline Internal Medicine. 3rd ed.
Anim Pracr 33: 1379-9.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp. 514-24.
184
16
Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
Dale C. Baker
Portola Ph armaceuticals, Inc.
The cardiovascular system delivers blood to tissues through.
thrombin, coagulation factors are further activated through
out the body and is susceptible to injury. When mechanical.
feedback amplification loops to enhance the initial stimulus.
inflammatory. or other injury occurs to the vascular system
The culminating event of coagulation factor activation is the
on a daily basis, normal animals have a finely controlled
conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin and the formation of a
system that prevents blood loss, maintains blood flow, and
stable fibrin clot in association with platelets to occlude
allows healing and repair of damaged vessels.
blood flow from a damaged vessel. Defective coagulation
factor activity or absence of coagulation factors will delay
the formation of fibrin.
Overview of hemostasis
The activation and amplification scheme of hemostasis
traditionally has been divided into the intrinsic, extrinsic.
The term hemostasis is defined as the arrest of bleeding. and
and common pathways (Fig. 16.1). This scheme implies two 
defects of hemostasis vary from excessive hemostasis, with
pathways of activation: by exposure to tissue thromboplas-
resulting intravascular thrombosis, to excessive bleeding and
tin, or by contact activation of basement membrane and
blood loss. Both extremes may be life-threatening. but intra.
collagen (or other negatively charged surfaces). The results 
vascular thrombosis is more difficult to detect and manage
of recent kinetic analyses of individual factors, however.
in animals. This chapter discusses a systematic approach for
suggest a scheme in which the initial activation by tissue
establishing an effective diagnosis of the commonly encoun-
thromboplastin forms small amounts of thrombin, which is
tered disorders of hemostasis, and emphasizes disorders that
then amplified by subsequent loop activation of the intrinsic.
result in bleeding since they are most common in animals.
Effective hemostasis after vascular injury reflects integrated
the activation of factors VI1, XI, and the accelerators (factors
responses by three major components: the soluble circulat-
V and VII1) by thrombin (factor IIa). (Fig. 16.2). This implies
ing coagulation factors (i.e., proteins) that culminate in
that contact activation is not a significant contributor to
stable insoluble fibrin, circulating platelets, and the vessel
coagulation factor activation, and that the intrinsic system
comprised of endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and
primarily functions as an amplification loop that becomes
fibrobla sts.
activated after the initial thrombin generation by tissue
thromboplastin.'2 Evidence supporting this view exists in
Coagulation factors
human patients who do not bleed when they are deficient
The term coagulopathy usually refers to excessive bleeding
in any of the contact activator proteins (factor Xll, prekal-
resulting from the abnormal function or absence of one or
lilkrein, or high-molecular-weight kininogen (HMWK)). This
more circulating coagulation factors. Coagulation factors are
may not be true in some domestic animals as dogs and
present in plasma at very low concentrations (μg/mL). and
horses with prekallilkrein deficiency have mild clinical bleed-
most are proteases (Table 16.l). Coagulation factors are acti-
ing tendencies.
vated predominantly by exposure to tissue thromboplastin
Some coagulation factors require vitamin K, which serves
expressed on the surface of circulating microparticles, stimul-
as a cofactor for the post-translational carboxylation of coag
lated endothelial cells or extravascular fibroblasts. After
ulation factors II, VIl, IX, and X as well as anticoagulant
initial activation with production of small amounts of
proteins C and S. and recently protein Z.3 Vitamin K
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
185
mostly mild 
 Often severe 
Disease
Variable.
Variable
Severea
01 aUON
Severe
Mild 
PIW
Mildb
None
mild 
auto. rec., paraphemophilia 
Auto. dom. (auto rec. in
X-linked rec., hemophilia A
X-linked rec., hemophilia B
Auto. rec., hemophilia C
Auto. rec., Hageman trait 
Inheritance/Disease
Auto.dom.
Autosomal
Auto.rec.
 Auto. rec.
Name
man)
Man, dogs. cats, horses
Species Affected
Man, goats, dogs 
Man, dogs. horses
Man, dogs. cats 
Man, cattle. dogs
Man, dog
Man, dogs
Man, dogs
Man, catss
Man
Man
Man
Vitamin
K Dep.
1.5-6.3 days
32-48 hours 
4.5-7.0 days
 2.1-4.4 days
15-24 hours
48-52 hours
Half-Life
1-6 hours 
2.9 days
 5
30 hours 
35 hours 
Plasma
6.5 days
 Concentration
0. 1-2.5 g/vdL
q/6r 06-0/
auto. dom., autosomal dominant; auto.rec., autosomal recessve; X-linked rec., X-linked recessive.
7w/6r1l 0E
 50 μg/mL
 Plasma
u/6rg
—
Molecular
Ambiguous
Weight
340,000
350,000
72,000
53,000
56,000
56,000
124,000
80,000
320,000
85,000
110,000
Liver, macrophages 
Liver, macrophages 
'mot pue salgda isow 'sjewwew auyew u uasaid pou Alewons
Liver, macrophage
plasma membrane;
lipprotein can be 
Liver, macrophages
Lipoprotein, is a
constituitent of 
fibroblasts and 
monocytes, and
Liver (probably)
Liver (probably)
Liver (probably)
Liver (probably)
Liver (probably)
Location of
endothelium.
macrophages.
Synthesis
induced in
Liver
Tissue thromboplastin 
Antihemophiliac factor
Plasma thromboplastin
Fibrin-stabiling factor 
plastin component)
Christmas factor 
(plasma thrombo-
Table 16.1 Procoagulation factors.
Hageman factor 
Fitzgerald factor
 awen e
Stuart factor 
Fletcher factor 
a Severe in neon ates, mild in adults.
Prothrombin  
Proconvertin 
Fibrinogen
Proaccelerin
No factor 
antecedent 
Calcium 
Prekallikrein 
kininogen 
Factor
weight
VI:C
又
186
CHAPTER 16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
Intrinsic
Pathway
Extrinsic
Factor 12 is activated with
Common
Pathway
Negatively
 the aid of prekallikrein and
charged
Pathwav
Factor 3 plus 7
+
surfaces (eg.
high molecular weight
Ca++
activates factor
kininogen
collagen)
Ca++
Activates
7 (7a)
8a
Factor 10
Activates
(10a)
Factor ll is
Factor9
activated
(9a)
+
(1la)
5a
Amplification
Phospholipid
Loop
Activates
Amplification
Factor 2
Loop
(2a)
Activates Factor 13
(13a)
Fibrinogen
Soluble
Stable
 Fibrin
Fibrin Clot
Figure 16.1 The traditional activation cascade of the intrinsic system by contact activation of negatively charged surfaces. Activation of factor Xl by
auasaid aul u x lotoey atenlie uen l pue '(ll joiney pateae pue) eix lotoey Aa pateae s! Xl oiey lueodui aou aq Aeu 'anamoy (el) uiguoi
of calcium and platelet factor Ill. Factor Vll:C is not required for activation, but when factor Vll: Ca is present, the rate of factor Xa formation is
pue 'uoeaie uoeinbeon jo poyauu sueuiuopaid aul ag ot lyonoyt s! wasis yisuuxa aul otoey pateae ue satouap se, uoeuisap aul paseainu
this occurs when factor ll (tisue thrormboplastin) is in contact with factor Vll which then can activate factor X. Factor X is the first factor of common
pathway and is activated by either factor IXa or Vlla. The cornmon pathway culrminates in the forrnation of a stable covalently linked fibrin clot.
Activation of prothrombin to thrombin (lla) does not require factor V, but it proceeds much faster with activated factor V.
Factor 13
Factor 13a
stasis and provide a surface* for the formation of the tenase
Factor 8:C
Factor 7
Factor 7a
Factor 5
FactorB:Ca
Factar 2a,
and prothrombinase complex to form thrombin and are
Faclor 2a
Factor5a
Factor 11
(Throrr bin)
Factor 11a
Factor 9a, Factor 10a,
responsible for the initial, temporary cessation of blood flow
Factor 7
Factor 7a.
or Factor 7a
after injury to the microvascular bed.? The importance of
Figure 16.2 Thrombin activates many other factors of the coagulation
cascade and arplifies the initial activation of prothrormbin to form much 
platelet surfaces for activation of coagulation and hemostasis
 more thrombin. Once factor Vll has been activated, additional
is evident in some German shepherd dogs that lack normal
arnplification loops generate mmore factor Vlla to enhance the overall
 phosphatidylserine surface exposure and clinically bleed.&
activity of the coagulation cascade. Factor Vlla also activates factor IX to 
Platelets respond to vascular injury that exposes collagen,
 Ka to enhance the formation of factor Xa from X. The purpose of these 
laminin, and fibronectin. Thrombin (factor IIa) formed
activation loops is to fuly activate the cascadle and to generate much 
during activation of coagulation is a strong agonist for plate-
mmore thrombin to, ultimately, shorten the tirme needed to convert a critical
let activation through PAR-1, and PAR-4g receptor signaling
mass of fibrinogen to fibrin for the forrmation of a stable fibrin clot.
on platelets. Platelets can adhere to collagen in the basement 
membrane and extravascular stroma through a surface
receptor complex (glycoprotein (GP) 1b-V-IX) that binds the
normally is oxidized during carboxylation of coagulation
plasma glycoprotein von Willebrand factor (vWF), which in
proteins and then reduced back to the active hydroquinone
turn binds collagen. Platelets also adhere to collagen directly
form in a two-step process by the enzyme epoxide reduc-
in shear conditions (as in arteries) primarily through surface
tase.5 In the presence of inhibitors of vitamin K reduction
GP VI and c2B1. Lack of the GPlb-V-IX receptor (Bernard-
 or the absence of dietary vitamin K, the procoagulant and 
Soulier syndrome) or vWF (von Willebrand disease) results 
anticoagulant proteins are formed but lack activity. These
in clinical bleeding.1p1l After adhesion, platelets undergo
nonfunctional proteins are designated PIVKA (proteins in
what is termed "inside-out" signaling through integrin
vitamin K absence or antagonism), and they can be detected
by immunologic methods.
second wave signaling to further stabilize the developing
platelet/fibrin thrombus.'2 As platelets adhere to one another
Patelets
by glycoprotein Ib/Illa (Cueβs) binding fibrinogen, they
 Platelets are cytoplasmic fragments of megakaryocytes with
 swell, centralize their organelles, and then form pseudopo-
numerous cytosolic organelles (Table l6.2), and are in the
dia (Fig. 16.4). Glanzmann's thrombasthenia is a lack of Ib/
shape of a flat disk (Fig. 16.3). Platelets are crucial to hemo-
IIla glycoprotein and results in bleeding.'? Aggregation of
187
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
 Table 16.2 Ultrastructural and functional anatomy of platelets.
 Anatomic-Structure
Constituents
 Functions
Exterior coat
Fibrinogen 
 Platelet aggregation 
 Glycoprotein 
 Platelet adhesion
Unit membrane
 Arachidonic acid 
 Prostaglandin synthesis
 Platelet factor Ill (phosphaticdylserine)
 Enhances coagulation
Microtubules
Tubulin
 Provides cytoskeleton and contractile system 
Microfilarments
 Thrombosthenin 
 Shape change, clot retraction. platelet release 
 α-Granules 
β-Thromboglobulin
Impedes prostacyclin production by endothelium 
von Willebrand factor
 Platelet adhesion to subendothelial collagen
Factor V (Platelet factor I)
Fibrinogen
Fibronectin 
Growth factor(s)
 Mitosis of fibroblasts, endothelium, smooth rnuscle
 High-rnolecular-weight kininogen
 Platelet factor IV
Antiheparin activity
Dense bodies
 Adenine nucleotides 
 Platelet metabolism and hermostasis 
 Histarmine
 Increases vascular premmeability 
Serotonin 
Vasoconstriction and enhancerment of aggregation
Calcium 
 Necessary for platelet stirmulation 
Lysosomal granules
Acid hydrolases
proteolysis
Dense tubular system 
Calcium
 Necessary for platelet stirmulation 
 Enzyrmes for prostaglandin synthesis
 Thromboxane Az is important in recruiting more
 platelets and mobilizing calcium 
Open canalicular system 
Extensive surface area
 Route for exocytosis, endocytosis, phagocytosis
DGr
Mc
®
®
81
Figure 16.3 The disc shape of a platelet on end (left) and from above
Figure 16.4 The centralization of platelet contents during activation.
(right). DGr, dense granules; DT, dense tubular systemn; Gr, granules; Mc.
with pseudopodia formation and fusion of granules to the open
mitochondria; Mt, microtubules around the margin: OC, open canilicular
canalicular system to release their contents into the extracellular milieu
system.
without lysis of the platelet membrane.
platelets and recruitment of additional platelets are pro-
P2Yl2, the important target for platelet inhibition by the
moted by the release reaction that empties products of the
 drug clopidogrel), serotonin, histamine are examples of ago-
platelet granules into plasma. Coagulation factors stored
nists released by platelets.15 Thromboxane A2 is produced
within granules ensure fibrin formation, which is necessary
and released to bind the surface receptor (TP) to further
for platelet plug stabilization. Platelet granules empty their
activate platelets in a positive feedback fashion. Aspirin and
contents into the open canalicular system (OcS) that com-
other NSAIDs inhibit platelet function by blocking throm-
municates with the exterior, or onto the surface of platelets
boxane A2 synthesis.
if they lack an OCs (as in cattle'4). Platelets do not lyse
during aggregation. Platelets also respond to agonists released
Vessels
from platelet granules in a positive feedback fashion through
Vessels contribute to the cessation of blood loss by reflex
surface receptors. ADP (that stimulates surface receptors
vasoconstriction of smooth muscle cells to reduce the vessel
188
CHAPTER 16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
 sa  s a n  s  
mally are removed from the circulation by hepatocytes, and
thrombogenic substances from endothelial cells to promote
 decreased removal results in increased circulating concen-
clot formation such as platelet activating factor or tissue
tration of FDPs. D-dimer is a product of plasmin digestion
thromboplastin. Damage or loss of endothelium also reduces
of crosslinked fibrin and has the same diagnostic interpreta-
the local secretion of mediators such as prostacyclin (PGI)
tion as FDPs; however, D-dimer is more specific for throm-
that downregulate the reactivity of platelets, thus enhancing
bus formation as it only occurs when soluble fibrin has been
platelet responsiveness at that site of injury. Decreased peri-
crosslinked by factor XIlI and plasmin has cleaved stable
vascular collagen support in disease conditions such as
fibrin to form unique neoantigens as opposed to FDPs occur-
Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, scurvy. and
 ring with plasmin degradation of fbrinogen or fibrin (Fig.
steroid excess has been associated with increased vascular
16.6).17 Evaluation of D-dimer concentration in citrate-
fragility and bleeding: there is also some evidence for reduced
anticoagulated blood is by immunologic detection (either
platelet response to abnormal collagen. Vascular abnormali-
by ELISA or Latex agglutination) of the neoantigen, D-
ties, when compared with platelet and coagulation factor
dimer. In the absence of liver disease, the usual clinical
abnormalities, are the least frequent cause of excessive
implication of an increased FDP or D-dimer concentration is
bleeding but the most difficult to evaluate.
increased intravascular coagulation with subsequent clot
Effective maintenance of vascular integrity and tissue per-
resolution.19,20
fusion requires the precise control of clot formation and
resolution of the clot for reestablishing blood flow in tissues.
Even as the clot forms. lysis of the fibrin clot occurs by
Anticoagulant proteins
Anticoagulant proteins
downregulate the 
coagulation
 In vivo activation of plasminogen to plasmin is primarily by
 cascade by inhibiting the procoagulant proteins of the intrin-
active factor Xll and by tissue-plasminogen activator from
sic, extrinsic, and common pathways. This ensures that acti-
endothelial cells. Factor XIl activates plasminogen as well as
vation of coagulation does not exceed the immediate need
factor XI, complement, and kinins by the scheme depicted
for hemostasis at the site of vascular injury. These anticoagu-
in Figure 16.5. Patients who are deficient in factor Xll do
lant proteins are in balance with the procoagulant proteins.
not bleed excessively. but they do have a tendency for
and deficient anticoagulant protein activity relative to the
thrombosis resulting from the insufficient resolution of
procoagulant protein activity results in thrombosis. This
fibrin clots by plasmin. Other activators of plasminogen are
balance can be shifted in favor of thrombosis by the loss of
known (epithelial plasminogen activator, urokinase, biloki-
nase, streptokinase, staphylolkinase), but these are less or
tion of procoagulant proteins. Important anticoagulant pro-
not important in the normal regulation of intravascular clot
teins are listed in Table 16.3.
resolution. Plasmin degrades fibrin and fibrinogen to small
fragments and peptides (Fig. 16.6).'7 Detection of fbrin and 
antithrombin (AT), previously called antithrombin II, which
fibrinogen (fbrin(ogen)) degradation by plasmin is prirmar-
accounts for approximately 70% of the total anticoagulant
ily by the immunologic identification of fragment E in most
activity in plasma. Antithrombin requires heparin for activ-
ity at the endothelial surface. Heparin allows AT to bind
thrombin in a l:l ratio and inactivates thrombin. The AT:
In addition to the inactivation of thrombin (Ila), AT also
inactivates other serine proteases (IXa, Xa). Antithrombin
High Molecular
Weight Kininogen (HMWK)
has a very low molecular weight (Table 16.3) and is lost in
Kalli
rein
Prekallixrein
the urine of patients with severe glomerular nephritis or
Bradykinln
HMWK
amyloidosis. Low AT activity in plasma, either through loss 
or hereditary deficiency. is often associated with clinical
Plas
 thrombosis. Deficiency of other anticoagulant proteins, such
12
12a
as proteins C and S, which inhibit factors Va and VIll:Ca.
HMWK
also may be associated with thrombosis. C-Macroglobulin
11
11 a
CT
Cla
inhibits thrombin, plasmin, and kallikrein, and it accounts
Fibrin(ogen)
Fibrin Degradation
Products
Figure 16.5 Factor Xll can activate four protein cascades, but the only
and endothelial cells that is thought to be the major regula-
 significant functional loss associated with decreased plasmna factor Xll
tor of extrinsic pathway activation. Extrinsic pathway inhib-
activity is thrombosis caused by reduced generation of plasmin from
itor inactivates thromboplastin and factor Vlla, and it
 plasminogen.
requires factor Xa for activation.
189
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Plasmin Products
Fibrinogen
r0-000
D
E
口
E
口
Thrombin Cleavage
of Fibrinogen
Fibrin + Fibrinopeptides A & B
SolubleFibrin
D
Factor Xllla
Crosslinking
口
口
E
口
Insoluble Fibrin
E
口
Figure 16.6 The degradation of fibrin and fibrinogen to smaller peptide fragments that can be used in anabolisrn by hepatocytes. Degradation of fibrin
results in neoantigen, d-dimer.
A careful physical examination to determine the nature
Evaluation of the bleeding patient
and severity of the hemostatic defect provides useful infor-
mation as well. For example, if evidence is found for under-
When an animal is suspected of having a hemostatic defect,
lying disease processes such as icterus, mass lesions, or fever.
the following case-analysis method may be used to accu-
then disorders such as liver disease, hemangiosarcoma, or
rately determine if a defect exists and, if so, to determine
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, respectively, may be causing
the nature of a defect.
secondary bleeding disorders. Also, petechial and ecchy-
 Patient history is a very important component in the anal-
motic hemorrhages are characteristic of platelet abnormali-
ysis of an animal suspected of having a hemostatic defect.
ties (Fig. l6.7) and generalized vascular abnormalities.
Specifc questions should be asked, such as:
whereas large hematomas, hemarthrosis, and deep muscle
1. Have there been large hemorrhages into the subcutane-
hemorrhages are more characteristic of soluble coagulation 
ous tissue in the past?
factor defects (Figs. 16.8 and 16.9).
2. Have there been previous petechial or ecchymotic hem-
Appropriate laboratory evaluation is another important
orrhages on the skin?
 component in evaluation of hemostasis and should initially
3. What has been the color of urine?
include a complete blood count (CBC), activated partial
4. Does the animal have periodic lameness, suggesting
thromboplastin time (aPTT) or activated coagulation time
intra-articular hemorrhage?
(ACT), and prothrombin time (PT). The CBC provides infor-
5. What are the color and character of the feces?
mation such as platelet concentration and packed cell
6. Did the animal bleed excessively during previous
volume. The aPTT or ACT and PT help to determine if the
surgery?
levels of coagulation factors (except factor Xlll) are deficient.
7. Has the animal been administered any drug and, if so.
A bleeding time may be necessary if the platelet concentra-
when?
tion is normal but the animal is still suspected of having a
8. What is the animal's environment?
platelet-related bleeding problem (defective platelet func-
9.When
did
hemorrhage
occur
relative
to
other
tion). In addition, clinical chemistry, urinalysis, radiology.
symptoms?
ultrasound, or isotope scanning may be helpful in evaluating
Questions such as these should be asked to determine if
other system functions in a patient with a hemostatic defect.
the hemorrhage is appropriate for the degree of injury and
 Other laboratory tests, available from specialized labora-
 if it resolves in an appropriate length of time. Persistent.
tories, may be required to fully characterize the underlying
recurrent hemorrhage at one site suggests a local vascular
defect in hemostasis. Light transmitta nce platelet aggregome-
problem rather than a generalized homeostatic defect. Drugs
try may be necessary to examine platelet responsiveness and
and toxins, including rodenticides, may result in hemostatic
thromboelastography may be helpful in assessing overall
defects, and possible access to such chemicals also is impor-
 coagulation of whole blood, especially if hypercoagulability
tant information.
is suspected (see Appendix l6.1)
190
Thrombosis (purpura)
 Clinical Disease
Thrombosis
 Inheritance
 Autosomal
Species
 Affected
Man
Man
Vitamin
K Dep.
Half-Life
 sunoy 6-9
 Plasma
 Concentration 
 Plasma
Molecular
Weight
62,000
000/z9
75,000
Liver, endothelium
'enen lo sainpanad leiins dew iae ino Aeu bupalg aiasss
aNormally not present in marine mammals, most reptiles, and fowl.
Lacation of
(lipoprotein)
Endothelium
 Synthesis
Liver
 activated protein C 
 Heparin cofactor 
 Protein C cofactor
Trivial Name
Cofactor for 
Table 16.3 Anticoagulant factors.
 Cl esterase inhibitor 
Extrinsic pathway 
Thrombomodulin 
Antithrombin Il!
α2-Antiplasmin
α.1 -Antitrypsin
Protein C 
inhibitor 
Protein S 
191
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Evaluation of the components of hemostasis
Coagulation factors
All circulating coagulation factors are produced by the liver.
and hepatic insufficiency often is associated with clinical
bleeding because of the decreased synthesis of one or more
coagulation factors. The factors and some of their character-
istics are listed in Table 16.1. Of the coagulation factors, only
factors VIIl:C and V are not proteases; these two factors
increase the activity of factor IXa and Xa respectively. Hered-
itary deficiencies of coagulation factors are uncommon in
domestic animals, but hereditary deficiencies of most known
factors have been described. The most frequent hereditary
coagulation factor deficiency described in veterinary medi-
cine involves factor VIll:C and is termed classic hemophilia
or hemophilia A. Deficiencies of factors VIll:C and IX (hemo-
Figure 16.7 Petechial hemorrhages on the gingival surface of the lips
philia B) are sex-linked traits and bleeding occur more fre-
are suggestive of thrombocytopenia or a platelet function defect.
quently in male patients; the remaining factors are encoded
(Courtesy of Dr. Ellen Miller.)
 on somatic chromosomes.
Evaluation of coagulation factor activities is usually not
performed in the clinic setting but instead at local or regional
laboratories because the tests require infrequently used and
 often expensive equipment. The only exception to this gen-
eralization is the ACT test, but even this test can require
dedicated hemostasis instruments depending on the system
utilized. The ACT does, however, evaluate all coagulation
factor activities (except factors VII and xIll). This test uses
sterile, diatomaceous earth or other contact activator sub-
stances and has an endpoint of loose blood clot formation.
An ACT also requires a minimum number of functional
platelets (10"/μL) (see Appendix 16.1 for specific details of
the ACT test). If the ACT and platelet count are normal, then
coagulation factor deficiencies are an unlikely cause of the
hemostatic defect. Factor XllI deficiency has never been
 reported in animals, and factor Vll deficiency is associated
Figure 16.8 Hermorrhage into joints (as in this lamb with a
with mild clinical bleeding.
 carboxylation defect of coagulation factors) or body cavities suggests
Thromboelastography has been advocated as a method of
dleficiency of a coagulation factor (or factors).
evaluating overall coagulation, including platelets, and
though it has been available for over 60 years, improved
technology has been associated with a resurgence of inter-
anticoagulated blood is utilized in this assay, but it requires
dedicated instrumentation to measure the viscous resistance
of clotting blood.2223 Thromboelastography has been shown
to useful in detecting hypercoagulable conditions.24
Selective evaluation of the coagulation cascade may be
done by collecting blood in 3.2% sodium citrate in a volume
of l:9 anticoagulant :blood. Atraumatic venipuncture and
collection of blood, first into a tube that is thrown away
before collection into a sample vial to be sent to the labora-
tory. are important steps in proper blood collection. Blood
is then sent to a laboratory for testing. optimally within 4
hours of collection. The aPTT uses one of several contact
Figure 16.9 Subcutaneous hemmorrhage suggestive of a coagulation
activators, and the PT uses tissue thromboplastin to activate
factor cdeficiency.
coagulation. Phospholipid is added as a substitute for plate-
192
CHAPTER 16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
lets in both tests. A prolonged aPTT results if there is less
than 25% of normal activity or concentration of any of
factors II, V, VIII:C, IX, X, XI, XII, prekallilkrein, HMWK, or
fibrinogen. A prolonged PT results if there is less than 25%
of normal activity or concentration of any of factors II, V.
VIl, X, or fibrinogen. A thrombin time may also be done.
which essentially reflects fibrinogen concentration and may
be modified to quantitate the actual fibrinogen concentra-
tion. Coagulation factor concentrations as well as activation
kinetics to convert fibrinogen to fibrin vary between species.
but these details are clinically unimportant. Submission of
plasma for an aPTT or PT should be coordinated with the
laboratory performing the evaluation in order to optimize
reliability of the results and to avoid any delay in testing. A
similarly collected blood sample from a normal animal may
Figure 16.10 Bone marrow film showing a mature megakaryocyte. The
be required as an additional control for the patient's sample
cytoplasm is eosinophilic and granular, with a large, syncytial nucleus.
(to control for handling, collection, transportation, etc.).
(Wright stain, x500 magnification)
especially if the laboratory is distant from the site of collec-
tion. If individual coagulation factor analysis is desired for a
complete evaluation, it usually is referred to a specialized
laboratory for determination. The clinician should consult
with laboratory personnel before collection and delivery of
the sample to enhance reliability of the results.
Platelets
Inadequate platelet concentration and, less commonly.
abnormal platelet function can be responsible for excessive
bleeding. Both platelet concentration and function can be
assessed by several methods. Platelet concentration can be
determined by counting platelets electronically or manually.
The concentration can be estimated on a blood film; at least
5-10platelets/oil immersion field (magnification, xl000)
should be present. Normal platelet concentrations vary
among animal species. but the range for all species is
Figure 16.11 Large platelets (macroplatelets) in a thrombocytopenic
100,000-800,000 platelets/μL with horses having the lowest
dog infected with Ehrlichia canis. Large platelets suggest accelerated 
and cattle the highest concentrations. Animals do not exhibit
thrombopoiesis and early release of irnmature forms.
bleeding because of low platelet concentration until the con-
centration is ≤10,000-50,000 platelets/μL. Normal platelets
should be smaller than erythrocytes. Pseudothrombocytope-
suring platelet response to specific agonists in vitro. In
nia caused by undercounting larger than normal platelets
general, the bleeding time is the time that it talkes blood to
can occur in the Cavalier King Charles spaniel or in cats that
cease flowing from a shallow wound that causes injury to
have platelets which overlap erythrocytes in size. Platelet
capillaries under a hairless skin surface. A bleeding time is
concentration can actually be decreased sufficiently to cause
performed by creating a wound on the lip, gum, or nasal
hemorrhage because of decreased production by the bone
planum of an animal (see Appendix l6.l for details). The
marrow, increased removal from the blood (i.e., destruc-
time that it takes for blood to stop flowing initially is the
tion), or activation (i.e., consumption). When the bone
bleeding time, and it reflects platelet plug formation stop-
marrow production of platelets is decreased, the megakaryo-
ping the capillary blood leakage. If coagulation factors are
cyte concentration within the marrow is decreased; con-
insufficient, the platelet plug still forms and blood flow is
versely. the bone marrow megakaryocytes concentration is
 Stopped, but the wound begins bleeding again (i.e., rebleed
increased when platelets are being destroyed or consumed
phenomena) because fibrin has not been formed rapidly
(Fig. 16.10). Platelets may appear to be larger than normal
enough to stabilize the formed platelet plug. If the platelet
if production and release are accelerated (Fig. l6.ll)-
concentration is decreased, the bleeding time is prolonged.
If the platelet concentration is adequate, platelet function
If the platelet concentration is within the reference interval
can be evaluated by performing a bleeding time or by mea-
but the bleeding time is prolonged, then platelets are not
193
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
 responding appropriately. Once an animal is thought to have
Table 16.4 Frequency of abnormal coagulation parameters during 
a platelet defect, more detailed platelet function analysis can
disseminated intravascular coagulation caused by a variety of diseases.
be performed by platelet aggregometry using a wide variety
of chemical stimuli for platelets. The pattern of response to
 Coagulation Parameter
 Abnormality and %
known platelet agonists suggests the type of platelet defect.
of Time Abnormal
Von Willebrand's disease is the most common platelet func-
tion defect in veterinary medicine and is due to abnormal
 Activated partial thromboplastin timme
 Prolonged, 87%
von Willebrand factor synthesis by endothelium and mega-
 Antithrombin Ill activity
Decreased, 85%
karyocytes. Platelets will not respond to collagen appropri-
Prothrombin time
 Prolonged, 80%
ately during collagen-induced platelet aggregometry. and
Platelet numbers
Decreased, 80%
measuring plasma von Willebrand factor (vWF) will allow
Fragrmented red blood cells (schizocytes)
Increased, 71 %
clinical diagnosis. (Von Willebrand's disease is discussed in
Fibrin (ogen) degradation products 
Increased, 61 %
 Fibrinogen
Decreased, 61 %
more detail later.) Thrombocytosis (i.e., a platelet concentra-
 Plasmminogen activity 
Decreased, 49%
tion greater than the reference interval) is a nonspecific
Factor 5V activity
Decreased, 46%
disorder that usually is not associated with clinical signs in
 Factor Vll:C activity
Decreased, 29%
animals but has the potential to predispose to thrombosis
and hypercoagulable states. Thrombocytosis is often associ-
Fromm Feldrman BF, Madewell BR, O'Neill S. Dissemminated intravascular
ated with iron deficiency anemia, inflammatory conditions.
coagulation: antithrombin, plasminogen, and coagulation
epinephrine release, and some forms of myeloproliferative
abnormalities in 41 dog5. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1981;179:;151-154.
disorders.
Vascular abnormalities
 Disorders of hemostasis resulting from defects or abnormali-
ties in the vessel are uncommon. These patients may have
lation occurs, and although coagulation times initially may
a prolonged bleeding time with normal platelet function or
be shorter than normal, most animals present with clinical
a localized vascular injury resulting in bleeding. Methods to
bleeding and prolonged coagulation times. There are no
evaluate possible vascular causes of bleeding include tissue-
clear diagnostic parameters to identify DIC, but many of the
incisional biopsy for histologic evaluation of tissue and
available tests have abnormal results in most patients with
vessel structure or for biochemical evaluation of collagen.
DIC. The aPTT commonly is prolonged, and other frequent
Depending on the species affected, clinical evaluation for
abnormalities include a prolonged PT, decreased fibrinogen
scurvy or Cushing syndrome may be appropriate for
concentration, decreased platelet concentration, presence of
increased fragility of the skin and collagen in a bleeding
fragmented erythrocytes (i.e., schistocytes), and increased
patient.
levels of FDPs or d-dimer. Table 16.4 lists the frequency of
coagulation abnormalities detected during DIC. No test
directly evaluates increased coagulation, but an increased
Commonly encountered disorders of
serum FDP or d-dimer concentration provides indirect evi-
hemostasis
dence of increased intravascular coagulation. This is because
plasmin simultaneously degrades fibrin clots as they are
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
being formed. Occasionally, FDP and possibly d-dimer con-
centrations can be increased in patients with resolution of
with many clinical diseases and is caused by excessive acti-
extensive hemorrhage into subcutaneous tissue or pleural
vation of coagulation, either regionally or throughout the
or peritoneal spaces, as might occur in patients with warfa-
entire body. Potential causes for the initiation of coagulation
rin toxicosis.
can vary from widespread tissue damage, as in heat stroke.
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation has been associ-
to elaboration of procoagulant proteins by neoplastic cell
ated with many disease conditions, including a wide variety
populations, as in some leukemias.2s26 Diffuse thrombosis.
of neoplasms. Dogs with hemangiosarcoma often have asso-
especially in the microcirculation, may occur with resulting
ciated DIC and thrombosis within the tumor mass. Some
exhaustion of coagulation factors and decreased platelet
leukemias secrete procoagulant proteins that initiate DIC.
concentrations. In turn, this consumption of coagulation
and many other tumors are associated with DIC as well.
factors and platelets leads to bleeding. Disseminated intra-
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, incompatible blood
vascular coagulation often is life-threatening, and it is dif-
transfusions, and endotoxin-related endothelial injury often
ficult to control. Effective control is not possible without
initiate DIC.?° Physical and infectious causes of DIC include
determining what induced the DIC and then treating the
heat stroke, snake bite, pancreatitis, and infections with
Underlying cause. During DIC, excessive activation of coagu-
Rickettsia rickettsii and Diroflaria imitis.
194
CHAPTER 16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
Hereditary coagulopathies
Other hereditary deficiencies of circulating coagulation
 Inherited coagulopathies and the domestic species in which
factors are infrequent, but examples of all but factor XIII
they have been reported are summarized in Table 16.l. The
deficiency have been described at least once. Prekallikrein
deficiency has been described in several dogs and horses
is hemophilia A, which is a deficiency of coagulation factor
with only mild bleeding tendencies. Deficiency of HMWK
VIII:C. Hemophilia A has been described in sheep. dogs, cats.
was suspected in one horse but was not proved. This horse
and horses. This disorder is inherited in a recessive manner.
did not have a bleeding tendency but did have a prolonged
and the gene is located on the X chromosome. Hemophilia
aPTT, a normal PT, and normal plasma activity of other
A often is confused with von Willebrand disease because
intrinsic coagulation factors. Factor Xll deficiency has been
historically. both these conditions have been termed defects
described in cats and in dogs associated with either prekal-
of factor VII. Factor VIIl:C and vWF circulate in plasma in
likrein deficiency or von Willebrand disease but not purely
close physical association with one another. Von Willebrand
as a factor XII deficiency. Factor XII deficiency in cats and
disease, which is the most common hereditary hemostatic
humans is not associated with bleeding, but in humans, it
defect in domestic animals, is strictly a defect of platelet
is associated with a tendency for thrombosis. Interestingly.
function. Expected hematologic parameters in patients with
factor XIl is not present in marine mammals, reptiles, or
hemophilia A and in patients with von Willebrand disease
avian species. Factor XI deficiency has been described in
are given in Table l6.5. Whereas hemophilia A is a sex-
cattle and dogs. with severe bleeding in Holstein cattle and
linked trait and occurs more frequently in male patients, von
milder bleeding tendencies in dogs. Factor IX deficiency (i.e.,
Willebrand disease is an autosomally transmitted defect with
hemophilia B) has been demonstrated in dogs and cats and.
an equal frequency of occurrence in male and female
like factor VIl:C, has a sex-linked inheritance pattern.
patients.27
Factor IX deficiency is usually associated with severe bleed-
ing tendencies. Deficiencies of coagulation factors XIl, XI, IX,
VIII:C, HMWK, or prekallikrein all produce a prolonged
aPTT with a normal PT, regardless if these patients bleed 
clinically or not. Factor X deficiency has been described in
Table 16.5 Expected coagulation parameter results in hermophilia a
dogs and cats with variable bleeding tendencies. Factor VII
or von Willebrand disease.
deficiency has been described in beagle dogs and is usually
associated with mild clinical bleeding. These dogs have a
Test
Hemophilia A
von Willebrand
prolonged PT and a normal aPTT or ACT. Factor II (i.e.,
Disease
thrombin) deficiency has been described in dogs. Fibrinogen
 deficiency has been described in dogs and goats and is associ-
 Activated partial
Prolonged
Normal to
ated with severe bleeding clinically. Animals with deficien-
 thromboplastin time
prolongeda
cies of factor X, V II, or fibrinogen have a prolonged PT, ACT.
 Prothrombin time
Normal
 Normal 
and aPTT. A deficiency of coagulation factor XIll does not
 Prolonged 
 Normal to
cause a prolonged aPTT or PT because a stable fibrin clot is
Activated
a uogeinbeon
prolonged
not necessary for these tests. Hereditary deficiencies of
several coagulation factors simultaneously. because of
Bleeding time
 Normal 
Prolonged
several genetic defects, have been sporadically reported. In
Fibrinogen
 Normal 
 Normal 
addition, hereditary deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent 
coagulation factors because of abnormal carboxylation has
Fibrin(ogen)
<10 μg/mL
<10μg/mL
been reported in Devon Rex cats and Rambouillet sheep.
degradation products 
 Figure 16.12 shows a simple algorithm to aid in establishing
Platelet number
Normal
 Normal 
the diagnosis of common hereditary deficiencies of coagula-
tion factors.
von Willebrand
 Normal 
Decreased 
factor concentration 
Acquired coagulopathies
 Factor VIl:C activity 
Decreased
Normal to decreased 
A relatively common ca use of acquired coagulopathy in both
large and small animals is exposure to vitamin K antagonists
Sorme variable results (normal to decreased or normal to prolonged)
that inhibit reduction of oxidized vitamin K back to the
reflect the physical relationship that factor Vll and von Willebrand 
factor have while cirulating in plasma together. Loss of von
active hydroquinone form. Antagonists of vitamin K reduc-
Willebrand factor may prolong the activated partial thromboplastin 
tion include coumarin from moldy sweet clover, sulfaqui-
time, because factor Vll:C is not appropriately oriented physically but
noxaline (a coccidiastat) that is added to water, and some
rodenticides. Rodenticides containing indanedione-type
is present.
active ingredients have a half-life of 15 to 20 days in the
195
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Hereditary Coagulation Factor
NAD(P)H
Deficiency Algorithm
Dehydrogenase
( a  pe
Vitamin K
OraPTT
NAD(P)
Pathway Number 2
Normal
Prolonged
KH2 (hyroquinone)
Vit K>0 (K 2,3 epoxide)
PT
aPTT
.
GLU+CO2+02
GLA + H20
DTT ox.
4
DTT red.
Prolonged
Normial
Prolonged
epoxide reducta5e
Vitamin K 
epoxide reductase
DTT red.
Possiblg Factor 1, 2,5.
Factor7 deficiency
Possible Factor
Platelet function defect
 Pathway Number 1
DTTOX.
8:C,9,10,11,12,
13 deficiency
prekallikrein.
or severe
orHMWKdeficiency
thromtocytopenia
Figure 16.13 This figure depicts the two pathways that mediate the 
PT
s! I laqnu Aemyed (auouinboupy) gh'y uueia pannpan jo uoeoy
the physiologic pathway that is normally operative and cycles oxidized
 Prolongedi
Normal
vitarmin K, to the reduced formn, but epoxide reductase can be inhibited
Posible Factor 10.
s! z Aemued sisuoheue hune-huol panneynueu Amau jo uueuem Aq
5. 2, or 1 deficiency
11. 8:C, 9, prekalikrein
insensitive to warfarin, but requires supraphysiologic concentrations of
or ^-carboxyfase
or HMWKdeficiency
vitarnin K, for activity. Therapeutic administration of vitarnin K, to a
defect
warfarin-poisoned patient uses this pathway, but adrninistered vitamin K
Thrombin tine
is exhausted as it is reduced then subsequently oxidixed with
accummulation of vitarmin K, 2,3 epoxide in the plasma and liver. Repeated 
Pmolonged
Normal
 administration of vitamin K1 is required as oxidized vitamin K, (2,3
Factor'1 deficiency
epoxide) is not reduced by pathway 2. DTT = Dithiothreitol, a proposed 
Possible Factor 10,
5, 2 deficiency, or
ala ene aul ag A saads enaloi ao ng ou uonala
7-carboxylase
donor. GLU = glutamic acid in the peptide sequence of the coagulation 
doficicncy
factor or anticoagulant protein, GLA = gamma-carboxyglutarnic acid that
Figure 16.12 Specific coagulation factor deficiencies can be determined 
has been transformed in the peptidle sequence.
by mixing patient plasma with specific factor cleficient plasma and then
repeating the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) or prothrombin
tirme (PT). The factor-deficient plasma will correct the prolonged
Autoimmune disease, with an autoantibody directed against
coagulation time for all deficiencies except the deficiency that is common
a coagulation factor, also has been described in domestic
to the patient's plasma and the specific factor-deficient plasma. The only 
animals but occurs only rarely. Figure 16.14 provides an
exception is factor Xll deficiency, in which a clot urea solubility evaluation
algorithm to aid in establishing the diagnosis of acquired
is done to determine if factor Xll is active.
abnormalities and other defects of hemostasis that result in
clinical bleeding.
body, whereas warfarin-type rodenticides have a half-life of
Thrombocytopenia
only 40 hours. Administration of vitamin K allows vitamin
Numerous conditions that affect the bone marrow may
K to be reduced to the active hydroquinone form through
cause decreased platelet production (see Chapter 14).
a second pathway, which operates at a much higher concen-
Whole-body irradiation, drugs. toxins, infectious agents.
tration of vitamin K than is usually present (Fig. 16.13). Low
neoplastic processes, or immune-mediated disorders may
availability of vitamin K is also associated with obstructive
result in decreased production of platelets. Estrogen toxicosis
hepatopathy (i.e., lack of bile for absorption of vitamin K).
is a common cause of decreased production in dogs and
malabsorption syndromes with an inability to absorb lipids.
ferrets.
and low dietary levels of vitamin K. In small animals, admin-
 Increased platelet consumption is associated with DIC
istration of antibiotics that inhibit production of vitamin K
(discussed earlier), hemangiosarcoma in dogs, vasculitis, and
by gut flora may result in deficiency. Severe liver disease
other types of vascular injury. Blood loss does not result in
significant thrombocytopenia; the platelet concentration
lation factors are produced by hepatocytes; moreover, the
rarely is less than 100,000/μL secondary to hemorrhage.
liver is responsible for the removal of activated coagulation
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia is one of the most
factors and FDPs from plasma.
common causes of thrombocytopenia in dogs. Antibodies
Uncommon causes of acquired coagulopathy include
 may be directed specifically against platelet epitopes or may
amyloidosis, which is associated with selective factor X defi-
be antigen (e.g., drugs or infectious agents)-antibody com-
ciency because this factor is incorporated in the amyloid
plexes on or adsorbed to platelets. Administration of intra-
matrix, thereby depleting plasma factor X concentrations.
196
CHAPTER 16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
horses, and heparin overdose may result in severe throm-
is defective, platelets are not activated, because they do not
bocytopenia in cats. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is
recognize and respond to collagen in the basement mem-
branes or extravascular tissue. Release of stored vWF in
antibodies directed against a heparin-platelet component
endothelium can be stimulated by l-desamino-8-D-arginine
complex. Recently, better methods to determine if antibod-
vasopressin (DDAVP) administration.
ies are present on the surface of platelets have been devel-
Von Willebrand disease is classified into three types
oped. These methods are either indirect (examining plasma}
depending on the underlying molecular cause. Type I has a
or direct (examining patient platelets). Direct methods are
decreased level of vWF:Ag (antigen). with levels of all
more sensitive but have less flexibility regarding both time
plasma multimers decreased as well. This group includes the
and handling.
Welsh corgi (percentage of breed population affected or car-
 The most common infectious cause of thrombocytopenia
riers, 43%). Doberman pinscher (73%), German shepherd
in dogs is ehrlichiosis. Infection with Ehrlichia canis and, less
I adA “(%0e) apood pue '(%0e) 1aaaa1 uapio8 (%5)
commonly. Anaplasma platys. E. ewingii. and E. chaffeensis
appears to have autosomal dominant inheritance with
cause thrombocytopenia (Figs. 16.15 through 16.17. Table
incomplete penetrance. Type II animals have decreased
16.6). Ehrlichia canis is thought to initially cause platelet
levels of vWF:Ag, with a disproportionate decrease in the
destruction by immune-mediated mechanisms. Then, late in 
level of high-molecular-weight multimers. The German
the disease, the agent causes bone marrow aplasia, with a
shorthair pointer dog is a notable member in this category.
subsequent decrease in platelet production.
The inheritance pattern is unknown. Type III animals have
undetectable levels of vWF:Ag. The Scottish terrier (30%).
Defects of platelet function
Chesapeake Bay retrievers, and Shetland sheepdog (23%)
Acquired
are of this type. The inheritance pattern appears to be homo-
Platelet function can be inhibited by most nonsteroidal anti-
zygous recessive in Scottish terriers and Chesapeake Bay
inflammatory drugs. abnormal plasma proteins (myeloma
retrievers and autosomal dominant with incomplete pene-
paraproteins), proteins such as FDPs, autoantibodies, phe-
trance in Shetland sheepdogs. Von Willebrand disease has 
nothiazine tranquilizers, or plasma waste products that
also been identified in rabbits, cats, horses, and swine.
accumulate in patients with uremia.
Acquired causes of the disease in dogs are in dispute, but
such causes do occur in humans.
Hereditary
Platelets may not function because of hereditary defects
Vascular causes of bleeding
such as von Willebrand disease or intrinsic defects of platelet
Acquired
receptors or signaling that have been described in domestic
Injury to the endothelium, as occurs with Rocky Mountain
as well as laboratory animals.?s Table 16.7 provides several
spotted fever or heat stroke, may cause widespread hemor-
specific examples of hereditary platelet defects that have
rhage with subsequent activation of coagulation. Acquired
been described. The most common hereditary platelet defect
collagen disorders such as scurvy may be associated with
in domestic animals is von Willebrand disease.27
bleeding because of the increased fragility of vessel walls.
Von Willebrand disease is associated with the lack of vWF.
Localized inflammatory disease may be associated with
a glycoprotein that is synthesized and secreted by endothe-
hemorrhage. If recurrent localized hemorrhage is detected
lial cells and megakaryocytes. Von Willebrand factor circu-
but a defect in either platelets or coagulation factors is not
lates in close physical association with factor VIIl:C, and is
a heterogeneous glycoprotein composed of various-sized
cause of hemorrhage.
multimers of an identical 270-kDa polypeptide subunit
linked to each other by disulfide bonds. Plasma concentra-
Hereditary
tions of vWF can be measured by immunologic methods
Hereditary collagen disorders, such as Ehlers-Danlos syn-
(immunoelectrophoresis and, more recently, enzyme-linked 
drome and Marfan syndrome, as well as acquired collagen
immunosorbent assay). Results are usually reported as a
disorders, such as scurvy and Cushing syndrome, have been
percentage of normal pooled plasma. Circulating multimers
associated with clinical bleeding. In part, bleeding results
can be separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-agarose electro-
from increased vascular fragility caused by defective or
phoresis and visualized with labeled antibody after electro-
decreased collagen, and in some cases may also be caused
blotting (Fig. 16.18). These multimers range in size from 500
by decreased platelet responsiveness to abnormal collagen.
to 104 kDa. The higher-molecular-weight multimers are
most effective in mediating platelet adherence and aggrega-
Thrombosis
tion. Von Willebrand factor binds to surface glycoprotein lb
Thrombosis can be life-threatening. and it is a common
of platelets and also to IIb/IIla, which usually also binds
ultimate cause of death in a wide variety of clinical
fibrinogen. If the level of vWF is deficient or the vWF itself
diseases involving altered blood flow, endothelial injury, or
197
Prolonged
 FDPs, d-cimer
Prolonged
thought of as having decreased
clinical data and hemostasis
abnormaliies but is usually
PT
 Increased 
 FDPs, d-dimer 
Normal
Decreased
Vitamin K deficiency or
 as listed to the left
Normal
Normal
FDPs.
Ehrlichia infection, marrow aplasia, estrogen
2i
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 
Prolonged 
FDPS
icreased
Normal
 Clinically Bleeding Patient
Prolonged
PT
Normal
Possible DIC. Very
 platelet count
hypersplenism
, aspirin
administration, thrombopathy, etc.
 Platelet function defect such as 
von willebrand's disease,
Prolonged
 Platelet function defect not 
aPTT
Marfan's syndrome, etc.)
Normal
 Prolonged 
 Bleeding Time
 Normal
 abnomality or
inflammation
Early Vit. K
Prolonged
Normal
198
CHAPTER 16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
suoipuon aseasi asaut jo ypea iot sisouhep leuy ayl woyad ot lnsp anou ane jeyl asoyl ot shunas jeniup isouu ui auop aq uen jeyl sisat woy
relies on additional serum biochemical, hematologic., physical, serologic, and tissue evaluations or other specialized tests. This list is not all-inclusive, but it
prothrombin time
Figure 16.15 Transmisson-electron micrograph of a platelet containing
Figure 16.17 Peripheral blood film from a dog containing an Ehrichia
a morula of Anaplasma platys. The elementary bodies are surroundled
ewingii morula (arrow) in a neutrophil. (Wright stain, X1000
and held together by a second membrane
magnification)
thrombosis may occur during late pregnancy after the admin-
istra tion of growth hormone implants or of some drugs. such
as asparaginase. Cushing disease is associated with thrombo-
sis, but the pathophysiology in dogs is unknown. Localized
thrombosis can result from turbulent or misdirected blood
flow, and generalized thrombosis can result from widespread
vascular injury caused by chemicals, endotoxin, immuno-
logic mechanisms, or infectious agents, such as infectious
canine hepa titis virus or Rickettsia rickettsii.
Conclusion
Effective hemostasis is the product of coagulation factors.
Figure 16.16 Wright-stained blood filr from a dog with two
platelets, and vessels working in concert to cease the flow
Anapiasma pfatys morulae in a platelet (arrow). (X1 0o0 magnification)
of blood from an injured vessel and allow healing and repair 
to occur, with subsequent reestablishment of blood flow to
the tissues. Defects in any component of this delicate balance
hypercoagulable conditions. Clinical thrombosis is especially
may result in excessive hemostasis (i.e., thrombosis) or in
common in some specific clinical diseases.
adequate hemostasis (i.e., bleeding). The challenge in each
clinical case is to logically consider the possible causes and
occurs in animals with nephrotic syndrome, because AT is a
to fully evaluate them. Each clinical case should have at least 
small-molecular-weight protein that is lost in the glomerular
an aPTT or ACT, a PT, and a platelet count performed to
ultrafiltrate. Decreased levels of AT also occur in response to
evaluate commonly encountered disturbances of hemosta-
some drugs, such as asparaginase, a chemotherapeutic drug
sis. Additional clinical evaluations are determined by the
used in patients with lymphosarcoma. Increased concentra-
results of these tests and their relationship to the results of
tions of coagulation factors make blood hypercoagulable, and
a thorough physical examination.
199
Table 16.6 Species of Ehrichia and related Anapiasma spp. important in animmals and humans with the disease names, cells infected, vectors, and
 distribution.
 Naturally Occurring Ehrlichia and related Anaplasma spp.
Species
Disease Name
Natural Hosts
Cells Infected 
 Primary Vectors
Distribution 
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
Human monocytic
Human, dogs. deer 
 Prirnarily
Ambiyomma americanum
USA, Europe,
(monocytotropic)
 mononuclear cells 
(Lone Star tick)
Africa, South and 
ehrlichiosis (HME)
Central America 
Anaplasma
Human granulocytic
Human, deer, wild 
Granulocytes
 Ixodes scapularis and f.
USA, Great
 phagocytophilum
(granulocytotropic)
rodents, elk,
 pacificus in the USA; f.
 Britain, Europe
(previous names:
ehrlichiosis (HGE), equine 
horses, llammas,
ricinus in Europe
HGE agent, E. equi,
ehrlichiosis, tick-borne
sheep, cattle, bison 
E. phagocytophilum)
 fever: pasture fever
Ehrichia canis
Canine ehrlichiosis
 Dogs, wolves,
 Primmarily
Rhipicephalus sanguineus
Worldwide
jackals 
 mononuclear cells 
(brown dog tick)
Ehrlichia ewingii
Canine and human 
 Human and dogs
Granulocytes
 Ambiyomma americanum
USA
 granulocytic ehrlichiosis
(Lone Star tick)
Anaplasma platys
Canine cyclic
Dogs
 Platelets 
Rhipicephalus sanguineus
USA, Japan,
(previous name: E.
thrombocytopenia
(brown dog tick)
Venezuela, lsrael,
platys)
Thailand, Europe,
Taiwan, Greece
Table 16.7 Hereditary platelet function defects in domestic and laboratory anirmals.
 Species/Breed Affected
Type of Defect/Gene Affected
 Otterhounds, Spitz, Great Pyrenees, Thoroughbred cro55,
All are mutations involving oue of the o4ueB: surface integrin. Altered
Quarter horse, Oldenburg horse (thrombasthenia)
 fibrinogen binding.
Rats, mice
Various additional storage pool defects of αx or & granules (dense bodies)
in platelets.
 Chédiak-Higashi syndrome (cattle, cats, killer whales, beige
 Storage pool granule defect (LYST gene defect in Japanese Black Cattle)
mice, fox, mink)
 Simmmental catle, basset hound, Spitz, Landseer ECT dogs
Cytoskeletal assembly (calcium-dliacylglycerol guanine nucleotide exchange
(thrombopathia)
factor 1}
Fawn-hooded rats 
Serotonin release.
 Pale ear mouse. gray collies (cyclic hematopoiesis), cocker
Dense body (& granule) defects: Mouse counterpart to Hermansky-Pudlak 
 spaniels
 syn drome. Collie has cdefect in gene. Cocker spaniels have ADP deficiency.
 Dogs (Johnson,1999)
Arachidonate insensitivity.
Germman shepherds 
 Phosphatidylserine defect, lack procoagulant activity of platelets.
Cavalier King Charles spaniels
Beta-1 tubulin defect suspected; macroplatelets. Dogs don't bleed.
200
CHAPTER 16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
 9. Bou dreaux MK (1 996) Platelets and coagulation: an update. Ver
 anes
Clin North Am Smalf Anim Pract26:1065-87
10. Dahlback B (2008) Advances in understanding pathogenic
1
2
mechanisms of thrombophilic disorders. Blood 112: 19-27.
11. Sanford S, Newman PJ (2004) Integrins: dymamic scaffolds for
adhesion and signaling in platelets. B/ood 104: 1606-15.
12. Shattil SJ (1999) Signaling through platelet integrin alpha I1b
beta 3: inside-out, outside-in, and sideways. Thromb Haemosr 82:
318-25.
13. Boudreaux MK, Lipscomb DL (200l) Clinical, biochemical, and
molecular aspects of Glanzmann's thrombasthenia in humans
and dogs. Ver Patho/ 38: 249-60.
14. Meyers KM, Hopkins G, Holmsen H, Benson K, and Prieur DJ
(1982) Ultrastructure of resting and activated storage pool defi-
cient platelets from animals with Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
Am J Pathol 106: 36477.
15. Barrett NE, Holbrook L, Jones S, er al. (2008) Future innova-
tions in anti-platelet therapies. Br J Pharmarology 154: 918-39.
16. Ponting CP, Marshall JM, Cederholm-Willimas SA (1992) Plas-
minogen: a structural review. Blood Coagulation and Fibrinolysis
3: 605-14.
17. Walker JB, Nesheim ME (1999) The molecular weights, mass
distribution, chain composition, and structure of soluble fibrin
degradation products released from a fibrin clot perfused with
plasmin. J Biol Chem 274, 5201-12.
18. Stokol T, Brooks M, Erb H, and Mauldin GE (1999) Evaluation
Low Molecular Weight Multimers
of kits for the detection of fibrin(ogen) degradation products in 
dogs. J Ver Intern Med 13: 478-84.
1 9. Nelson OL (2005) Use of the D-dimer assay for diagnosing throm-
boembolic disease in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 4l: 145-9.
Figure 16.18 Plasma subjected to low resolution, sodium dodecyl 
20. Stokol T, Brooks MB, Erb H, Mauldin GE (2000) D-dimer con-
 sulfate-gel electrophoresis. Large-nolecular-weight vWF multimers are
centrations in healthy dogs and dogs with disseminated intra-
closest to the origin, with low-molecular-weight multimers being furthest
vascular coagulation. A J Ver Res 6l: 393-8.
from the origin. Lane 1 depicts a patient with type 1 von Willebrand
21. Chen A, Teruya J (2009) Global hemostasis testing. thrombo-
pai a u suoede mau oouuan Pio ydenaise[a
disease and a decrease in all types of vWF multimers compared with
normmal values, as shown in lane 2. Selective loss of large-molecular-
29: 391-407
weight multimers, or absence of all multimers, characterizes patients with
22. Winberg B, Jensen AL, Rojkjaer R, Johansson P, Kjelgaard-
other types of von Willebrand disease.
Hansen M, Kristensen AT (2005) Validation of human recom-
binant tissue factor-activated thromboelastographyin citrated whole
blood from clinically healthy dogs. Ver Clin Parho! 34: 389-93.
23. Paltrinieri S, Meazza C, Giordano A, Tunesi C (2008) Validation 
References
of thromboelastometry in horses. Ver Clin Patho! 37: 277-85.
24. Winberg B, Jensen AL, Johansson PI, Rozanski E, Tranholm
1. Furie B, Furie BC (2007) In vivo thrombus formation. Thromb
M, Kristensen AT (2008) Thromboelastographic evaluation of
Haemosr Supp! l: 12-17.
hemostatic function in dogs with disseminated intravascular
2. Schenone M, Furie BC, Furie B (2004) The blood coagulation
coagulation. J Ver Intern Med 22: 357-65.
cascade. Curr Opin Hemato! 1l: 272-7.
25. Bick RL (1992) Coagulation abnormalities in malignancy: a
3. Bek K, Ozkaya O, Fisgin T, er af. (2007) Protein Z and natural
review. Semin Thromb Hemosr 18: 353-72.
anticoagulants in children. Pediarr Nephrol 22: 88 1-6.
26. Scott-Moncrieff JC, Treadwell NG, McCullough SM, Brooks MB
4. Oldenburg J, Marinova M, Miller-Reible C, Watzka M (2008)
(2001) Hemostatic abnormalities in dogs with primary immune-
The vitamin K cycle. Vitam Horm 78: 35-62.
mediated hemolytic anemia. J Am An Hosp Assorc 37: 220-7.
5. Stafford DW (2005) The vitamin K cycle. J Thromb Haemost 3:
 27. Thomas JS (1996) Von Willerband's disease in the dog and cat.
1873-8.
Ver Clin North Am Smal! Anim Pracr 26: 1089-1109.
6. Zwaal RFA (1989) Cagulanion and Lipids. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
28. Boudreaux MK (2008) Characteristics, diagnosis, and treatment
 7. Jackson SP (2008) The growing complexity of platelet aggrega-
of inherited platelet disorders in mammals. Journal of the Am Ver
tion. Bl0od 109: 5087-95.
Med Assoc 233: 1251-9.
8. Brooks MB, Catalfamo JL, Brown HA, Ivanova P Lovaglio J
29. Donahue SM, Otto CM (2005) Thromboelastography: a tool for
{2002) A hereditary bleeding disorder of dogs caused by a lack
of platelet procoagulant activity. Blood 99: 2434-41.
sis, J Ver Emerg e Crir Care: 15(1): 9-16, 2005.
201
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
maceous earth. Begin timing with a stopwatch when blood
Further reading
first enters the tube. Invert the tube five times to mix, and
then place it in 37°℃ heating block, removing it every 5-10
Johnson GJ, Leis LA, Dunlop PC (1993) Thromboxane-insensitive
seconds after l minute of incubation to check for the first
 dog platelets have impaired activation of phospholipase C due to
soft clot formation.
receptor-linked G protein dysfunction. J Clin Invesr 92: 2469-79.
Loscalzo J, Schafer A (1994) Thrombosis and Hemorrhage. Cambridge.
Principle. Contact activation proteins are fully activated
 MA: Blackwell Scientific Publications.
when blood enters the tube. The time to clot formation
Stamatoyannopoulos G, Nienhuis AW, Majerus PW, Varmus H (eds.)
depends on adequate mixing and activation, temperature.
{1994) The Molecular Basis of Blood Diseases. Philadelphia: WB
coagulation factor concentrations, and platelet numbers as
Saunders, PP. 565-785.
well as function. Prolonged times suggest intrinsic or
common pathway factor deficiencies. Platelet numbers must
Appendix 16.1
be very low to prolonged the ACT (<l0,000 cells/μL). The
ACT does not evaluate factor Vll, and it generally does not
Minimum laboratory information base to evaluate
evaluate platelets.
a patient with a hemostatic defect
Reference interval
1. Activated clotting time or activated partial thromboplas-
tin time.
Dogs
79 ± 7.1 seconds
2. Prothrombin time.
Horses
163 ± 18 seconds
3. Platelet count.
Cows
145 ± 18 seconds
4. Bleeding time (possibly).
 Other tests of hemostasis are may be indicated by the results
Note. Salicylates, anticoagulants, some antibiotics, and bar-
 of these preliminary examinations.
biturates can inhibit clot formation.
Laboratory methods in clinical practice
Utilizing specialized equipment
Bleeding time
Method. Draw fresh whole blood into a tube containing
Method. Cause a reproducible wound (#ll BP blade, fixed
negatively charged particles and time for the formation of a
to penetrate 1/8-1/4 inch, or use a commercial product that
clot in a commercially available endpoint detection machine.
creates a small wound lmm in depth) on a smooth, non-
The type of negatively charged particle affects the "normal"
haired portion of the skin (e.g. gingiva, nasal planum.
length of ACT:
umbilicus, upturned lips held in place by a gauze tied around
Celite = Diatomaceous Earth
the muzzle). Next, gently remove beads of blood from
·Used
with
high
circulating
levels of  heparin-
wound margins, not touching the wound itself, with filter
 cardiopulmonary bypass
paper at 30-second intervals, and then record the time taken
● Black top glass test tube
to stop bleeding.
Kaolin
·Used
with
high
 circulating
glevelsof heparin-
Principle. Initial hemostasis reflects platelet function and
 cardiopulmonary bypass
numbers. May have rebleed phenomenon if fibrin clot does
● Gold top glass test tube
not adequately form after the initial cessation of bleeding.
Glass particles
and this may be the result of coagulation factor deficiency.
● Used with medium circulating levels of heparin-
haemodialysis
Reference interval. 1-5 minutes
● Clear top plastic test tube
Type of endpoint detection machine affects normal and
Note. The results of this test can be influenced by certain
therapeutic values:
Hemochron@ (International Technidyne Co.,Edison,
or analgesics.
NJ)
● A warmed test tube is rotated inside the instrument. As
Activated clotting time (ACT)
the blood clots, it displaces the magnet within the test tube.
Utilizing only 2 mL draw fubes and nonspecialized
The clotting time is determined when the magnet has dis-
equipment
placed enough to activate a proximity switch
Method. Draw 2mL of venous blood into a prewarmed
Medtronic HemoTec@ (Medtronic HemoTec Inc.,
(37°C) tube (available at http://www.vetlab.com/ACT%20
Englewood, CO, USA)
· A mechanical plunger is dipped in and out of a kaolin
CLKbzKmn9JwCFQtN5QodvSSur) containing sterile, diato-
activated blood sample. The instrument optically senses the
202
CHAPTER 16 Diagnosis of Disorders of Hemostasis
time it takes the plunger to move through the specimen
Clotting is defined by the "drop time" threshold for the
plunger.
Seconds
Principle. Contact activation proteins are fully activated
when blood enters the tube. The time to clot formation
in
depends on adequate mixing and activation, temperature.
Time
coagulation factor concentrations, and platelet numbers as
well as function. Prolonged times suggest intrinsic or
common pathway factor deficiencies. Platelet numbers must
be very low to prolong the ACT (<10,000 cells/μL). The ACT
25%
50%
75%
%001
does not evaluate factor VII, and it generally does not evalu-
Perccnt Plasima Diluted With Saline
ate platelets.
Figure 16.19 (In Appendlix 16.1) The approximate change in activated 
partial thromboplastin tirne (apt) or prothrombin time (PT) with serial
Note. Salicylates, anticoagulants, some antibiotics, and bar-
dilutions of normal plasma using saline. A more than approximately 70%
biturates can inhibit clot formation.
paieu e yam pateiosse s! Aine ioisey uoeinbeon euseld jo ssol
change in coagulation time.
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
Method. Blood is collected from a vein nontraumatically
into 3.2% sodium citrate anticoagulant in a blood :antico-
agulant ratio of 9:1. Plasma is harvested by centrifugation
coagulation times. One or more factors must be decreased
and mixed with a phospholipid platelet substitute (ether
by 70 to 80% before significant prolongation occurs in the
extract of brain); an activator such as kaolin, diatomaceous
coagulation times (aPTT, ACT or PT) (Fig. 16.19).
 silica, or ellagic acid; and calcium. A pooled plasma sample is
run as a control, samples are done in duplicate, and an
Prothrombin time (PT)
average time is reported. Electrical impedance or optical
Method. Blood is collected using the same method as that
endpoint systems are used to detect fibrin clot formation.
described for an aPTT, and plasma is harvested. Plasma is
Factor xill activity is not evaluated with this test, because
mixed with tissue thromboplastin (rabbit brain tissue throm-
only a loose, noncovalently linked clot is necessary for initi-
boplastin) and calcium. The time to clot formation depends
ating an endpoint by optical, impedance, or manual methods.
on the presence of factor Vll and common pathway factors.
Electrical impedance or optical endpoint systems are used to
Principle. Contact activator proteins are fully activated.
detect fibrin clot formation. Factor XllI activity is not evalu-
and platelets are replaced by phospholipid. Normal time
ated with this test, because only a loose, noncovalently
reflects adequate levels of intrinsic and common pathway
linked clot is necessary for initiating an endpoint by optical.
factors.
impedance, or manual methods. It should be noted that an
assay called PIVKA test (Thrombotest@, Axis Shield, UK) has
General reference intervals
been advocated for detecting PIVKAs that form with vitamin
K antagonists or deficiency. and although claims have been
that this test is sensitive to both an increase in PIVKAs
Dogs
9-1l seconds
(which are supposed to inhibit the reaction) as well as a
Cats
10-15 seconds
Horse
X  ' 'l s   a  
25-45 seconds
 l   si  '   S 
actually inhibit the reaction. This PIVKA test is merely a
Note. Several types of contact activators are used commer-
modified Prothrombin time.
cially for the aPTT, and each activator has an associated
normal reference interval for a given species. The laboratory
Principle. Factor Il is supplied with a platelet substitute.
performing the test should provide a reference interval for
and normal time reflects adequate levels of factor VIl and
different species. Circulating anticoagulants (heparin, fibrin-
common pathway factors.
ogen degradation products, autoantibodies) inhibit the reac-
tion. Mix equal volumes of normal plasma and patient
General reference intervals
plasma, and repeat the test. If the time corrects, there was
a deficiency, not a circulating anticoagulant, that caused the
Dogs
6.4-7.4 seconds
prolonged time. Nontraumatic venipuncture is very impor-
Cats
7-11.5 seconds
tant, because release of tissue thromboplastin shortens most
Horses
9.5-11.5 seconds
203
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Note. The aPTT and PT can be done in a local hospital, but
and E of fbrin or fibrinogen are mixed with diluted serum
plasma is best transported on ice. There should not be a long
that has had an inhibitor of plasmin added. The beads agglu-
delay between collection and testing.
tinate if sufficient D and E fragments are present. Results are
sensitive to 2 μg/mL. Other commercial kits are available and
Fibrinogen concentration
 perform well.
Method. Methods include heat precipitation (see Chapter
29 for details), modified thrombin time, and immunologic
Principle. Activation of the contact activation system also
methods. Heat precipitation is the least accurate when
activates plasmin. Fibrinogen and fibrin forming in a clot are
fibrinogen concentrations are low but the most accurate
broken down by plasmin, and the fragments circulate in the
when fibrinogen is high. Modified thrombin time is most
peripheral blood. Microvascular injury and repair are constantly
occurring against a background of FDPs being produced (usually
methods do not require normal function of fibrinogen,
<10μg/mL). Concentrations of FDPs increase with increased
which is the most abundant coagulation factor in plasma.
coagulation (as in disseminated intravascular coagulation),
General reference intervals
Note. The FDPs inhibit thrombin and platelet function by
competing with fibrinogen for binding sites, but they lack
Cats
the structure to form crosslinks or a fibrin meshwork.
0.05-0.3 g/dL
Cow
0.2-0.7 g/dL
Reference interval. Most animals have FDP concentra-
Horses and goats
0.1-0.4 g/dL
tions of less than l0μg/mL.
Dogs, sheep. and pigs
0.1-0.5 g/dL
D-dimer determination
 Note. Concentrations may be increased during inflamma
Method. Blood is collected in 3.2% sodium citrate antico-
tion or decreased when consumed during coagulation (e.g..
agulant in a ratio of 1 part anticoagulant to 9 parts blood.
 disseminated intravascular coagulation).
then mixed. Several kits are available commercially and
 some have been validated for dogs. cats, and horses. There
Platelet enumeration
 is no interference from fibrinogen in the assay.
Method. Methods include use of a hemocytometer and
altomated platelet enumeration by particle counters. Blood
Principle. A monoclonal antibody in most commercial kits
must be collected in EDTA using nontraumatic venipunc
detect the neoantigen, D-dimer, found in plasma or fluids in
ture, because trauma activates platelets and causes clump-
which there has been plasmin degradation of crosslinked
ing. Feline platelets clump readily. If clumping is noted on
fibrin. The interpretation is more specific than FDP quantita-
the blood film, then the platelet count is factitiously
 tion, which also detects degradation of fibrinogen.
decreased. Platelets can be estimated when looking at a
blood film. Less than three platelets per oil immersion field
Thromboelastography
suggests the platelet count is 50,000 platelets/μL or less if
Method. Blood is collected in 3.2% sodium citrate antico-
platelet clumping is not present.
agulant in a ratio of l part anticoagulant to 9 parts blood,
then mixed. Blood is then added to a plastic cup placed on
Reference intervals
an angle with a sensing rod that oscillates and tissue throm-
boplastin is added to initiate the coagulation cascade. Other
Dogs
200,000-500,000 platelets/pL
versions of instruments rotate the cup relative to the sensing
Cats
200,000-500,000 platelets/pL
rod. The change in resistance detected by the probe is plotted
Horses
100,000-600,000 platelets/μL
 paea si uil saded al po adeus aui ds saded e uo
Cows
200,000-800,000 platelets/μL
how fast a clot forms and subsequently lyses giving. a non-
specific profile of coagulation strength and clot lysis capabil-
Note. This test should include examination of blood film
ity of blood. Disadvantages of TEG include a relatively high
platelet morphology when evaluating circulating platelet
coefficient of variation, poorly standardized methodologies.
numbers, and may require examination of bone marrow
and limitations on specimen stability of native whole blood
to evaluate platelet production. Younger platelets are larger
samples.
when viewed on peripheral blood films.
Four values are determined by this test in the classic assay:
the R value (reaction time), the K value, the angle, and MA
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products (FDPs)
(maximum amplitude). The MA represents the clot strength.
Method. The most common method is to use the Thrombo-
A mathematical formula determined by the specific manu-
Wellco? Kit from Remel Inc. (http://www.remelinc.com/).
facturer can be used to determine a Coagulation Index (CI)
Immunoglobulin-coated latex beads that detect fragments D
which is an overall assessment of coagulability.29
204
Principles of Blood Transfusion
and Crossmatching
Diane Brown' and Linda M. Vap2
'Center for Comparative Medicine and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital.,
Harvard Medical School
²Colorado State University
in the potential for clinically important transfusion reactions
Blood groups (blood types)
in that breed.'
Blood groups or types are classifcations made on the basis
Cat
of species-specific antigens on the surface of erythrocytes.
Three blood types are routinely recognized in the feline AB
Antigens associated with platelets, leukocytes, and plasma
blood group system. Type A is the most common and is
proteins may also be important in inducing immune-
estimated to occur in more than 95% of domestic shorthair
mediated reactions in host animals during transfusion thera-
(DSH) and domestic longhair (DLH) cats in the United
pies. Naturally occurring alloantibodies against another
 States.ls Type B occurs with varied frequency (<5-25%) in
blood type can be present in an animal's plasma despite lack
the Abyssinian, Birman, Himalayan, Scottish fold, Somali.
of prior exposure to those erythrocyte antigens. More com-
Sphinx, Maine coon, Norwegian forest, and Persian cat 
monly. antibodies against erythrocyte antigens are induced
breeds, whereas the highest frequency (25-50%) has been
in response to exposure, either via blood transfusion, trans-
reported in the British shorthair, Cornish Rex, Devon Rex,
placental exposure or, in the case of neonatal isoerythrolysis.
and Turkish angora/van breds.'s A higher percentage of
through colostrum. Blood groups in the common domestic
DSH/DLH cats in the West Coast region of the United States.
and pet exotic species are described here.
Europe, Japan, India, Turkey. and Australia are reportedly
type B;1910 a recent report found up to 30% of DSH/DLH
Dog
cats were type B in the United Kingdom.ll To date, type B
The dog erythrocyte antigen or blood type system is known
has not been found in the Siamese, Burmese, Oriental short-
as the DEA system, and includes DEA 1 (1 neg. 1.1, 1.2, 1.3)
hair, Tonkinese, American shorthair, or Russian blue breeds.
and DEAs 3-8. Naturally occurring alloantibodies are of
Type AB is extremely rare but has been reported in DSH/
limited clinical significance in dogs. unlike the situation in
DLH cats and in certain families of breeds in which type B
cats.12 The most important canine blood types are DEAs 1.1
blood also occurs, including the Abyssinian, Birman, British
shorthair, Norwegian forest, Somali, Scottish fold, and
in the canine population.? These antigens will induce severe
Persian.1² A novel erythrocyte antigen, Mik, has been
transfusion reactions in previously sensitized dogs. DEA 1.3
 described in DSH cats.' It is important to consider that geo-
has been described in German shepherd dogs in Australia.3
graphical variation of feline blood types is significant, even
DEA 4 is a high frequency antigen that can result in hemo-
in mixed breed cats, and the risk of administering a poten-
lytic transfusion reactions in DEA 4-negative dogs previ-
tially fatal type A or AB blood transfusion to a type B cat,
ously sensitized by DEA 4-positive blood transfusions.4 In
at least in some populations, may be as high as one in
addition, DEA 7 may elicit an antibody response in dogs that 
five.11,14
lack it, and DEAs 3 and 5 are low incidence antigens in
Cats have naturally occurring alloantibodies: anti-A, anti-
which naturally occurring alloantibodies can occur; anti-
B, and anti-Mik.i31s All type B cats have high serum con-
DEA 3, 5, and 7 can result in delayed transfusion reactions.56
centrations of alloantibodies that are strong hemagglutinins
The high frequency Dal erythrocyte antigen has been dem-
   s   r s 
 onstrated as lacking in some Dalmatian dogs thus resulting
generally have weak hemagglutinins and hemolysins against
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
205
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
type B erythrocytes. Newborn kittens have no alloantibodies
Sheep and goat
because of their endotheliochorial placenta, but colostral
Seven blood groups have been identified in sheep (A, B, C.
transfer of immunoglobulin (primarily IgG) occurs. Neonatal
D, M, R, X). The B system has over 52 factors.17 The R system
S         
is similar to the J system in cattle (i.e., antigens are soluble
born to type B queens with transfer of the anti-A alloanti-
and passively adsorbed to erythrocytes). The M-L blood
bodies via the colostrurm.&.1516 Because DSH/DLH cats have
group in sheep is related to active potassium transport in
a low frequency of type B blood, less than 2% of random
reticulocytes.27 The blood groups of the goat (A, B, C, M, J)
matings produce litters at risk for NI, whereas Birman and
are very similar to those of sheep with the B system equally
Devon Rex matings carry a risk of 15% and 25%, respec-
complex. Many of the reagents used for blood typing of
tively. for producing NI.' The Mik antigen is clinically
sheep also have been used to type goats.
relevant in that AB-matched blood transfusions with Mik-
positive blood to cats lacking this antigen can result in acute
Exotic pets
 post-transfusion hemolysis.'3
No blood groups have been identified to date in ferrets.2s
Blood transfusions can be administered safely without the
Horse and donkey
need for crossmatching even when multiple transfusions are
The seven internationally recognized blood groups in the
indicated such as for severe estrus-induced aplastic anemia.29
horse, A, C, D, K, P, Q. U, include more than 30 antigens. 17,1s 
 Little to no information is available on blood groups in
Because of various antigenic combinations, no universal
rabbits and exotic pet species of birds or reptiles. In these
 donor exists. To minimize transfusion reactions, blood typing
cases crossmatching prior to transfusion is recommended
of the donor and recipient is ideal but often impractical; at
and homologous transfusions using species-specific blood
the very least crossmatching prior to transfusion must be
are advised. A low-volume simplified crossmatch procedure
 performed.'" Aa and Qa alloantigens are extremely immu-
(see Appendix 17.l) can be utilized in these species particu-
nogenic; both are hemolysins, and most cases of NI are
larly for cases in which a prior transfusion has been
associated with anti-Aa or -Qa antibodies. In addition, anti-
administered 30.31
Aa and -Ca are agglutinating antibodies; therefore it is
important to note that Qa will be negative on an agglutina-
tion test. Blood types vary among horse breeds with Thor-
Transfusion therapy
oughbreds and Arabians havinga high prevalence of antigens
Aa or Qa compared to other breeds, and Standardbreds
General principles and indications
lacking the Qa antigen.172o A unique donkey and mule
 In general, blood transfusions should not be administered to
animals without blood typing and crossmatching the recipi-
-a yanoul zztz In iof  ie saueuid anu le snd
ent and donor to decrease the likelihood of a transfusion
rocyte antigens Aa or Qa have been associated with approxi-
reaction. In addition to potential adverse reactions, the
mately 90% of equine NI cases.23 other antigens including
shortened survival of mismatched transfused cells results in
Ab, Dc, Db, De, Dg. Pa, Qc, and Ua have rarely been associ-
ineffective therapy. Crossmatching and blood typing are par-
ticularly important in breeding females to avoid primary
body does not cause NI and, in fact, may actually prevent
    n  n 
NI by removal of potentially sensitizing cells from the
lytic disease. General guidelines and information related to
circulation.25
transfusion medicine are summarized in Table 17.l; the
reader is referred to the text for background and explana-
Cattle
tion. Blood typing for canine DEA l.1 and for feline types
The eleven recognized blood groups in cattle are A, B, C. F
A and B is feasible in the general veterinary practice.32.33
J. L, M, R, S, T, and Z with groups B and J being the most
More extensive typing is available through universities and/
clinically relevant. The B group itself has more than 60
or reference laboratories. Crossmatching and blood typing
antigens, thereby making closely matched blood transfu-
products are described in this chapter and select procedures
sions difficult. The J antigen is a lipid found in plasma that
are provided (Appendix 17.1).
is not a true erythrocyte antigen; it is usually acquired to
Blood transfusions are not without risk; therefore, they
varying degrees early in life. Cattle with anti-J antibodies.
should be performed only when warranted. Clients should
despite having erythrocytes with a small amount of adsorbed
 be questioned regarding any history of previous transfusion
J antigen that apparently type negative, can develop transfu-
therapy, which necessitates crossmatching. Whole blood or
sion reactions when receiving J-positive blood .17.2e Vaccina-
 blood component therapy may be administered depending
tions of blood origin (some anaplasmosis and babesiosis
on availability and the reason for transfusion. Blood com-
vaccines) may sensitize cattle to erythrocyte antigens which
 ponent therapy in domestic animals has been reviewed else-
could result in NI in subsequent calves.17
where,& 34.35.3 but the primary indication forblood transfusion
206
CHAPTER 17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and Crossmatching
 Table 17.1 Antigens and pertinent factors in veterinary transfusion medicine.
Species
 Major Immunogenic
Naturally Occurring
 Recommended Donor Type
First Transfusion Risks
Matched
Antigens
Alloantibodies
 and Recommendations
Transfused
RBC Half-Life
Dog
DEA 1.1. 1.2
Rare: DEA 3. 5. 7:
 DEA 1.1 type-matched or 1.1
Low
21 days
 cold reacting
negative for first transfusion.
Use of universal donor
 Universal donor for repeat 
 minirnizes sensitization.
 tran sfusion5.
 Must crossmatch if prior
 No prior transfusion
 transfusion.
e3
A most common
Common
A and B needed
 High for non-type-matched 
sAep 8E-0E
Anti-B, usually mild in 
 A in US for most DSH/DLH 
tran sfusions.
type A cats
and Siammese, Burmese.
Usually low in type-matched 
 Oriental shorthair, Tonkinese.
transfusions.
 B rare except select breeds
 Anti-A, strong in type
or Russian blue breeds 
Type and crossmatch with 
AB very rare - in breeds 
A or AB preferred for AB cats.
B cats
A/B matched blood.
which also have B.
 Refer to text for breed-related 
High neonatal isoerythrolysis
Mik
Anti-Mik reported in
incidence including breeds 
 risk when A or AB kittens 
DSH
with higher percent type B
nurse B queen.
 Risk exists with anti-Mik in
Mik -negative cats.
Horse
Complex 5ysterm of 30+
Occur
None
Considerable; use least 
2-4 days
 antigens in seven blood
Anti-Aa, -Qa most
Aa/Qa negative or samme breed 
incompatible.
groups
important 
class is best starting choice.
High neonatal isoerythrolysis
 Donkey RBC antigen
Probably none
risk for mule foals.
Cattle 
 Eleven blood groups:
Occasionally Anti-J 
J-negative
Low for first transfusion.
2-4 days
 B and J most important 
 Close match difficult.
 B very complex in ruminants 
Hermolytic crossmatch 
recommended.
Sheep
 Seven blood groups in
Weak
Not defined
Low for first transfusion.
Unknown
Goat
 sheep: sheep R similar to
Goat Anti-R
Hernolytic crossmatch 
cattle J; sheep B simmilar to
recommended.
cattle and goat B. Five
 Hemolytic crisis rare in
 blood groups in goat:
sheep.
 simmilar to sheep.
Ferret 
 None identified
 None identified
 Not applicable
No risk identified
Unknown
is the treatment of severe anemia caused by hemorrhage.
ing of collected blood and recordkeeping are crucial in all
hemolysis, ineffective erythropoiesis, immune-mediated
cases of blood collection and administration.
hemolytic anemia, chronic inflammatory or infectious
disease, or neoplasia. Animals must be clinically evaluated
Donor selection
on an individual basis. A rule of thumb for the treatment of
 Blood typing should be perforrmed to select permanent blood
anemia is to transfuse when the packed cell volume (PCV)
donors. All donors should be healthy young adults that have
is less than 10% to 15% 3.3-39 Animals with acute-onset
never received a blood transfusion. In addition, donors
anemia, however, usually require transfusion before their
must undergo routine physical examinations as well as
PCV decreases to 15%. which contrasts with the situation
hematology and clinical chemistry evaluations, receive vac-
in animals with chronic anemia. For cases of thrombocyto-
cinations, and be tested free of blood parasites and other
penia, the generally accepted trigger for platelet transfusion
infectious diseases. Donors should have normal baseline
is a platelet count of 10,000/μL." Additional indications for
PCV and total protein concentrations prior to any donation.
transfusion include hypovolemia, primary or secondary clot-
Blood should be collected aseptically usually via jugular
ting factor deficiency, and hypoproteinemia. Detailed label-
venipuncture. To avoid interference with platelet function,
207
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
donors should not be sedated with acepromazine. Blood
tifying compatible donors, the use of universal donors is
collection methods for different species have been reviewed
recommended when periodic transfusions are anticipated.
in detail elsewhere 630,31,35,36,41
Since about 42% of dogs are DEA 1.l positive and testing
for DEA 1.1 is a practical procedure, having DEA 1.1 positive
Dogs
donor blood available for DEA l.l positive recipients is
Dogs can donate approximately 15mL of blood per kilogram
prudent.l2 A practical summary is that DEA 1.1 negative
(kg) of body weight every 6 weeks.* Previously transfused
dogs are ideal for first time transfusions regardless of recipi-
dogs should not be blood donors.' For first-time transfusion
ent blood type, and DEA l.l positive donors should be
recipients, donors negative for DEA l.l can be considered
limited to DEA l.l positive recipients. An algorithm includ-
universal donors and, for this situation, routine typing for
ing details for specific cases is presented in Figure 17.1
other blood types is not clinically warranted.' A dog is con-
Dog donors should be greater than 25-30kg. bled less
sidered a universal donor when negative for DEA 1.l, 1.2.
-a pue unp un suand on y aid anu u
3. 5. 7. and positive for DEA 4.2 To minimize potential
nourished including supplemented with oral iron if collected
sensitization of the recipient and improve the odds of iden-
frequently. To ensure general good health donors should
Has the recipient been
No*
Yes/Unknown
 previously transfused?
 Repeat transfusion
Has it been ≥ 4 days since
likely in ≥4 days?
No
the last transfusion?
No
Yes
Yes/Unknown
(Crossmatch imperative)
Recipient
Transfuse in order of availability:
DEA 1.1 positive?
Universal donor**
2.
 DEA 1.1 negative or type-
CROSSMATCH donors in order of
matched to recipient
availability:
Yes
Universal Donor**
1
2.
 DEA 1 negative or type-matched
No/Unknown
to recipient.
Odds of compatibility improved
Transfuse DEA 1.1
with sibling or same breed donor.
positive or negative blood
Transfuse DEA 1.1
negative blood.
Transfuse crossmatch-compatible
blood or blood substitute
Figure 17.1 Dog type and crossmatch algorithm.
Commplete typing and crossmatching will not prevent or predict all sensitizations and transfusion reaction5.
* Crossmatching is always advised;74 alloantibodies that can result in a delayed transfusion reaction may be detected.
+* Universal donor: DEA 1.1. 1.2. 3. 5. 7 negative; DEA 4 positive.
208
CHAPTER 17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and Crossmatching
have negative fecal and heartworm disease examinations.
product to a foal with NI increased its likelihood of nonsur-
According to the American College of Veterinary Internal
vival by greater than eightfold, and administration of four or
Medicine's (ACVIM) Consensus Statement, donors should
more liters (total volume) of blood products significantly
test negative for transmissible infectious diseases including:
increased the risk for liver failure in foals.4 Mule foals with
babesiosis, leishmaniasis (especially foxhounds),4? brucello-
NI could receive a transfusion from a horse not previously
sis, ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, and neorickettsiosis.
The
sensitized by pregnancy against donkey factor, since horses
Consensus Statement should be consulted for specific rec-
are known to be free of naturally-occurring antibodies
ommendations on diseases relevant to particular geographi-
against donkey factor, the implicated antigen in cases of NI
cal regions such as trypanosomiasis, bartonellosis, and
in mules.
hemoplasmosis."3
Cattle and sheep
Cats
Cattle can donate 8-l4mL/kg of body weight. Closely
Donor cats can donate between 10 and 12mL of blood/kg
matched transfusions are very difficult in cattle; first transfu-
body weight. Healthy adult cats can donate 45-60 mL every
sions are generally low risk, but ideally a donor would be
6 weeks and usually require sedation for blood collection.36.44
negative for the J antigen." Prion diseases have been shown
Like dogs. donors should have negative fecal and heartworm
to be transmitted by blood transfusion in sheep?? and should.
disease examinations as part of a general health screening.
therefore, be a consideration for disease screening prior to
Since the majority of cats in the United States are type A.
blood transfusion in ruminants.
 donors should also be type A, but depending on geography
 oe a sop  pue d ad 'auad aa u
Exotic pets
required. Because of the cat's naturally occurring alloanti-
 Large, vaccinated adult male ferrets are the best choice as
bodies, there is no universal cat donor. Donor cats should
blood donors, and should have a normal PcV and total
be negative for feline leulkemia virus (FeLV), feline immu-
protein, be negative for Aleutian mink disease virus, and be 
nodeficiency virus (FIV), cytauxzoonosis, and hemoplasmo-
screened for heartworm microfilaria.30as These ferrets can
sis. As for donor dogs, the Consensus Statement should be
donate a total of 6-l0mL of blood depending on body
consulted for specific recommendations on diseases relevant
weight.98
to particular geographical regions such as anaplasmosis, bar-
For pet birds and reptiles, since blood typing is not gener-
tonellosis, ehrlichiosis, and neorickettsiosis.43
ally available, using a healthy donor of the same species as 
the recipient may minimize the likelihood or severity of
Horses
transfusion reaction and will reportedly result in longer sur-
Adult horses can safely donate approximately 6-8 L of blood.
vival of transfused erythrocytes.313s Ideally a bird donor
Whole blood can be collected every 2-4 weeks and plasma
would be negative for chlamydiosis, psittacine beak and
l   e i a   a 
feather disease, and polyoma virus.30
donor.s Donors should be in good health, negative for
equine infectious anemia, and have normal PcV and plasma
Anticoagulants
protein concentrations; male donors may be preferred as
Citrate-phosphate-dextrose-adenine (CPDA-l) is the supe-
they are less likely to have been previously sensitized.1
rior anticoagulant because it maintains higher levels of
Mares that have been pregnant or foaled and horses that
2,3-disphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) and adenosine triphos-
have received blood or erythrocyte-contaminated plasma
phate (ATP) in collected blood. Blood can be stored for
transfusions should be excluded as potential donors. A
approximately 35 days in CPDA-1. Acid-citrate-dextrose
totally compatible blood transfusion is unlilkely to be
(ACD) allows storage of blood for 21 days.6.36.49.so when
achieved in the horse. Crossmatching to identify the least
using CPDA-l or ACD, use lmL of anticoagulant for every
incompatible donor is recommended to minimize adverse
7 mL of blood. Blood should be refrigerated in plastic blood
transfusion reactions but will not identify all donor/recipient
collection bags. Heparin activates platelets and is not recom-
incompatibilities.' Because Aa and Qa erythrocyte antigens
mended for blood collection, but if heparin is used as the
are extremely immunogenic, Aa- and Qa-negative donors
anticoagulant (5U per mL of blood).* blood must be used
are the best choice as donors to recipients of unknown blood 
immediately. Blood collected for transfusion in pet birds
type. In cases of NI, the dam's washed erythrocytes may be
must be administered immediately because use of available
used for transfusion to severely anemic foals whereas a
storage media will result in a blood product that contains
transfusion from the sire to foal would be contraindicated.17.41
 pota ssium levels that are dangerously high.38
While blood transfusion can be life-saving to foals with NI.
 Survival and functional usefulness of erythrocytes decrease
number and volume of transfusions must be limited: one
with increased storage temperature and time because of
study demonstrated that each administration of a blood 
glucose consumption and depletion of ATP and 2,3-DPG.
209
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Erythrocyte nutrient additives are available for closed-
by 10% if the donor has a PCV of approximately 40%.630
collection blood systems that will prolong the lifespan of
One report in horses demonstrated that 15mL/kg of whole
stored canine packed red blood cells (pRBCs); a review of
blood and 8-l0 mL/kg of packed erythrocytes resulted in a
Storage shelflife of blood component products is available.36
4% increase in PCV when the donor PCV was 35-40%.19
To preserve platelets, blood should be collected into latex-
More specific calculations for cattle are reported depending
-    s n  s  
on the indication for transfusion; for hemorrhagic shock a
ferred to plastic collection bags for storage). Glass-bottle
 general volume rule is 7L of whole blood/600 kg cow.'5 For
collection systems also are available for use; however limita-
tions include loss of platelets because of activation, increased
whole blood is used for treatment, the general rule is to
administer 10 mL/kg to increase the recipient's platelet count
by a maximum of about 10,000/μL." The reader is directed
Administration
  ss r aan i o sn o
Blood for transfusion must be collected aseptically. As rec-
rates for specific blood components.35,36,39.41
ommended by the ACVIM Consensus Statement on infec-
In dogs, the matched transfused erythrocyte half-life is
tious disease screening. an aliquot from every donated unit
approximately 2l days. In cats, the matched transfused
of blood should be stored for later testing in cases where
disease transmission following transfusion is suspected.43
vival time of compatible transfused erythrocytes is only 2-4
Blood should be filtered either prior to or during adminis-
days in horses and cattle.5354 Homologous transfusions in
tration using 150-170μm pore, nonlatex filters. An inline
birds result in a longer transfused erythrocyte half-life
filter should also be utilized when administering blood via
(approximately 8.5 days} compared to heterologous transfu-
plastic syringe immediately following collection as for reptiles.
sions (4.5 days).2,30
should be warmed to not greater than 37°C before administra-
Preparations used for transfusions
 tion; higher temperatures cause lysis of erythrocytes and
 Fresh whole blood is indicated for use in acute hemorrhage.
inactivation of clotting factors. Blood is administered intrave-
anemia, coagulation disorders, and thrombocytopenia.
nously through commercially available administration sets
Stored whole blood is indicated for use in anemia but wil
with filters. If concurrent crystalloid fluid therapy is indica ted
not provide platelets or coagulation factors. Packed erythro-
or for reconstituting blood components such as pa cked eryth-
cytes are recommended for anemic animals, particularly
rocytes, use only fluid containing 0.9% saline. Lactated Ring-
those at high risk for volume overload. Preparation methods
er's solution, 5% dextrose in water, and hypotonic saline are
for blood components are reviewed elsewhere.35,36.39.41
contraindicated for the following reasons: lactated Ringer's
Uses for fresh-frozen or stored-frozen plasma include con-
solution causes calcium chelation with citrate-containing
genital or acquired deficiencies of coagulation factors and
anticoagulants and subsequent clot formation, dextrose-
hypoproteinemia. Fresh-frozen plasma is indicated for use
con taining fluids cause swelling and lysis of erythrocytes, and
in failure of passive transfer (hypogammaglobulinemia} in
hypotonic fluids will lyse erythrocytes.
Circulatory overload and heart failure can result from
prepared from fresh-frozen plasma is indicated for replace-
excessive and rapid injection of blood or plasma. Generally.
ment of coagulation factors, especially factor Vlll:C, vWf.
blood should be given intravenously at a rate not to exceed
and fibrinogen, but not for protein. Cryosupernatant
increase flow rate): however, each patient must be assessed
factors II, VIl, IX, and X and can be stored for 5 years.°
individually to establish an appropriate infusion rate. For
Platelet-rich plasma or platelet concentrate is indicated for
severe thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathia. Hyperim-
of 20 mL/kg per hour, whereas patients with cardiac, renal,
or hepatic disease or recumbent calves may require an infu-
antibodies has been used for critically ill foals reportedly
sion rate of only 1 mL/kg per hour.35 Exotic species may
improving survival in those that are septic.5 Hyperimmune
require a slower initial infusion rate (0.5mL/kg)* If blood
 serum products are also available for use in cattle with infec-
is administered too quickly, salivating, vomiting. and muscle
tious disease.35
fasciculations may occur. Transfusions should be completed
Blood substitutes are available and have been used for
within 4 hours to avoid contamination of warmed blood.
treatment of anemia in different species of animals including
The amount to be transfused is determined according to the
dogs, cats, horses, birds, and ferrets. The most widely used
recipient's body weight, estimated blood volume, PCV of the
product is the hemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying product
recipient and of the donor, and the goal of therapy. A simple
Oxyglobin@ (Biopure Corporation, Cambridge, MA), which
guideline for small animals is that 10-15 mL/kg of packed
has been approved for use in dogs only. Oxyglobin is no
erythrocytes or 20 mL/kg of whole blood increases the PCV
longer available. Blood substitutes have several advantages
210
CHAPTER 17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and Crossmatching
intravascular hemolysis and serious clinical signs and pos-
of infectious disease transmission is minimized and the shelf
sibly death — even if it is the frst transfusion.&16 Type AB
life is long (3 years for Oxyglobin@). However, the product
cats can safely receive type AB or A blood. Administering
is expensive and must be discarded if not used within 24
Mik-positive blood to Mik-negative recipients can also result
hours: once administered it has a half-life of 18-40 hours
in acute hemolytic transfusion reactions.'′ Because of iden-
(depending on the dosage). Because Oxyglobin is a colloid.
tification of novel blood groups in cats, even AB-matched
patients of all species must be monitored very closely for
transfusions can result in reactions, and therefore cross-
volume overload, particularly those with compromised
 matching may be necessary for any feline blood or plasma
cardiac, respiratory, and/or renal function, and very small
transfusion.'
animals; monitoring for other adverse reactions during
 First transfusions can generally be administered with low
risk in cattle; however, transfusing J-positive erythrocytes
aware of the potential for abuse of artificial oxygen-carriers
into J-negative cattle can result in transfusion reactions, and
in canine and equine athletes.5 Lastly, these products can
hemolytic reactions to a second transfusion within four days
interfere with patient monitoring using colorimetric labora-
of a first transfusion have been reported.35
tory tests; effect of transfusion in recipients should be moni-
Neonatal isoerythrolysis is the destruction of erythrocytes
tored using hemoglobin concentration, not PCv.6.34
in the circulation of offspring by alloantibodies of maternal
origin that are absorbed from colostrum. Kittens at risk
Transfusion reactions and sequelae
include those that are type A or AB that suckle colostrum from
Potential transfusion reactions may be acute or delayed.
type B queens in the first l6 hours of life.' Nearly all cases in
Acute intravascular hemolysis with hemoglobinemia and
foals are caused by factor Aa in the A system and factor Qa in
hemoglobinuria may be seen in animals receiving incompat-
the Q system (acquired, not naturally occurring. alloantibod-
ible transfusions. Release of thromboplastic substances may
ies).17 Signs usually develop 24-36 hours after suckling. with
lead to disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Hypoten-
anemia and resultant liver failure and kernicterus (bilirubin 
sion and shock secondary to the release of vasoactive sub-
encephalopathy) being the primary causes of death in foals.6
stances, acute renal failure, and death also may occur.
Neonatal isoerythrolysis is also important in mule foals, and 
Delayed hemolysis is evidenced by a decrease in PCV
between 2 and 14 days after transfusion, and it occurs most
Complications that may be unrelated to erythrocyte
commonly in previously transfused animals with an anti-
antigen-antibody reactions include fever, allergic reactions.
body titer too low to detect by crossmatching. Usually.
circulatory overload, citrate toxicosis, ammonia toxicosis.
hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria do not occur; however.
and infection.661.62.63 Fever is a common reaction to a blood
hyperbilirubinemia and bilirubinuria may result from extra-
transfusion, and it may occur in response to leukocyte or
vascular hemolysis.
platelet antigens or to sepsis from bacterial contamination
A first transfusion usually can be safely given to dogs
of blood. Allergic reactions after transfusions can be seen in
without regard for donor blood type (if the recipient has not
been previously transfused). because alloantibodies against
or leukocyte and platelet antigens is generally responsible.
the common canine erythrocyte antigens 1.l and 1.2 do not
Circulatory overload is a potential sequela to whole-blood
exist, and sensitization does not occur during pregnancy in
transfusion, particularly in patients with cardiovascular
dogs.' Administering a mismatched first transfusion may
compromise. Citrate toxicity can result in acute decreases in
sensitize the recipient to immunogenic antigens such as 1.1,
the level of serum ionized calcium, which can be especially
1.2, 7, and others, however, and result in shortened survival
significant in cattle already hypocalcemic during acute
times of the transfused cells on first transfusion, and subse-
illness. Simultaneous administration of calcium in a separate
quent predisposition to severe transfusion reaction. The
administration line from the transfused blood may be indi-
strongest antigen in dogs, DEA l.l, elicits the most severe
cated in these cattle.35 Ammonia toxicity can occur with
transfusion reaction.2
prolonged storage of blood, because the ammonia concen-
In cats, AB-mismatched transfusions, whether initial or
tration increases over time. Patients with liver disease should
subsequent, may cause acute hemolytic incompatibility
be monitored closely for these latter two reactions. Infection
reactions. Because of alloantibodies, erythrocytes are
is a potential risk of blood transfusion as a result of blood-
 destroyed immediately in cats; this contrasts with the situa-
borne parasites and viruses, contamination of stored blood
tion in dogs. in which delayed transfusion reactions are
   n  
ai e o o  a o uis  n l a
and screening of donors as well as proper handling and
A cat typically results in mild clinical signs but also short-
storage of blood and visual inspection of the unit prior to
ened erythrocyte survival, thus resulting in ineffective
 transfusion help to minimize these risks.43 Storing a properly
therapy. Transfusion of type A blood to a type B cat results
labeled segment of the donor unit tubing is a convenient
in an acute hemolytic transfusion reaction with massive
way to retain an aliquot for later testing if needed.
211
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Rapid Vet-H
Rapid Vet-H
(Canine DEA 1.1)
(Feline A,B,AB)
Dog.
Date,
Cat
Date.
DEA1.1
Positive
Auto-
Control
Agglutination
Saline Screen
Type A
DEA 1.1
Negative
Control
Patient
TypeB
Test
Patient
Test
dmslaboratories,inc.
2atidn
RapidVet is a registered trad
dmslaboratories,inc.
Figure 17.2 RapidVet?-H typing cards demonstrating type B in a cat (let) and type DEA 1.1 in a dog (right). (Courtesy of DMS Laboratories, Inc.)
Rare, but fatal, cases of serum hepatitis have been reported
appropriate donor selection prior to crossmatch and transfu-
in horses receiving transfusion of commercially available
sion. Commercially available blood typing kits include a
plasma, and, as previously mentioned, liver failure and ker-
card-based agglutination assay (DMS Laboratories, Inc.,
nicterus are associated with large volume (greater than or 
 Flemington, NJ). an immunochromatographic cartridge
equal to 4L) transfusions in foals.46.64
(Alvedia, France), and a gel column diffusion assay (DiaMed,
Common sense and quality medical care mandate that
Switzerland);: the kits type for A, B, or AB in cats, and DEA
transfusions associated with hemolysis or hemoglobinuria.
1.l only in dogs. Brief overviews of the procedures are
which is evidence of an acute hemolytic reaction, be imme-
described; however, current package insert directions should
diately stopped and investigated. Visible hemolysis of the
be carefully followed at the time of testing.
donor unit suggests inappropriate storage or bacterial con-
Blood typing cards contain lyophilized antisera in desig-
tamination, in which case culture is warranted. Pre- and
nated reaction wells. The dog cards include positive and
posttransfusion recipient blood samples as well as donor unit
negative control wells and the cat cards include an autocon-
samples should be obtained to allow confirmation of blood
trol well. A drop of diluent and a drop of whole blood are
types, compatibility by crossmatching. and Coombs testing
mixed onto each reaction well on the card, rocked, and then
status." Similar testing may provide insight to an unex-
 observed for macroscopic agglutination (Fig. 17.2). The pro-
plained failure to maintain maximal PCV when delayed
cedure is simple, and results are obtained in less than 2
transfusion reactions occur.
minutes with no special equipment required. The autocon-
trol well included on the cat typing card and on separate
 cards in dogs allows assessment for autoagglutination. Auto-
Typing blood
General principles
*At the time of pres, the distributor (BioRad) indicates the DiaMed
Blood typing can be performed in the clinic to screen poten-
(Switzerland) gel column diffusion assay has been discontinued (per-
tial cat and dog blood donors and to type the recipient for
sonal communica tion, R. Orynich, 1l/22/2010).
212
CHAPTER 17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and Crossmatching
preclude accurate typing. A prozone phenomenon may
occur in the presence of inappropriate antigen:antibody
VETDEA1.1M
ratios that can generate false negative results. Consequently.
 an additional drop of diluent should be added to dog samples
with weak or grainy reactions followed by rocking and
reading the card again, and samples from very anemic
DMEVETD
 animals (Pcv < 10%) should be concentrated prior to typing
Buffer
The immunochromatographic kits utilize a plastic car-
41670.02
Lof:13410.14.10
tridge device and testing requires about 2 minutes. Testing
requires simple preparation of a cell suspension and manip-
ulation of the device to properly place the reaction strip into
the suspension. This allows erythrocytes to move up the
membrane by capillary action. Erythrocytes positive for the
 antigen in question are trapped by the antibody impregnated
in the strip. which then forms a visible line (Fig. 17.3).
Erythrocytes negative for the antigen pass by the antibody
and do not form a line. The strip is also impregnated with
control material that must read positive to confirm the test
was performed properly. The manufacturer claims autoag-
glutination and marked anemia do not interfere. These tests
 are easy to interpret and archive.66
 The gel tube typing kits require a simple preparation of a
cell suspension, a l0-minute incubation period, and a 10-
minute centrifugation in a centrifuge specifically designed
to hold the gel tube cartridges (Fig. 17.4). The reaction is
grossly visible as a compact to modestly dispersed layer of
agglutinated cells at or near the top of a gel column (Fig.
17.5). Nonreacting cells accumulate at the bottom of the
EVETDEA11
column. This method reportedly provides easier result inter-
The cat typing kits are generally reliable, but the card may
DEAY
misclassification of type AB cats as type B.33 The kit insert
instructs users to add a second drop of diluent to the "A"
pue (dot) saddns ly huid yiydenoiewoynounuul e'zl aanas
well; this reduces the chance of a prozone reaction. The gel
column indicating type DEA 1.1 in a dog (bottom). (Courtesy of Alvedia.)
and card/cartridge methods may give inconclusive or erro-
neous results, respectively, in FeLV positive cats. All three
methods are reportedly accurate for detecting B types, while
the gel method is accurate for type AB.66 Given the potential
Blood Resources International);: confirmatory testing by an
for error and the inability to routinely type for the Mik
outside laboratory is recommended when weak reactions
antigen, crossmatching with even apparently AB type-
are obtained. Since the canine kits indicate the presence or
matched units is strongly recommended to avoid potentially
absence of DEA 1.1 only, and do not detect DEA 1.2 or 7.
harmful mismatched blood transfusions.'
they should only be considered as a screen for typing poten-
Rare false positive and negative results occur with the dog
tial donors. It is recommended that potential donors typed
agglutination test kits and rare false negative results occur
as DEA l.l negative be further tested with more specific
antisera (Animal Blood Resources International, Stock-
tion reactions should be interpreted as l.l positive; some
bridge. MI) to at least rule out the presence of DEA 1.2. The
weaker reactions may be related to the DEA 1.2 type. This
kits are adequate for recipient testing provided that all
issue has been corrected according to DMS Laboratories.6 If
donors are known to be negative for DEA l.l and 1.2.
performing in-house confirmatory tube-typing. note that
 Failure to follow this recommendation may sensitize the
only 2+ or stronger reactions with 1.2 antisera should be
recipient to the DEA 1.2 antigen. If DEA 1.1/l.2 negative
considered positive for DEA 1.2 (package insert, Animal
blood is in short supply. DEA 1.l positive blood should be
213
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
ID-Centrifuge6S
Figure 17.4 Gel typing centrifuge and materials. (Courtesy of Bio-Rad.)
ctl
B
ctl
AnPLE
SAnPLE
Figure 17.5 Gel typing test card indicating type A cat (left, sample 1) and type B cat (right, samnple 2) with negative controls. (Courtesy of Bio-Rad.)
are also available. All samples for DEA 1.1 and 1.X typing
DEA 1.1.6
with reactions ranging from negative to l+ after the 15-
Tube typing is not available in kit form, but utilizes com-
minute 37°℃ incubation phase must also be taken through
mercially available  lyophilized antisera  (Animal  Blood
the antiglobulin phase of testing before a valid interpretation
Resources International, Stockbridge, MI), borosilicate glass 
 is rendered. This procedure is technically demanding and
tubes and a blood banking centrifuge capable of 3400rpm
more appropriate for high volume testing centers with expe-
(1000 relative centrifugal force—rcf) in order to obtain
rienced technical staff. Currently the procedure for DEA 3.
appropriate cell packing. An agglutination viewer assists
4, 5. and 7 determinations differs from DEA 1.1 and 1.X
reading macroscopic reactions. In addition to DEA l.l and
typing. and does not require the Coombs phase. Note that
1.X (includes 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3), DEA 3, 4, 5, and 7 antisera
antisera are not available for every known blood type.
214
CHAPTER 17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and Crossmatching
regardless of species, so sensitization can still occur when
less important, purportedly because the plasma volume is
administering transfusions of apparently type-specific blood.
small in the donated product compared to the recipient,
A rapid typing protocol for detecting Aa and Ca erythro-
and is ultimately diluted, particularly when packed erythro-
cyte antigens in horses has recently been developed."? This
cytes are transfused.* Exceptions have been documented
discovery may prompt the development of commercially
when transfusing dogs" and horses.1 Administration of
available typing reagents. The protocol's usefulness in the
packed erythrocytes may contain  sufficient antibodies
practice setting is limited at this time without such reagents,
against recipient erythrocytes to induce adverse reactions in
and with the inability to detect Qa, a hemolysin. Since com-
these species.
 For exotic species in which test volumes are limited and
from horses, cattle, sheep. and goats may be sent to the
also for cats, a simplified crossmatch procedure can be per-
Veterinary Genetics Laboratory (Davis, CA) for typing (530-
formed on a clean glass slide (see Appendix 17.l). Grossly
752-22ll; www.vgl.ucdavis.edu) Preparation methods for
visible agglutination indicates incompatibility. Note that this
sending typing samples to reference laboratories are
described in Appendix 17.1.
antibodies.1.30.76
An ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tube and a
clot tube from the recipient are preferred for use in cross-
Crossmatching blood
match testing. The same tubes may be collected from the
donor or alternatively. blood from the donor unit may be
General principles
used to provide plasma and cells for the procedure. If these
 Crossmatching tests for agglutinating and/or hemolytic reac-
options do not exist, erythrocytes teased from the clot and
tions between a donor and recipient and is classifed as
serum may be used for the entire procedure. The EDTA
plasma should not be used in place of serum because this
adequate for the dog and cat.? since the horse has both
contributes to increased rouleaux formation and difficult 
agglutinating and hemolytic antibodies, procedures testing
interpretation of agglutination, particularly in the horse.
for both are warranted. The use of a hemolytic test with
Ideally, samples should be free of autoagglutination, hemo-
complement is necessary for cattle, sheep. and goats since
lysis, and lipemia to aid in the interpretation of the reactions.
When autoagglutination is present, or when no compatible
The major crossmatch evaluates for the presence (positive
units are available, transfusing the least incompatible unit
findings) or absence (negative findings) of detectable levels
may be a necessity, albeit not without significant risk. Test-
 of antibodies, whether naturally occurring or induced, in the
transfusing even a small volume of unmatched blood is an
recipient against donor erythrocyte antigens. A major cross-
unsafe practice, and never recommended.
match should always be performed in animals that have
The interfering effects of hemolysis may be minimized by
strong naturally occurring antibodies, as in cats, or in those
setting up a control tube with an equal number of drops of
that may have induced antibodies as from prior transfusions.
serum alone; determine whether hemolysis is increased
The latter is true even if the same donor blood is intended
during the procedure by comparison to the control. Specific
for repeated transfusion beyond a span of several days.
-ad ane suynieussoo pue budn pooq ioy sainpaond
While the 37*C crossmatch is fairly standard for dogs and
sented in Appendix 17.1.
cats, recommendations for additional phases are under
review. Naturally occurring antibodies (anti-DEA 3, 4, 5. and
7) known to result in shortened erythrocyte survival in dogs
References
previously sensitized to these antigens,? might be identified
using a 4°℃ step. and more of these reactors could be identi-
1. Giger U (2009) Blood-typing and crossmatching. In: Kirk's
fied by adding the antiglobulin (Coombs) phase to the tube
Current Vererinary Therapy XIV, Bonagura JD, Twedt DC (eds.).
typing procedure (see Appendix 17.1) 2.5.72 The time required
 Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, p. 260-5.
pooa pue sdno pooq jo aueodun (too)  snequauoh "7
to vary slightly between species and author's opinions.
group antibodies in companion animals. Transfus Med Rev 18:
Erring on the side of caution, repeat crossmatching is recom-
117-26.
3. Symons M, Bell K {199l) Expansion of the canine A blood
mended when there is a span of greater than two days in
horses and cattle,3573 and 4 or more days in dogs and cats1.74
group system. Anim Gener 22: 227-35.
4. Melzer K, Wardrop K, Hale A, Wong V (2003) A hemolytic
since a prior transfusion.
transfusion reaction due to DEA 4 alloantibodies in a dog. J Vet
       s
Intermn Med 17: 931-3.
as the major crossmatch but evaluates for the presence or
5. Hale A (1995) Canine blood groups and their importance in
absence of detectable antibodies in donor plasma against
veterinary transfusion medicine. Ver Clin Norrth Am Small Anim
recipient erythrocytes. The minor crossmatch is considered
Pracr 25: 1323-32.
215
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
6. Wardrop K (2008) Transfusion medicine. In: Handbook of Small
28. Manning D, Bell J (1990) Lack of detectable blood groups in
Anima! Pracrice, 5th ed., Morgan RV (ed.), Saunders Elsevier, St.
domestic ferrets: implications for transfusion. J Am Ver Med Assor
Louis, pp. 707-13.
197: 846.
7. Blais M, Berman L, Oakley D, Giger U (2007) Canine Da/ blood
29. Ryland L {1l982) Remission of estrus-associated anemia follow-
type: a red cell antigen lacking in some dalmatians. J Vet Inter
ing ovariohysterectomy and multiple blood transfusions in a
Med 21: 281-6.
ferret. J Am Ver Med Assoc 18l: 820-2.
8. Giger U, Bucheler J, Patterson D (199l) Frequency and inheri-
30. Lichtenberger M (2004) Transfusion medicine in exotic pets.
tance of A and B blood types in feline breeds of the United
Clin Tech Small Anim Pracr 19: 88-95.
States. J Hered 82: 15-20.
31. Schumacher J (2008) Fluid therapy in reptiles. In: Zoo and Wild
9. Giger U, Griot-Wenk M, Bucheler J, Smith S, Diserens D, Hale
Animal Medicine Currenr Therapy 6, Fowler ME, Miller RE (eds.).
A {199l) Geographical variation of the feline blood type fre-
Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 160-4.
quencies in the United States. Fel Pracr 19: 21-6.
32. Giger U, Stieger K, Palos H (2005) Comparison of various
10. Malik R, Griffin D, White J, et al. (2005) Prevalence of the feline
canine blood-typing methods. Am J Ver Res 66: 1386-92.
A/B blood type in the Sydney region. Ausr Ver J 83: 38-44.
 33. Stieger K, Palos H, Giger U (2005) Comparison of various blood-
11. Forcada Y, Guitian J, Gibson G (2007) Frequencies of feline
typing methods for the feline AB blood group system. Am J Vet
blood types at a referral hospital in the South East of England.
Res 66: 1393-9.
J Small Anim Pracr 48: 570-3.
34. Chiaramonte D (2004) Blood-component therapy: selection,
12. Griot-Wenk M, Callan M, Casal M, et al. (1996) Blood type AB
administration and monitoring. Clin Tech Small Anim Pracr 19:
 in the feline AB blood group system. Am J Ver Res 57: 1438-42.
63-7.
13. Weinstein N, Blais M, Harris K, Oakley D, Aronson L, Giger U
35. Divers T (2005) Blood component transfusions. Ver Clin North
(2007) A newly recognized blood group in domestic shorthair
Am FoodAnimPracr21:615-22.
cats: the Mik red cell antigen. J Ver Inrern Med 2l: 287-92.
36. Lucas R, Lentz K, Hale A (2004) Collection and preparation of 
14. Knottenbelt C, Addie D, Day M, Mackin A (1999) Determina-
blood products. Clin Tech Small Anim Pracr 19: 55-62.
tion of the prevalence of feline blood types in the UK. J Smal!
 37. Kristensen A, Feldman B (1995) Blood banking and transfusion
Anim Pracr 40: 115-18.
medicine. In: Texibook of Vererinary Interna! Medicine, 4th ed.,
15. Bucheler J, Giger U (1993) Alloantibodies against A and B blood
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (eds.), WB Saunders, Philadelphia, pp.
types in cats. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 38: 283-95.
347-60.
16. Giger U (1992) The feline AB blood group system and incom-
38. Mitchell E, Johns J (2008) Avian hematology and related dis-
patibility reactions. In: Current Vererinary Therapy XI, Kirk RW.
orders. Ver Clin Exor Anim 1l: 50l-22.
WB Saunders (eds.), Philadelphia, pp. 470-4.
39. Sellon D (2004) Disorders of the hematopoietic system. In:
17. Blackmer J, Parish S (2002) Diseases caused by allogeneic
Equine Internal Medicine, 2nd ed., Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon
DC (eds.), Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, pp. 721-68.
Smith BP (ed.), Mosby Elsevier Science, St. Louis, pp. 1604-13.
40. Abrams-Ogg A (2003) Triggers for prophylactic use of
18. Stormont C, Suzuki Y, Rhode E (1964) Serology of horse blood
platelet transfusions and optimal platelet dosing in thrombocy-
groups. Cormel! Ver 54: 439-52.
topenic dogs and cats. Ver Clin Norrh Am Small Anim Pracr 33:
19. Hurcombe S, Mudge M, Hinchcliff K (2007) Clinical and clini-
1401-18.
 copathologic variables in adult horses receiving blood transfu-
41. Durham A (1996) Blood and plasma transfusion in the horse.
sions: 31 cases {1999-2005). J Am Ver Med Assoc 231: 267-74.
Equine Ver Educ 8: 8-12.
20. Wilkins P (2004) Disorders of foals. In: Equine Inrernal Medicine,
42. Owens S, Oakley D, Marryott K, er al. (200l) Transmission of
 2nd ed., Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC (eds.), Saunders Else-
visceral leishmaniasis through blood transfusions from infected
vier, St. Louis, pp. 1402-31.
English Foxhounds to anemic dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 219:
21. McClure J, Koch C, Traub-Dargatz J {1994) Characterization of
1076-83.
a red blood cell antigen in donkeys and mules associated with
43. Wardrop K, Reine N, Birkenheuer A, et al. Canine and feline
neonatal isoerythrolysis. Anim Gener 25: 119-20.
blood donor screening for infectious disease. J Ver Intern Med 19:
22. Traub-Dargatz J, McClure J, Koch C, Schlipf J (1995) Neonatal
135-42, 2005.
isoerythrolysis in mule foals. J Am Ver Med Assoc 206: 67-70.
44. Roux F, Deschamps J, Blais M, Welsh D, Delaforcade-Buress A,
   s [ r]   7
Rozanski E. Multiple red cell transfusions in 27 cats (2003-
and Db antigens in a foal. J Am Ver Med Assoc 219: 79-81.
2006): indications, complications and outcomes. J Fe! Med and
 24. Boyle A, Magdesian K, Ruby R (2005) Neomatal isoerythrolysis
Surg 10: 213-18, 2008.
in horse foals and a mule foal: 18 cases (1988-2003). J Am Vet
45. Byars T, Divers T. Clinical use of blood transfusions. Calif Ver l:
Med Assoc 227: 1276-83.
1416, 1981.
25. Bailey E, Albright D (1988) Equine neonatal isoerythrolysis:
46. Polkes A, Giguere S, Lester G, Bain F Factors associated with
evidence for prevention by matermal antibodies to the Ca blood
outcome in foals with neonatal isoerythrolysis (72 Cases, 1998-
group antigen. Am J Ver Res 49: 1218-22.
2003). J Ver Intern Med 22: 1216-22, 2008.
26. Stormont C (199l) Blood groups in animals. Adv Ver Sri Comp
47. Houston F, McCutcheon S, Goldmann W, et al. Prion diseases
Med 36: 9-55.
are effciently transmitted by blood transfusion in sheep. Blood
27. Tucker E, Ellory J (l97l) The M-L blood group system and
112: 4739-45, 2008.
active potassium transport in sheep reticulocytes. Anim Blood
48. Siperstein L (2008) Ferret hematology and related disorders. Ver
Groups Biochem Gener 2: 77-87.
Clin Exot Anim 1l: 535-50.
216
CHAPTER 17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and Crossmatching
49. Bucheler J, Cotter S (1994) Storage of feline and canine whole
68. Marino B (2009) E-mail communication. DMS Laboratories,
blood in CPDA-1 and determination of post-transfusion viabil-
Inc., 2 Darts Mill Road, Flemington, NI 08822; 1/26/09.
ity. J Ver Intern Med 8: 172.
69. Owens S, Snipes J, Magdesian K, Christopher M (2008) Evalu-
50. Jain N (1993) Immunohematology. In: Essentials of Veterinary
ation of a rapid agglutination method for detection of equine
Hematotogy. Jain NC (ed.), Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia. pp.
red cell surface antigens (Ca and Aa) as part of pretransfusion
381-407.
testing. Ver Clin Pathol 37: 49-56.
51. Mudge M, MacDonald M, Owens S. Tablin F (2004) Compari-
70. Jain N (1986) Hematologic techniques. In: Schaim's Vererinary
son of 4 blood storage methods in a protocol for equine pre-
Hematology. 4th ed., Jain NC (ed.), Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
operative autologous donation. Ver Surg 33: 475-86.
pp. 71-4.
 52. Marion R, Smith J (1983) Survival of erythrocytes after autolo-
71. Stormont C (1982) Blood groups in animals. J Am Ver Med Assoc
gous and allogeneic transfusion in cats. J Am Ver Med Assoc 183:
181: 1120-4.
1437-9.
72. Hale A (2009) Personal communication. Animal Blood
53. Kallfelz F, Whitlock R (1973) Survival of 59Fe-labeled erythro-
 Resources Intermational, 4983 Bird Dr., Stockbridge, MI 49285;
cytes in cross-transfused bovine blood. Am J Ver Res 34:
4/9/09.
1041-4.
 73. Williamson L (1993) Highlights of blood transfusion in horses.
54. Kallfelz F Whitlock R, Schultz R {1978) Survival of 59
Compend Cont Educ 15: 268-9.
Fe-labeled erythrocytes in cross-transfused equine blood. Am J
74. Wardrop K (2000) Clinical blood typing and crossmatching. In:
Ver Res 89: 617-20.
Schaim's Vererinary Hematology. 5th ed., Feldman BF Zink] JG.
55. Crisman M, Scarratt W (2008) Immunodeficiency disorders in
d 'edaeud sum s suem noud (sa) n uer
horses. Ver Clin Equine 24: 299-310.
795-8.
56. Peek S, Semrad S, McGuirk S, et al. (2006) Prognostic value of
 75. Kerl M, Hohenhaus A (1993) Packed red blood cell transfusions
clinicopathologic variables obtained at admission and effect of
in dogs: 131 cases (1989). J Am Ver Med Assoc 202: 1495-9.
antiendotoxin plasma on survival in septic and critically ill foals.
76. Griot-Wenk M, Giger U (l995) Feline transfusion medicine:
JVerIntermMed20:569-74
 blood types and their clinical importance. Ver Clin North Am
57. Belgrave R, Hines M, Keegan R, Wardrop K, Bayly W, Sellon D
Small Anim Pracr 25: 1305-22.
{2002) Effects of a polymerized ultrapurified bovine hemoglo-
77. Penedo M (2000) Red blood cell antigens and blood groups in
bin blood substitute administered to ponies with normovolemic
the cow, pig, sheep. goat, and llama. In: Schatm's Vererinary
anemia. J Ver Interm Med 16: 396-403.
Hemarology. 5th ed., Feldman BF Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.). Lip-
 g    
 pincot, Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 778-82.
ed., Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC (eds), Saunders Elsevier.
78. Bailey E, Conboy H, McCarthy P (1987) Neonatal isoerythroly-
St. Louis, pp. 273-88.
sis of foals: an update on testing. Proceedings of the Thirry-Third
59. Soma L, Uboh C, Guan F, et al. (2005) The pharmacokinetics of
Annual Convention of the American Association of Equine Practitio-
hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier hemoglobin glutamer-200
ners, New Orleans, Louisiana, Nov.-Dec., 341-53.
bovine in the horse. Anesrh Analg l0o: 1570-5.
 60. Weingart C, Kohn B (2008) Clinical use of a haemoglobin-based
oxygen carrying solution (Oxyglobin) in 48 cats (2002-2006).
J Feline Med Surg 10: 431-8.
Appendix 17.1
61. Harrell K, Kristensen A, Parrow J {1997) Canine transfusion
reactions. Part I. Causes and consequences. Compend Cont Educ
Procedures
19: 181-90.
 Reagents and equipment described here are used by the
62. Harrell K, Kristensen A, Parrow J {1997) Canine transfusion
Colorado State University Veterinary Teaching Hospital.
reactions. Part Il. Prevention and treatment. Compend Conr Edur
19: 193-200.
Tube typing
63. Hohenhaus A (20oo) Transfusion reactions. In: Srhalm's Vereri-
nary Hemarology. 5th ed., Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.).
 This tube typing protocol is used to type dogs for the pres-
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 864-8.
ence or absence of DEA l antigen, and if present, to distin-
           
guish between DEA 1.l and 1.2/l.3. (Adapted from Animal
associated with commercial plasma transfusion in horses. J Ver
Blood Resources International, Stockbridge, MI.) Fresh
Intern Med 19: 120-2.
EDTA-anticoagulated whole blood free of hemolysis is pre-
65. Giger U (2ooo) Blood typing and crossmatching to ensure com-
ferred, but clotted blood can be used.
patible transfusions. In: Kirk's Currenr Vererinary Therapy XIL.
Bonagura JD (ed.), Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Typing procedure
pp. 396-9.
1. Make a 4% suspension of erythrocytes:
66. Seth M, Winzelberg S, Jackson K, Giger U (2008) Comparison
of gel column, card and cartridge techniques for DEA 1.1 blood
a. Add 0.04 mL of packed erythrocytes to 0.96 mL of PBS
typing of dogs. J Ver Intern Med 22: 775.
in a labeled test tube or estimate by adding PBS to eryth-
67. Moritz A, Widmann T, Hale A (1998) Comparison of current
'I'I uaaue aiouaia sop jo uogen[eaa iog sanbuuai sud
tomato juice. It must have adequate erythrocytes to go
Proc 16th ACVIM Forum 716.
through a set of washes later.
217
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
2. For each sample to be tested, label three 12- x 75-mm,
indicates autoagglutination and negates the interpretation of
disposable glass tubes with the animal identification. Label
positive results in any of the typing tubes. Any blood that is
one tube "C" for control, one tube "Dl", and another "Dx."
positive in the DEA l.l tube is DEA 1.l, and should also be
3. Add two drops (100 μL) of 0.9% PBS to the control tube.
positive in the l.X tube. Any blood that is negative in the
4. Add two drops (100 μL) of DEA 1.1 and DEA 1.X typing
DEA l.l tube but positive in the DEA l.X tube is either DEA
sera (Animal Blood Resources International, Stockbridge.
1.2 or 1.3; DEA 1.2 is most likely except in the case of a
MI) to appropriately labeled tubes.
German shepherd dog from Australia. Dogs positive for
5. Add one to two drops (70μL) of the 4% suspension of
either type are not considered universal donors. No further
erythrocytes to each tube, swirl the tubes to mix, and incu-
testing is necessary. Negative, trace or l+ reactions for hemo-
bate at 37°℃ for 15 minutes.
lysis or agglutination with Anti-DEA 1.l and 1.X are con-
6. Centrifuge the tubes at 3400 rpm using a standard blood
o a   aq   u 
bank centrifuge (Sero-fuge II, Clay-Adams/Becton Dickin-
phase, including the control tube, to detect incomplete anti-
son, Sparks, MD) for 15 seconds.
bodies as described in the following section.
7. Read for hemolysis by observing the supernatant.
8. Gently rock the tubes and read for macroscopic (Figs.
17.6, 17.7) and microscopic agglutination (Fig. 17.8).
Interpretation
Hemolysis or agglutination reactions of 2+ or greater are
considered positive. The control tube should read negative
for hemolysis and/or agglutination. A positive control tube
Figure 17.7 Macroscopic 4+ agglutination. Note the tight button of
 cells. A reaction of this magnitude may be seen with a strong-reacting
 antibody, such as anti-A, which mmay be present in type B cats.
6.
123
130
9..1
8.5.
2...
Figure 17.6 Tube typing. Macroscopic 2+ agglutination (left) and
Figure 17.8 Microscopic 4+ agglutination. Note the irregular grape-like 
negative control (righty. These results could also represent incompatible
 clusters. A microscopic reaction of this strength may also be detectable
(left) and compatible (right) macroscopic crossmatch reactions.
 macroscopically as fine agglutination.
218
CHAPTER 17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and Crossmatching
Coombs phase to detect false-negative types
The reagent required is Canine Coombs Serum (VMRD.
Pullman, WA), stored refrigerated.
Procedure
1. Wash the cells in the "C" and both "D" tubes three times
with 0.9% PBS.
a. Use a squirt bottle of PBS to forcibly add at least 1 mL
to each tube. centrifuge for 2 minutes at 3400rpm
(Serofuge I) to tightly pack the cells, then decant super-
natant without removing any of the erythrocytes.
b. Resuspend the button of cells and repeat twice.
c. After the third wash, invert the tubes and pour off the
supernatant, then resuspend the cells in the residual
Figure 17.9 Slide crossmatch. Results demonstrate (from left to right)
fluid. Insufficient washing results in a false-negative
compatible (no agglutination), and 1+ to 3+ incompatible (agglutination)
result.
reactions.
2. Add two drops (100μL) of Coombs reagent to each tube.
3. Swirl the tubes to mix, and then incubate at 37°℃ for 15
minutes.
4. Spin at 3400rpm for 15-30 seconds. Gently mix the
3. Repeat steps l and 2 for the minor crossmatch, using two
 tubes, and then read for hemolysis and agglutination.
drops of donor plasma and one drop of recipient blood.
Interpretafion
Agglutination crossmatch test
The interpretation is the same as that described above. If the
The agglutination crossmatch test is appropriate for dogs and 
dog types negative with DEA 1.l and 1.X at this point, it
cats, and it is used in conjunction with the lytic test for
may be considered a universal donor for the DEA l group.
horses. In dogs previously transfused with nonuniversal
Any positive Coombs test result on the control tube using
donor blood, an extra autocontrol and major crossmatch
cells from a clot tube should be verified with an EDTA-
tube can be set up and incubated at 4°C to detect cold react-
anticoagulated sample. Calcium is bound by EDTA, which
in turn prevents the activation of C, (i.e., complement) and.
 procedure is modifed from that described by Jain.70
therefore, avoids interference by cold-reacting antibodies.
Procedure
Sample preparation for sending blood-typing
1. Centrifuge clotted blood, and place serum into a prela-
samples to reference laboratories
beled test tube.
Large animal blood typing requires ACD-anticoagulated
2. Wash EDTA-anticoagulated erythrocytes as described in
blood for longer cell preservation. Usually. EDTA-
the Coombs phase of the typing procedure above; however.
anticoagulated whole blood is adequate for small-animal
wash cells four times for horses.
blood typing. Samples collected with an anticoagulant
3. After the final wash, make a 4% erythrocyte suspension
should be gently mixed, not shaken, immediately after col-
of each specimen in PBS as previously described.
lection. The EDTA-anticoagulated whole blood should be
4. Place two drops of the recipient's serum and two drops
shipped cool (with, but not touching. a cold pack). All
of the donor's cell suspension in a 12- x 75-mm test tube
samples should be protected from temperature extremes and
and mix (i.e., major system). In a second tube, place two
shipped by overnight delivery. The reference laboratory
drops of the donor's serum and two drops of the recipient's
should be contacted to obtain more specific requirements
erythrocyte suspension (i.e., minor system). To check for
regarding sample type, handling. and shipping. Most labo-
autoagglutination, set up controls in the same manner by
ratories performing parental exclusion typing supply blood
mixing the donor's erythrocytes with its own serum, and
collection kits or mailers.
then follow the same procedure with the recipient's eryth-
rocytes and serum.
Simplified crossmatch?6
5. Shake the rack of tubes, incubate for 15-30 minutes at
1. For the major crossmatch, mix two drops of recipient
37°℃, and then centrifuge for 15 seconds at 3400 rpm.
plasma with one drop of blood from the donor on a clean
6. Examine the supernatant for hemolysis.
glass slide at room temperature.
7. Shake the tubes gently by tapping with the finger to
 2. Observe for macroscopic agglutination within one minute
detect grossly visible agglutination of erythrocytes (Figs.
(Fig. 17.9)
17.6 and 17.7).
219
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
。.
agglutination. Rouleaux should dissipate, whereas aggluti-
0
36
nation should remain.
Interpretation
Slight hemolysis in canine blood is nonspecific. Significant
hemolysis and/or agglutination in one or both of the cross-
matched tubes—-but not in the controls—-indicate an incom-
patibility and the need to select a new donor. Incompatibility
in the major crossmatch indicates the need to select a new
0。
donor. Strong incompatibility in the minor crossmatch, as
might be observed in mismatched cats, indicates the need to
select a new donor; otherwise, packed or washed erythro-
cytes minimize transfusion of donor antibodies. In horses,
hemolysis in the agglutination test most likely indicates
fragile or old cells rather than incompatibility. Therefore.
Figure 17.10 Negative microscopic agglutination. All the cells are
evenly dlispersed.
hemolysis in horses should be ignored; however, if all cells
are hemolyzed, then agglutination is impossible to detect.
Positive con trol tubes indicate autoagglutination or contami-
nated reagents, thereby rendering positive crossmatch tubes
Uninterpretable.
Hemolytic crossmatch test
The hemolytic crossmatch test is required in crossmatching
blood from goats, sheep. and cattle, because erythrocytes
from these species tend not to agglutinate.35 Most equine
isoantibodies act as hemolysins; thus, performing both the
test, fresh rabbit serum is used as the complement source.
Because all rabbits possess naturally occurring anti-
erythrocyte antibodies. the antibodies must be removed
before using the serum as a complement source.
 The following procedure is modifed from that described
by Jain.20
Figure 17.11 Rouleaux (coin-stacking phenomenon). This must not be
confused with agglutination, may indicate insufficient cell washing, and is 
Procedure
common with equine sarples.
1. Follow steps l-4 of the agglutination crossmatch adding
serum and cell suspensions to appropriately labeled tubes; if
performing the agglutination and hemolytic crossmatches
8. If no agglutination is observed, transfer a small amount
concurrently (as for horses). set up four additional tubes
to a glass slide and then examine under low power of the
labeled to identify them as major hemolytic and minor
microscope. Lower the condenser to increase the contrast.
hemolytic tubes, and recipient and donor hemolytic control
Erythrocytes are evenly dispersed (Fig. 17.10) if no aggluti
tubes.
nation is present. If present, agglutination appears as grape-
2. Add one drop of rabbit complement (absorbed for horses.
like clusters of erythrocytes (Fig. 17.8). Rouleaux should not
sheep. and goats; refer to the complement absorption pro-
be confused with agglutination. Rouleaux formation (Fig.
cedure that follows) to the hemolytic phase crossmatch and
17.1l) is common in horse blood, and it appears as stacks
control tubes.
of coins.
3. Shake the rack to mix, and then incubate at 37°C for 30
 Rouleaux and true agglutination may be further differen-
minutes.
tiated with the saline replacement procedure. First, centri-
4. Centrifuge the tubes at 3400 rpm (1000 g) for 15 seconds.
fuge the tube for 15 seconds, remove the serum by pipette
 Observe the supernatant in each "hermolytic" tube for
and replace with two drops of PBs, mix, and then centrifuge
hemolysis: there is no need to check these tubes for
at 3400 rpm for 15 seconds. Next, read for microscopic
agglutination.
220
CHAPTER 17 Principles of Blood Transfusion and Crossmatching
Interpretation
Jaundiced foal agglutination test (colostrum
A positive autocontrol indicates the presence of an auto-
crossmatch)
antibody and may induce uninterpretable results in the
The jaundiced foal agglutination test correlates highly with
hemolytic blood group tests at l:l6 dilutions. Lower dilu-
the recipient's serum reacts with the donor's erythrocytes.
tions have poorer correlations because of the viscosity of
and in this case, the donor blood should not be transfused.
colostrum."s
The minor crossmatch is incompatible if the donor serum
reacts with the recipient's erythrocytes. In this case only
packed or washed erythrocytes are generally safe for
Materials
1. Centrifuge (300-600 g)
transfusion.
2. Test tube rack
3. Disposable glass test tubes (12 × 75 mm)
Absorbed complement preparation;" for use in
4.Saline
the hemolytic crossmatch in horses, sheep, and
5. Colostrum (or serum) and EDTA whole blood from mare
goats
(erythrocytes teased from clotted blood may be used)
Reagents
6. EDTA whole blood from foal (erythrocytes teased from
1. Lyophilized rabbit complement (Pel-Freez), store frozen.
clotted blood may be used).
2. CaCL,-MgCl, solution, store refrigerated.
a. CaCL,, 14.7 g.
b.MgCl.20.35g.
Method
c. Distilled HO, approximately 2 L.
1. Label tubes for l:2, 1:4, 1:8, 1:16, and l:32 dilutions for
3. Na,-EDTA solution.
the foal.
a. 74.4g per 2L of distilled HO.
2. Add l mL of saline to all tubes.
or
3. Add l mL of colostrum to the tubes labeled as foal 1:2.
b. Sequester-Sol (Baxter).
Mix and remove l mL of the dilution and then add to the
4. PBS (Sigma Diagnostics, catalog no. 1000-3). store
next consecutive tube. Repeat the procedure, discarding
refrigerated.
1 mL from the 1:32 tube. Discard tube 8.
5. Normal erythrocytes from the species to be tested i.e.
4. Add one drop of foal's whole blood to each tube and mix.
horse, sheep. or goat. (Two lavender-top (EDTA), 10-mL
5. Centrifuge the tubes for 2 to 3 minutes at medium speed
tubes from one donor are adequate.)
(300-600 g).
6. Invert the tubes and hold upside down, pouring out the
liquid contents, and observe the status of the button of
Procedure of the University of California-Davis
erythrocytes at the bottom of each tube. It is easier to
wterinary genetics laboratory
compare reactions if all four tubes are poured out at the
1. Dilute each of three vials of thawed rabbit complement
with l mL of distilled water.
observing how the cells flow down the side of the tube as
2. Add 1 part EDTA (0.3mL) to 10 parts (3mL) complement.
follows:
3. Centrifuge the EDTA-anticoagulated whole blood, and
0 No agglutination; cells flow easily.
remove the plasma. Wash two aliquots of erythrocytes three
1 Weak agglutination; cells in small clumps.
times with PBs; refer to the Coombs phase of the typing
2 Strong agglutination; cells in large clumps.
procedure for washing instructions. (Make enough for two
3 Complete agglutination; cells remain packed in a
absorptions.)
button.
4. Add 1.l mL of packed, washed erythrocytes to the com-
7. If no agglutination is present, report the test as being
plement solution. Incubate at room temperature for 30
negative at all dilutions.
minutes.
8. If agglutination is present, grade the reactions and con-
5. Harvest the complement solution, and repeat the absorp-
tinue with controls. (Controls may be set up along with the
 n o   s   
patient tubes during step one to save time.)
of at room temperature for 30 minutes.
6. Centrifuge, collect absorbed rabbit complement (C') into
a flask on ice, and add 0.3 mL of CaCL-MgCl.
Controls
7. Aliquot the C' in volumes of 0.5 mL in bullet tubes, and
1. Foal autocontrol with l mL of saline and one drop of foal
freeze at once. Label with the date and contents. Do not
whole blood.
refreeze complement once thawed; use immediately or
 2. Mare colostrum/autocontrol, prepared by repeating steps
discard. (Do not store in a self-defrosting freezer, because
1 through 7 described earlier using colostrum and mare
the C' thaws with each defrost cycle.)
erythrocytes.
221
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Domestic Species
Interpretation
possibility that the foal has already nursed. A positive
 If all controls are negative, report the reactions of colos-
mare colostrum/autocontrol indicates interference from
trum versus foal erythrocytes at all dilutions. A reaction
the viscosity of the colostrum or a technical problem. Reac-
at a dilution of l:l6 or greater is considered to be a
tion grades for the same dilution should be compared
high titer, and the colostrum should not be used. A posi-
between the mare autocontrol and the foal crossmatch
tive foal autocontrol indicates autoagglutination and the 
tubes.
222
Hematology of Common
Nondomestic Mammals,
Birds, Reptiles, Fish,
and Amphibians
18
Mammalian Hematology: Laboratory
Animals and Miscellaneous Species
Terry W. Campbell
 Colorado State University
Total blood volumes reported for the mouse (Mus muscu-
Blood collection and handling
Ius) vary with some reporting a range of 5-12 mL/100 g body
weight and others a range of 7-8 mL/l00g body weight.3
  a  te   s a
The same guidelines recommended for laboratory rats likely
eters (red blood cell count, RBC; hemoglobin concentration,
apply to the laboratory mouse. Therefore, a 20 gram mouse
Hb; and hematocrit, HCT) have biological significance. Blood
is likely to have a blood volume of 1.44 mL with a safe blood
collection studies in rats ( Rattus norvegicus) used as laboratory
withdrawal volume of 0.1mL. Using the 1% of the body
animals have demonstrated that removal of 7.5% of the
weight guideline, the sample volume would be twice as
total blood volume over a 24 hour period did not have a
much.
biological effect with complete recovery within 48 hours.1
Although the blood volume will be restored within 48
The total blood volume of a rat has been determined to be
hours of blood collection in most healthy mammals, it may
7.2 ± 1.19mL/l00g body weight.2 Removal of blood volumes
take two weeks or longer for all of the blood constituents to
that exceed 7.5% will have a biological effect, the degree of
return to normal and likely much longer in unhealthy
which and time of complete recovery depend upon the
animals. If blood collection is required more frequently than
amount removed. Blood collected up to 20% of the total blood
every two weeks, a smaller sample size such as 0.5% of the
volume of healthy rats does not affect the health of the rat.
body weight (if using the 1% body weight rule) each week
In the clinical setting and for the ease of calculation, the
should be drawn.
maximum amount of blood that can be safely withdrawn
Blood collected from small mammals is typically placed in
from a single draw is presumed to be 1% of the animal's
lithium heparin because the blood sample volume is small.
body weight or up to 10% of the total blood volume. This
The heparinized blood can then be used for hematologic
practice, however, may overestimate the safe amount that
studies and clinical chemistries.
should be withdrawn during blood sampling. For example.
 The choice of blood collection method to be used is depen-
on the average. a healthy 300 gram rat has a total blood
dent upon the amount of blood required, frequency of sam-
volume (based upon 7.2mL/100g body weight) of 21l.6 mL.
pling. technical skill of the one obtaining the sample, and
Removal of 7.5% of the total blood volume (considered to
parameters measured. A number of collection sites are used
be a safe amount) represents 1.62mL. If the same rat was
to obtain blood from small mammals and listed in Table
sampled based upon 1% of the body weight, then the blood
18.1.d Blood samples are often difficult to obtain from small
volume collected would be 3.0mL or nearly twice the rec-
mammals: they lack superficial vessels, and the deeper
ommended safe amount. If up to 20% of the total blood
vessels may be covered with fat. In some cases, chemical
volume can be safely removed from healthy rats, then a
restraint may be necessary to safely handle mammals for
4.32mL blood sample could be obtained in the example
blood collection.
above without causing ill effects. With this consideration the
Use of a general anesthetic may have an effect on test
1% of the body weight rule for blood sample collection
results. For example. it has been demonstrated that five
would indeed be within safe limits. This assumes the animal
minutes of 4% isoflurane anesthesia results in a slight
is healthy and smaller blood volumes should be sampled
 ss  sd a a  
when dealing with an unhealthy animal.
increase in glucose.' Similar results have been reported in
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
225
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Table 18.1 Sites for blood collection in laboratory animals and miscellaneous species.
Retro-orbital
Tail
Jugular
 Cranial
Lateral
 Femoral 
 Cephalic
Ear
Cardio-
 Plexus
Vein
Vein
vena Cava
Saphenous Vein
Vein
Vein
Vein
centesis
Mice
X
X
X
Rats
X
X
X
X
 Hamsters 
X
X
Gerbils
X
X
 Guinea pigs
X
X
X
X
X
X
Chinchillas 
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Rabbits 
X
X
X
X
Ferrets
X
X
X
X
X
X
Hedgehogs
X
X
X
X
the ferret.' Coagulation times may also be affected by anes-
tion device. The lateral saphenous vein is typically small and
thesia. As a result, a limit of three minutes of 4% isoflurane
will easily collapse, making the collection of large sample
anesthesia is recommended to avoid these changes.
volumes difficult.
 In the clinical setting. the tail vein is site of choice for blood
Blood collection from the retroorbital venous plexus is
collection from small mammalian patients with tails (e.g.
commonly performed in rodents and requires technical skill
mice and rats). Veins are located on either side of the tail of
and general anesthesia. A heparinized microhematocrit tube
mice and can be dilated by placing the tail in warm water
is placed in the medial canthus of the eye and directed under
or under a heat lamp prior to blood collection. A tourniquet
the globe to the orbital venous plexus. With the rodent in
is placed at the base of the mouse's tail and a 25 gauge needle
lateral recumbency, the microhematocrit tube is rotated
is used to enter the lateral tail vein. Blood is collected into
along its long axis as it is advanced toward the venous plexus
a microcollection device, such as a microhematocrit or
along the caudal one-half to two-thirds of the orbit. Follow-
Microtainer (Becton-Dickenson, Rutherford, NJ) tube as it
ing blood collection, pressure on the area is required for
drips from the needle hub. Blood for hematology is collected
hemostasis.
into tubes containing an anticoagulant, such as EDTA or
Blood can be collected from the ear of some animals (e.g.
heparin. Blood collected for clinical biochemistry analysis is
rabbits). Blood collection from the vessels in the ear of
collected into tubes containing heparin or no anticoagulant.
rabbits is performed by a simple drip method, vacuum ear
A blood sample can be obtained from the ventral tail artery
bleeder, or a Vacutainer (Becton-Dickinson Co.) method.
of a rat placed in dorsal recumbency and under a general
Ear vessels can be dilated prior to blood collection by either
anesthetic. A 22-gauge or smaller needle attached to a 3 mL
wrapping the ear in a warm towel or applying a small
syringe with plunger removed is used to collect the sample.
amount of oil of wintergreen to the vessel to be punctured.
The artery is located slightly off the ventral midline of the
The skin is cleaned with an alcohol wipe prior to venipunc-
tail. The needle is inserted at a point one-third the length
ture. A 25-gauge needle can be used to puncture the vessel
from the base of the tail using a 30 degree angle. Blood fills
and the blood is collected as it drips from the needle hub
the syringe from the pressure of the artery once the vessel
into a microcollection device. This procedure minimizes
has been penetrated. Pressure is applied to the collection site
hematoma formation during sampling. Aspiration into a
to control hemostasis following blood sampling. Although
syringe or Vacutainer tube often results in collapse of the
rarely needed, puncture of the tail artery can also be
vessel in small rabbits. The vacuum ear bleeder method is
attempted for blood collection in ferrets. The artery is
performed by lacerating an ear vessel and placing the ear
approached along the ventral midline of the tail with a 22-
inside a flask with a side arm that is attached to a vacuum
or 2l-gauge needle directed toward the caudal vertebrae.
line and held firmly against the rabbit's head. This method
The artery is usually located 2-3 mm under the skin.
is generally used for research rabbits where large sample
Blood may be collected from the lateral saphenous vein
volumes are needed.
in small animals by applying a tourniquet above the stifle
Jugular venipuncture can be attempted in small mammals,
after clipping the hair. Shaving the hair off the lateral aspect
although the jugular veins may be difficult to locate and
of the tibia exposes the vein. The leg is extended, a 5/8 inch,
positioning the animals for the procedure can be stressful to
25-gauge needle is used to cannulate the vein, and blood is
them. Jugular venipuncture may require the use of sedation
collected as it drips from the needle hub into a microcollec-
or general anesthesia is some mammals (e.g. ferrets, hedge-
226
hogs. and rabbits). Blood collection in ferrets is commonly
meaningful reference values can be difficult beca use of vari-
performed by jugular venipuncture and simply allowing the
ations associated with blood collection, environmental
ferret to lick food at the time of the procedure may be
factors, and laboratory procedures. Blood collection often
adequate to limit movement without the need of anesthesia.
causes stress or requires chemical restraint. The hemogram
After the neck has been shaved and extended, blood is col-
can vary with age, environmental conditions, diet, gender.
lected from the jugular vein using a 22- to 25- gauge needle
and reproductive status. Also, laboratory procedures and
and a 3mL syringe. The jugular vein of ferrets is usually
sample handling are not standardized, creating variability
more lateral than those of dogs and cats and generally runs
between data sets. Tables 18.2 and 18.3 provide suggested
between the thoracic inlet and the angle of the mandible
reference intervals for erythrocyte and leukocyte parame-
when the head and neck are extended. Often, the vein
ters, respectively for small mammals.
cannot be visualized, especially in large males. Blood collec-
The erythrocytes of mammals are small, compared to the
tion from the jugular vein of hedgehogs usually requires
nucleated erythrocytes of other vertebrates.46.7 The srmall.
sedation or anesthesia to prevent the animal from balling
nonnucleated, biconcave shape minimizes the hemoglobin
and to protect the handler from the animal's quills. Because
to surface distance during gas exchange and increases cell
the jugular vein is protected by thick skin in the ventral neck
plasticity to improve movement through blood vessels.
area. it can be difficult to sarmple blood from hedgehogs
increasing oxygen delivery to tissues. The hemoglobin
using this technique.
content and packed cell volume remain relatively constant
Blood is frequently collected from the cranial vena cava
among the mammals, but the total erythrocyte count and
in small mammals, but may result in bleeding into the tho-
mean cell size varies. An inverse relationship between cell
racic cavity. Venipuncture of the cranial vena cava is com-
size and number exists.
monly performed in ferrets, where the ferret is held in dorsal
The granulocytes of nondomestic mammals vary in
recumbency with the forelimbs held along its sides and the
appearance but can be classified as neutrophils or hetero-
head and neck extended. A 23-gauge or smaller needle
phils, eosinophils. and basophils.46.7 The heterophils of
attached to a 3-mL syringe is inserted into the thoracic cavity
rabbits and some rodents were previously called pseudoeo-
between the first rib and the manubrium, advanced caudally
sinophils because their granules do not stain neutral with
at a 45 degree angle to the body, and directed toward the
Romanowsky stains but are distinctly eosinophilic.8 Neutro-
opposite rear limb. The plunger is pulled back as the needle
phils of mice often have nonlobed nuclei and those of
is slowly advanced or withdrawn, to allow blood to enter
normal primates appear hypersegmented. Cytochemical and
ultrastructural features of cells differ between species. For
needle, jugular venipuncture may actually occur using this
example, lysozyme activity is lacking in the neutrophils of
technique in the ferret as the jugular vein lies just under the
hamsters and allkaline phosphatase activity is less in neutro-
skin in the area of the sternal notch. The cranial vena cava
phils of mice. Neutrophils of mammals are phagocytic; one
is the most commonly used site for blood collection from
hedgehogs and other small mammals using the same tech-
Circulating neutrophil concentration increases with inflam-
nique as described for the ferret. The heart in these animals;
mation especially that associated with invading microorgan-
however, has a more cranial location compared to the ferret
isms, such as bacteria.
and the phlebotomist must take this into consideration
The granules of eosinophils become intensely eosinophilic
when using this approach.
with maturation as a result of the basic protein content. The
Cardiocentesis can also be used to collect blood from small
ultrastructure of the granules in mammalian eosinophils
mammals, but should be reserved for terminal procedures
reveals a distinct crystalline shape that varies with species;
because of the risk of death during the procedure. Cardio-
for instance, a trapezoidal pattern is found in the eosinophils
centesis requires general anesthesia because the heart often
of guinea pigs and true rodents and a needle-shaped pattern
moves away from the needle during the procedure. The
is found in rabbit eosinophils.? Mammalian eosinophils
small mammal is placed in dorsal recumbency and the heart
have phagocytic activity similar to that of neutrophils.
is located by palpation. The needle is inserted slightly to the
but are less effective. Mammalian eosinophils respond to
left of and under the manubrium and advanced toward the
heart, which is stabilized by a thumb and forefinger.
larvae), allergic inflammation (especially those associated
with mast cell and basophil degranulation),. and antigen-
antibody complexes. Therefore, eosinophilia suggests one of
General hematologic features of small
these processes.
mammals
Mammalian basophils  have characteristic cytoplasmic
granules that are strongly basophilic in Romanowsky stained
The hematology of laboratory and other small mammals is
blood films. Unlike basophils of lower vertebrates, those of
similar to that of domestic mammals. However, obtaining
mammals tend to have lobed nuclei. The ultrastructural
227
Table 18.2 Erytrhocyte parameters for laboratory animals and miscellaneous species (mean and reference interval).
PCV
RBC
Hb
MCV
McHc
MCH
Reticulocytes
%
x10%/μL
7p/6
fL
%
p9
Mice t
40.4
8.3
13.1
49.1
32.3
15.9
4.7
32.8-48.0
6.5-10.1
10.1-16.1
42.3-55.9
29.5-35.1
13.7-18.1
0-11.3
Rats t
46.1 ± 2.5
7.8
14.8
59.0 ± 6.4
32.4
18.9
2.2
41.1-51.1
6.6-9.0
13.2-16.4
52.6-65.4
30.2-34.6
16.5-21.3
0-4.6
Guinea
42.1
5.1
12.9
83.0
9'06
一
2.3
pigs t
35.9-48.3
4.1-6.1
10.5-15.3
75.0-91.0
28.2-33.0
0-6.1
 Hamsters t
52.5
7.5
16.8
71.2
47.9-57.1
2.7-12.3
13.4-19.2
64.8-77.6
Chinchilla t
38.3
6.6
11.7
58.0
25.0-52.0
5.2-9.9
8.8-15.4
Rabbits t
42.0
6.0
13.3
70.4
31.7
22.3
3.7
36.6-47.4
5.2-6.8
11.5-15.1
64.6-76.2
29.5-33.9
21.1-24.5
1.1-6.3
Ferrets t
49.2
8.11
16.2
47.1
32.0
15.0
5.3
42-55
6.8-9.8
14.8-17.4
42.6-51.0
30.3-34.9
13.7-16.0
2-14
Hedgehogs*
9E
6
12.0
67
34
22
22-64
3-16
7.0-21.1
41-94
17-48
11-31
tModified from Jain NC. Essentiais of Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger. 1993. pp. 54-71.
tModified from Fox JG. Normal clinical and biologic parameters.In Fox JG ed. Biology and Diseases of the Ferret. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1988,
pp.159-73
*lvey E. Carpenter JW. African hedgehogs. In Quesenberry KE and Carpenter JW eds. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents;: Clinical Medicine and Surgery.
2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders, 2003. p. 345.
Table 18.3 Leukocyte parameters of laboratory animals and miscellaneous species (mean and reference intervals).
WBC
Bands
Neutrophils
Lymphocytes
Mono-
Eosinophils
Baso-
Platelets
Cytes
phils
x10²/μL
x10/μL
Micet
22'9
×10°/μL
0
1.20
4.86
0.14
0.08
0
1.16
2.61-10.05
0-0.02
0.4-2.0
1.27-8.44
0-0.29
0-0.17
0-0.02
0.78-1.54
Ratst
9.98
×10°/μL
0
2.48
7.07
0.25
0.17
0
1.04
7.30-12.66
0-0.02
1.25-3.71
5.07-9.07
0.05-0.44
0.04-0.30
E0:0-0
0.84-1.24
Guinea
11.11
×10°/μL
2.50
8.01
0.31
0.27
0
0.55
pigst
8.22-14.0
0-0.01
1.35-3.65
5.47-10.55
0.06-0.56
69'0-0
0-0.02
0.39-0.71
Hamsterst
7.62
%
29.9 ± 8.0 
73.5 ± 9.4
2.5 ± 0.8
1.1 ± 0.02
6.32-7.92
Chinchillat
8.0
%
44.6
53.6
1.2
0.5
0.4
2.2-45.1
10.0-78.0
19.0-98.0
0.0-5.0
0.0-9.0
0.0-11.0
Rabbitst
8.18
x10°/μL
0
2.35
5.18
0.25
0.08
0.21
0.43
6.30-10.06
1.49-3.21
00/-996
0.05-0.45
0.01-0.15
9E'0-90'0
0.25-0.61
Ferretst
10.5
%
59.5
33.4
4.4
2.6
0.2
545
4-18
43-84
12-50
2-8
S-0
0-1
310-910
Hedgehogs*
11
×10°/μL
5.1
4.0
E'0
1.2
0.4
229
3-43
0.6-37.4
0.9-13.1
9' 1-0'0
0.0-5.1
0.0-1.5
60-347
tModified from Jain NC. Essentials of Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger. 1993. pp. 54-71.
*Modified from Fox JG. Normal clinical and biologic parameters. In Fox JG ed. Biology and Diseases of the Ferret. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger. 1988.
pp.159-73
*lvey E. Carpenter JW. African hedgehogs. In Quesenberry KE and Carpenter JW eds. Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery.
2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders, 2003, p. 345.
228
appearance of the granules varies with species; for instance.
a coiled threaded pattern is observed in basophil granules
from primates and rabbits and a homogenous pattern is
observed in rodents.? Basophils participate in allergic and
delayed hypersensitivity reactions.
Mammalian monocytes generally are the largest leuko-
cytes in peripheral blood films and do not vary grossly in
 appearance between species. The monocyte nucleus varies
in shape and the moderately abundant cytoplasm is typically
light blue-gray. The granules, when present, are very fine
and appear azurophilic in Romanowsky stained prepara-
tions. Monocytes engulf and degrade microorganisms.
abnormal cells, and cell debris. Monocytes also regulate
immune responses and myelopoiesis.
The appearance of mammalian  lymphocytes  varies
depending upon the species, lymphocyte type, and degree
of activation. Mammalian lymphocytes vary in size, color of
Figure 18.1 Polychrormatic erythrocytes (arrows) in the blood of a rat.
cytoplasm (light to dark blue), and degree of nuclear chro-
Wright-Giermsa stain .
matin condensation. Variability depends on the degree of
antigenic stimulation and type of lymphocyte
In general, the leukocyte morphology of nondomestic
mammals is a reliable indication of disease. The presence of
polychromatic cells representing 1-l8% of the erythrocyte
immature cells, toxic neutrophils, and Dohle bodies are
population (Fig. 18.1).1 This is lilkely related to the relative
more reliable criteria for infectious diseases than are total
short erythrocyte half-life of 45-68 days for rats and 40-50
leukocyte and differential counts, given the amount of infor-
days for mice.?? Adult rats and mice normally have a high
mation known regarding various strains and breeds.
degree of reticulocytosis with means that average between
 2 and 7%: the young have even higher numbers that ranging
between 10 and 20%. Erythrocyte concentrations in females
Hematologic features of rodents
tend to be less than those of males. The normal PCV is
39-54% for rats and 35-45% for mice. The hemoglobin
Mice (Mus muscufus) and rats (Rattus norvegicus)
concentration generally ranges between 13.4 and 15.8 g/dL
Hematologic parameters of mice and rats are influenced by
with a mean of 14.6g/dL. Howell-Jolly bodies are found in
a variety of factors, including site of sample collection, age.
small numbers of erythrocytes in normal rats and mice.
gender, strain, anesthesia, method of restraint, temperature.
Rouleaux formation of erythrocytes is rarely seen, even with
and stress.15,1o-1 In rats, collection of blood from the heart
inflammatory disease.
resulted in a significant decrease in the erythrocyte and
Granulocytes of mice and rats often have nuclei without
leukocyte counts, hemoglobin concentration, and hemato-
distinct lobes and typically have a horseshoe, sausage, or
crit compared to samples taken from the retroorbital venous
ring (doughnut) shape (Fig. 18.2).416 The ring shape results
sinus and tail." A distinct circadian rhythm affects periph-
from a gradually increasing hole that develops in the nucleus
eral leukocyte concentrations with an increase in circulating
during matura tion of the granulocyte. Nuclear segmentation
leukocyte concentration occurring during the light phase
occurs as the ring breaks during maturation and begins to
and a decrease during the dark phase. A distinct decrease in
form constrictions. Neutrophils usually have a colorless
the total leukocyte count associated with a decrease in lym-
cytoplasm but may contain few dustlike red granules, thus
phocytes occurs in mice following the stress, such as occurs
appearing diffusely pink with Romanowsky stains (Fig.
during transportation.io13 Thus, it is diffcult to establish
18.3). Rat neutrophils measure llμm in diameter. In
reference hematologic values for mice and rats because of
general, the neutrophil represents 12-38% of the leukocyte
the large number of strains and variations in blood collection 
differential. Eosinophils have a ring- or U-shaped nucleus.
methods, handling techniques, and environmental condi-
a basophilic cytoplasm, and numerous small round eosino-
tions. Published reference intervals for several strains of rats
philic cytoplasmic granules that may be arranged in small
and mice are available and the reader should refer to the
clumps (Fig. 18.4). Eosinophils generally comprise 0-7% of
the leukocyte differential. Basophils are present in small
rocytes of healthy rats and mice vary in size with a range
numbers (0-l%) and contain numerous basophilic granules
between 5 to 7μm in diameter; therefore, a marked aniso-
(Fig. 18.5). Basophils should be differentiated from mast
cytosis is common. Polychromasia is also common with
cells that may appear in peripheral blood, especially when
229
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 18.2 A neutrophil (arrow) with a nucleus forming a ring in the
Figure 18.4 An eosinophil (arrow) with a nucleus forming a ring in the
blood of a rat. Wright-Giemsa stain.
blood of a rat. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Figure 18.3 A neutrophil (arrow) with fine, pink cytoplasmic granules in
Figure 18.5 A basophil (arrow) in the blood of a rat. Wright-Giemsa
the blood of a rat. Wright-Giermsa stain.
stain.
cardiocen tesis is performed. Basophil numbers appear higher
Monocytes (17μm diameter) are the largest leukocyte
in blood collected from the tail of mice and rats when exces-
found in the peripheral blood of rats and mice. They account
sive trauma is involved, such as laceration technique and
for 1-6% of the leukocyte population in rats and 0-2% in
compressing the tail to facilitate blood flow.
mice. Monocytes have a variably shaped nucleus with the
 Lymphocytes are the predominant leukocyte in the periph-
kidney-bean shape being the most common form. The abun-
eral blood of rats and mice where they represent 60-75%
dant blue-gray cytoplasm often contains fine azurophilic
and 70-80% of the leukocyte population, respectively. The
 granules and occasional vacuoles.
size of lymphocytes ranges from the size of erythrocytes to
Leukocyte concentrations of mice and rats not only dem-
the size of neutrophils. The cytoplasm of lymphocytes stains
onstrate a distinct diurnal variation, but also vary markedly
light blue and azurophilic cytoplasmic granules are occasion-
between strains.'? There is an age-dependent variation in
ally found in large lymphocytes (Fig. 18.6).
the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio, with the lymphocyte
230
CHAPTER 18 Mammalian Hematology: Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species
Figure 18.6 A lymphocyte (arrow) with azurophilic granules in the
Figure 18.7 A neutrophil (arrow) in the blood of a guinea pig.
 blood of a rat. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Wright-Giernsa stain.
concentration  decreasing  and neutrophil  concentration
increasing as a rodent ages.
Platelet concentrations in rodents tend to be high com-
pared to those of larger domestic mammals. Platelet concen-
trations greater than l x lo* per μL are common.
Guinea pigs (Cavia porcelfus)
Guinea pigs have larger erythrocytes than other rodents
with a range of 6.6-7.9μm.17 The total erythrocyte count
and hemoglobin concentration of guinea pigs are generally
lower than those of true rodents. Polychromasia and a mac-
rocytosis characterize regenerative responses to anemia. The
neutrophils of guinea pigs measure 10-12μm in diameter.
have a pyknotic segmented nucleus, and contain cytoplas-
mic granules that stain eosinophilic that often cause them
to be referred to as heterophils or pseudoeosinophils (Fig.
18.7). Although they stain differently than the neutrophils
Figure 18.8 An eosinophil (arrow) in the blood of a guinea pig.
of domestic mammals with Romanowsky stains, the neutro-
Wright-Giernsa stain.
phils of guinea pigs are equivalent in function. Guinea pig
eosinophils (l0-l5μm in diameter) are larger than the neu-
trophils and have larger round to rod-shaped bright red
18.9). These Foa-Kurloff cells are unique to cavies, such as
ate from neutrophils (Fig. 18.8). The granules of basophils
guinea pigs. The finely granular and occasionally vacuolated
are reddish-purple to black. Like those of rats and mice.
Kurloff bodies stain homogeneously red with Romanowsky
lymphocytes are the predominant leukocyte in the differen-
stains and stain positive with toluidine blue and PAS.8 They
tial of healthy guinea pigs and small lymphocytes (approxi-
appear to be influenced by sex hormones and occur in low
mately the size of erythrocytes) are the most common form.
numbers in immature male guinea pigs. The exact function
 of these cells is not known, but many speculate that they
phocytes, have a slightly smaller nucleus: cytoplasmic ratio.
may function as killer cells.17
and often contain azurophilic granules. Approximately
3-4% of the leukocytes in the peripheral blood of adult
Other rodents
 guinea pigs are large mononuclear cells that contain a single.
The hematologic features of hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus).
large cytoplasmic inclusion referred to as a Kurloff body (Fig.
gerbils (Meriones unguiculatus). and chinchillas (Chinchilla
231
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 18.9 A lymphocyte (arrow) containing a Kurloff body in the
Figure 18.10 Erythrocytes in the blood of a rabbit. Wright-Giemsa
blood of a guinea pig. Wright-Giemmsa stain.
stain, 500x.
lanieger) resemble those of mice and rats.18.1 As with rats
cytes is between 57 and 67 days.? Male rabbits tend to have
and mice, polychromasia is normal finding in blood film
higher erythrocyte counts and hemoglobin concentrations
from hamsters and gerbils and Howell-Jolly bodies are
than females. The total erythrocyte count, hemoglobin con-
common. Nucleated red blood cells may account for up to
centration, and hematocrit values can be significantly lower
 2% of the erythrocytes in blood films of normal hamsters.
in the pregnant rabbits in the third trimester compared to
The neutrophils of chinchillas are typically hyposeg-
nonpregnant rabbits; however, the McV value increases.21
mented and resemble neutrophils of dogs with the Pelger-
Use of a general anesthetic does not appear to have an effect
Huet anomaly.  Hamster neutrophils contain prominent
on the hematologic test results in rabbits.22 Erythrocyte fra-
round to rod-shaped eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules and
gility studies in rabbits based upon the sodium chloride
are frequently referred to as heterophils. Lymphocytes pre-
concentrations indicate the first detectable hemolysis at
dominate the leukocyte differential of gerbils; however, a
0.5-0.3% NaCl.23 As with most other species of mammals.
diurnal variation occurs in the numbers and types of leuko-
a regenerative response to an anemia is characterized by
cytes in the blood of hamsters. Leukocyte numbers of ham-
increased anisocytosis, polychromasia, nucleated erythro-
sters, a nocturnal animal, increase significantly at night
cytes, and presence of Howell-Jolly bodies. Anemia is com-
when they are most active with neutrophils rather than
monly associated with a variety of diseases in rabbits.
lymphocytes being responsible for the increase.? Small and
Infectious diseases often result in increases in the number
large lymphocytes are found in the blood of hamsters. but
of nucleated erythrocytes.
unlike other rodents, neutrophils tend to predominate the
The rabbit neutrophil is between 10 and 15μm in diam-
leukogram differential.
eter. The polymorphic nucleus stains light blue to purple
with Romanowsky stains. The cytoplasm of rabbit neutro-
Hematologic features of rabbits (Oryctolagus
phils typically stains diffusely pink with Romanowslky stains
cunicufus)
due to the fusion of the many small acidophilic granules
The PCV of healthy rabbits generally range between 30 and
(primary granules) (Figs. 18.1l, 18.13, and 18.17). These
50%. The rabbit erythrocyte is a biconcave disk with an
cells are often referred to as pseudoeosinophils or hetero-
average diameter of 6.8μm; however, the presence erythro-
phils in the literature because of the larger eosinophilic
cytes with a range of 5.0-7.8 μm makes reporting of a sig-
cytoplasmic granules (secondary granules) that stain dark
nificant anisocytosis a common finding in the hemogram of
pink to red with Romanowsky stains. Rabbit neutrophils are
normal rabbits (Fig. 18.10). Like rodents, polychromatic
ultrastructurally, functionally, and biochemically equivalent 
erythrocytes and reticulocytes are common in blood films of
to neutrophils from other domestic mammals and humans.?
normal rabbits. Polychromasia is commonly observed in
An occasional neutrophil with characteristics of the Pelger-
2-4% of the erythrocyte population of normal rabbits.
Huet anomaly may be observed in blood films from normal
Nucleated erythrocytes and Howell-Jolly bodies are occa-
rabbits. Rabbit neutrophils are easily distinguished from the
sionally observed. The estimated half-life of rabbit erythro-
eosinophils, which have large eosinophilic granules.
232
CHAPTER 18 Mammalian Hematology: Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species
Figure 18.11 Neutrophils (heterophils; arrows) in the blood of a rabbit.
Figure 18.13 An eosinophil (arrow) and a neutrophil (heterophil:
Wright-Giernsa stain.
arrowhead) in the blood of a rabbit. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Figure 18.12 An eosinophil (arrow) in the blood of a rabbit. Wright-
Figure 18.14 A basophil (arrow) in the blood of a rabbit. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
Giemsa stain.
The eosinophils of rabbits are larger than the neutrophils
Rabbit lymphocytes are morphologically similar to those
and are between 12 and 16 μm in diameter (Figs. 18.12.
of other domestic mammals and humans (Fig. 18.15). The
18.13, and 18.17). The large cytoplasmic granules of the
majority of lymphocytes are small, between 7 and 10 μm in
eosinophil are more numerous than those of neutrophils.
diameter; however, large lymphocytes between l0 and
Eosinophil granules are poorly defined and stain intensely
15 μm in diameter may also be present. Azurophilic granules
pink to a dull pink-orange with Romanowsky stains creating
are often commonly present in the cytoplasm of the large
a tinctorial quality that differs from the neutrophil granules.
lymphocytes.
The nucleus of the eosinophil is often bi-lobed to U-shaped.
Rabbit monocytes are similar to those found in other
Rabbits typically have more basophils than do other
domestic mammals (Figs. 18.16 and 18.17). The nucleus
species; commonly five percent of the leukocytes are baso-
varies from lobulated to bean-shaped and the cytoplasm
phils. but they can be as high as 30% in rabbits with no
stains blue and may contain a few vacuoles.
apparent abnormalities. The basophils of rabbits resermble
The normal leukocyte concentration of rabbits is typically
those of domestic mammals (Figs. 18.14 and 18.17).
reported to range between 7000 and 9000/μL. Variations
233
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 18.15 Lynphocytes (arrows) in the blood of a rabbit. Wright-
Figure 18.17 A monocyte (large cell in center), neutrophil (heterophil;:
Giemsa stain.
long arrow), eosinophil (arrowhead), and basophil (short arrow) in the
 blood of a rabbit. Wright-Giemmsa stain
a 15-30% decrease in the total leukocyte concentration."
A mature neutrophilia and lymphopenia characterize
glucocorticoid-mediated changes in the leukogram. Preg-
nant rabbits demonstrate a slight increase in total leukocyte
counts during the first half of gestation owing to an increase
in lymphocyte numbers; however, a significant decrease can
occur in the second half owing to a decrease in lymphocytes
 and/or neutrophil numbers.21
Rabbits generally do not develop a leukocytosis with bac-
terial infections, but will have a reversal of the N:L ratio; N:L
ratio reversal is also associated with increases in serum cor-
tisol concentrations.?4 Therefore, evaluation of the N:L ratio
appears to be the more reliable indicator of inflammatory
disorders than are total leukocyte concentrations.
Figure 18.16 Monocytes (arrows) in the blood of a rabbit. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
Hematologic features of ferrets (Mustela putorius)
The hematology of ferrets resembles that of domestic carni-
vores.? Ferrets are commonly anesthetized to restrain them
occur with age, restraint methods, methods of blood collec-
for blood collection. The use of inhalant anesthetics such as
tion which may alter the neutrophil : lymphocyte (N:L) ratio.
isoflurane, enfurane, and halothane result in significant 
and pregnancy. A bimodal increase in the leukocyte concen-
and rapid decreases in the red blood cell count, hematocrit,
tration is seen with increasing age, with highest lymphocyte
and hemoglobin concentration. As much as a 33% decrease
concentration occurring at three months of age then slowly
in the hemoglobin concentration occurs with the use of
declining. and highest neutrophil concentrations occurring
these inhalant anesthetics. Splenic sequestration and
in older animals.? The normal neutrophil: lymphocyte ratio
anesthetic-induced hypotension are possible causes for this
of 33:60 at 2 months of age changes to 45:45 by 12 months
response in ferrets. The erythron returns to normal within
of age. Therefore, rabbits younger than twelve months of
45 minutes of recovery from the anesthetic. Either the use
age are expected to have lower N:L ratios than do older
of manual restraint or injectable anesthesia such as ket-
rabbits, which typically have equal numbers of neutrophils
amine or rapid blood collection following anesthetic induc-
and lymphocytes. A stress response associated with restraint
tion (less than 3 minutes) is required to avoid this effect in
during blood collection procedures can result in as much as
the erythron.
234
The hemogram of domestic ferrets is influenced by gender
various ferret granulocytes are 10-l3 μm for neutrophils in
and age. Young hobs (males) have lower red blood cell
males and 9-10μm in females; and 12μm and 14μm for
counts, hematocrits, and hemoglobin concentrations than
eosinophils and basophils respectively regardless of gender.
adult hobs and young jills (females).? Jills have a decrease
The size of small lymphocytes ranges between 6 and 9μm
in the hematocrit with age.
in male ferrets and 8 and 10 μm in females. Large lympho-
Common causes of nonregenerative anemia in domestic
cytes and monocytes measure 1l to 12μm and 12 to 18 μm
ferrets include malignant neoplasia such as lymphoma, sys-
in both sexes respectively. Neutrophil concentrations are
temic infections, and hyperestrogenism in intact females.
 higher than lymphocyte concentrations in normal ferrets.27
Gastrointestinal ulcers are a common cause of blood loss
Ferrets have an increase in neutrophil concentration and
anemia.
decrease in lymphocyte concentration with increasing age.
The morphology of ferret leukocytes is similar to that of
The total leukocyte count of healthy ferrets can be as low
dogs (Figs. 18.18 and 18.19). The ranges in size for the
as 3000/μL. Ferrets are unable to develop a marked leuko-
cytosis with inflammatory disease and concentrations greater
than 20.000/μL is unusual and a left shift is rare.2s
Results of coagulation studies in ferrets vary depending
upon methodology. For example, a significant prothrombin
time was obtained using a manual method (12.3 ± 0.3
seconds) compared to an automated method (l0.9 ± 0.3
was not significantly different between the two methods
(18.7 ± 0.9 for the manual method and 18.1 ± 1.1 seconds
for the automated method). Fibrinogen concentration for
ferrets is reported as 107.4 ± 19.8 mg/dL and antithrombin
activity is 96 ± 12.7%.
Hematologic features of African hedgehogs
(Atelerix albiventris)
The hematology of African hedgehogs resembles that of
domestic carnivores. The morphology of erythrocytes and
leukocytes is similar to that of other small mammals (Figs.
18.20 through 18.26). Likewise, interpretation of changes in
Figure 18.18 A neutrophil (arrow) in the blood of a ferret. Wright-
the hemogram are based upon those same changes in other
Giemsa stain.
small mammals.
Figure 18.19 A monocyte (arrow) in the blood of a ferret. Wright-
Figure 18.20 Erythrocytes in the blood of a hedgehog. Wright-Giermsa
Giemsa 5stain.
stain.
235
Figure 18.21 A nucleated erythrocyte in the blood of a hedgehog
Figure 18.22 A neutrophil in the blood of a hedgehog. Wright-Giemsa
Wright-Giermsa stain
 stain.
Figure 18.23 An eosinophil in the blood of a hedgehog. Wright
Figu
Giemsa stain.
aneutrophil
Figure 18.25 A monocyte in the blood of a hedgehog. Wright-Giemsa 
ay ul (peaymoue) ialaield jueih pue (mome) lydonau y gz'el annaid
stain.
blood of a hedgehog. Wright-Giernsa stain
236
CHAPTER 18 Mammalian Hematology: Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species
17. Moore DM (20o0) Hematology of the guinea pig (Cavia porrel-
References
[us). In Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.), Schalm's Vererinary
s  s o  a  
1. Nahas K, Provost J-P (2002) Blood sampling in the rat: current
pp.1107-10.
practices and limitations. Comp Clin Path 1l: 1437.
18. Moore DM (2000) Hematology of the Mongolian gerbil (Merio-
2. Moore DM (2oo0) Hematology of the rat (Rarrus norvegicus). In
nes unguicularus). In Feldman BF Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.).
Feldman BF Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds.). Schaim's Vererinary Hema-
Schalm's Vererinary Hemarology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
tology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. pp.
Williams & Wilkins, pp. 1lll-14.
 19. Moore DM (200o) Hematology of the Syrian (Golden) hamster
1210-18.
3. Moore DM (2oooj. Hematology of the mouse (Mus muscu/us).
(Mesorricerus aurarus). In Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.).
In Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.), Schaim's Veterinary
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, pp. 1l15-19.
Hemarology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
pp. 1219-24.
20. Moore DM (2000) Hematology of rabbits. In Feldman BF Zink]
4. Campbell TW, Ellis CK (2007) Avian and Exoric Animal Hematol-
JG, Jain NC (eds.), Schalm's Vererinary Hemarology. 5th ed. Phila-
ogy and Cyrology, 3rd ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, pp. 1l100-6.
5. Marini RP, Jackson LR, Esteves MI, er af. {l994) Effect of isoflu-
21. Kim J-C, Yun H-1, Cha S-W, Kim K-H, Koh WS, Chung M-K
rane on hematologic variables in ferrets. Am J Vet Res 55:
1479-83
New Zealand white rabbits: a longitudinal study. Comp Clin Path
6.Hawkey CM (1975) Comparative Mammalian Haematology.
11: 98-106.
London, William Heinemann Medical Books Ltd.
22. Melillo A (2007) Rabbit dinical pathology. J Exotic Per Med 16:
7. Hawkey CM, Dennett TB, Peirce MA (1989) Color Arlas of Com
13545.
parative Veterinary Hematology. London, Wolfe Medical Publica-
23. McLaughlin RM, Fish RE (1974) Clinical biochemistry and
hematology. In Manning PJ, Ringler DH, Newcomer CE (eds.).
tions Ltd.
The Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit. New York, Academic Press.
8. Jain NC (1993) Essentials of Vererinary Hematology. Philadelphia,
Lea & Febiger.
pp. 111-27.
          
24. Toth LA, January B (1 990) Physiological stabilization of rabbits
Vertebrate Blood Cells. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
after shipping. Lab Animal Sei 40: 384-7.
 25. Moore DM (200o0) Hematology of the ferret (Mustela putorius
pp. 337-424.
10. Drozdowicz CK, et al. (1990) Effect of in-house transport on
furo). In Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC (eds.), Schalm's Vereri-
murine plasma corticosterone concentration and blood lympho-
nary Hemarology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams S
Wikins, pp. 1096-9.
cyte populations. Am J Ver Res 51 (11): 1841-6.
11. Suber RL, Kodell RL (1985) The effect of three phlebotomy
26. Fox JG (1 988) Normal clinical and biologic parameters. In Fox
JG (ed.), Biology and Diseases of the Ferrt. Philadelphia, Lea &
a    o  s
in Sprague-Dawley rats. Ver Clin Pathol 14: 23-30.
Febiger. pp. 159-73.
12. Wright JR, er al. (1983) Hematological characteristics of the BB
27. Lee EJ, Moore WE, Fryer HC, et al. (1982) Haematological and
Wistar rat. Ver Clin Pathof, 12: 9-13.
serum chemistry profiles of ferrets {Musrela purorius furo). Lab
13. Bean-Knudsen DE, Wagner JE (1987) Effect of shipping stress
Anim 16: 133-7.
on clinicopathologic indicators in F344/N rats. Am J Ver Res
48(2): 306-8.
pretation of disease states in the domestic ferret. Seminars in
14. 12. Leonard R, Ruben Z {1986) Hematology reference values
Avian and Exotic Per Medicine 3: 40-7.
for peripheral blood of laboratory rats. Lab Anim Sri 36: 277.
29. Benson KG, Paul-Murphy J, Hart AP, Keuler NS, Darien BJ
15. Ringer DH, Dabich L (1979) Hematology and clinical biochem-
(2008) Coagulation values in normal ferrets (Mustela purorius
istry. In Baker HJ, Lindsey JR, Weisbroth SH (eds.), The Labora-
furo) using selected methods and reagents. Ver Clin Patho! 37:
tory Rat, Volume 1, Biology and Disease. New York, Academic Press.
286-8.
pp. 105-21.
16. Schalm OW, Jain NC, Carrol EJ (1975) Veterinary Hematology.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger.
237
19
Hematology of Birds
Terry W. Campbell
 Colorado State University
The normal values for the hematologic parameters of each
volume of blood needed, and physical condition of the
species of bird have a broad range because of the influences
patient.
of various intrinsic and extrinsic factors. In general, avian
Venous blood provides the best sample for hematologic
hematological values are subject to extensive variability
studies. Blood collected from capillary beds (i.e., clipping of
resulting from different environment and management
a toenail) usually results in abnormal cell distributions and
practices, which can affect physiological responses. For
contains both cells and other substances not found in venous
example. heterophil numbers are altered by seasonal
blood, such as tissue fluid, macrophages, and cellular debris.
changes, diurnal rhythm, gender and age. and diet. Normal
Veins commonly used for venipuncture include the jugular.
hematologic values vary between the species as well. The
basilic (cutaneous ulnar, wing or brachial). and medial
different avian species from which blood samples are sub-
metatarsal (caudal tibial). Blood can be collected using a
mitted to veterinary laboratories creates a significant logisti-
needle and syringe when performing venipuncture on the
cal challenge to the development of clinically relevant
jugular or other large veins. A short (l inch or smaller)
 normal values. Thus, published references should only be
25-22G needle attached to a 3-6 mL syringe commonly is
used as guidelines.
used for jugular venipuncture. A needle with an extension
Avian hematology is approached in a manner similar to
tube, such as a butterfly catheter (Abbott Hospitals, North
that of human and mammalian hematology. but a few dif-
Chicago, IL) aids in stabilization of the needle during sample
ferences require modification of the hematologic proce-
collection. Blood also can be collected after venipuncture by
dures. Major differences include the presence of nucleated
allowing it to flow through the needle and drip into a micro-
erythrocytes, thrombocytes, and heterophil granulocytes in
collection device. Collecting blood by allowing it to flow
the peripheral blood of birds.
through the needle, rather than by aspirating it into a
syringe, minimizes hematoma formation. A variety of these
devices (Microtainer tubes, Becton-Dickinson, Rutherford.
Collection and handling of blood samples
NJ) are available. Microcollection tubes containing ethyl-
enediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA} are available for hema-
The amount of blood that can be safely removed from a bird
tologic studies, but they also are available as plain tubes.
depends on its body size and health status. A blood volume
with or without a serum separator, and as tubes containing
representing 1% or less of body weight usually can be with-
heparin (lithium heparin is preferred) for studies of blood
drawn from healthy birds without detrimental effects.' For
chemistry.
example; a healthy. 80g cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus)
Jugular venipuncture most commonly is used for collect-
can easily tolerate removal of a 0.8 mL blood sample. The
ing blood from birds, because most small birds do not have
sample size taken from severely ill birds, however, must be
other veins that are large enough for venipuncture.23
reduced. For routine hematologic evaluations in birds, a
Jugular venipuncture involves lightly wetting the feathers
sample size of 0.2 mL usually is adequate. A variety of col-
with alcohol to expose the featherless tract (apterla) of skin
lection methods have been used to obtain blood from birds.
that overlies the jugular furrow. The right jugular vein is the
and the method chosen depends on the size of the bird.
vein of choice for this procedure, because it either is the only
peculiarities of the species, preference of the collector.
jugular vein present or is the larger of the two jugular veins.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
238
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
Figure 19.3 Location of the basilic vein in a parrot (Amazona sp.).
Figure 19.1 Location of the right jugular vein in a cockatoo (Cacatua
Irmage courtesy of Dr. Krystan Grant, Colorado State University.
moluccensis).
Figure 19.2 Jugular venipuncture in a parrot (Amazona sp.) Image
Figure 19.4 Cannulation of the basilic vein of a cockatoo (Cacatua
courtesy of Dr. Krystan Grant, Colorado State University.
moluccensis) using the drip method of blood collction.
Jugular venipuncture is performed by using an appropriate-
syringe or by allowing it to drip from the needle hub into a
sized needle and providing proper restraint, with the bird's
microcollection tube (Figs. 19.3 through 19.5).
head and neck extended to allow the jugular vein to fall into
Blood also can be collected by aspiration or the drip tech-
the jugular furrow (Figs. 19.1 and 19.2). Jugular venipunc-
nique from the medial metatarsal (caudal tibial) vein, which
ture provides a rapid collection time and the ability to easily
is located on the caudomedial aspect of the tibiotarsus just
collect adequate amounts of blood, even in small birds. The
above the tarsal joint. Because this vein is protected by the
tendency for hematoma formation can be minimized with
surrounding muscles of the leg. hematoma formation is
proper attention to technique and hemostasis.
minimal (Figs. 19.6 through 19.8).
Another common procedure for blood collection in
Clipping the toenail and lancet wounding are two other
medium to large birds is venipuncture of the basilic (cutane-
methods of blood collection, but these should be reserved
ous ulnar or brachial) vein.? This vein crosses the ventral
for very small birds or for when attempts at venipuncture 
surface of the humeroradioulnar joint (elbow). and it is
have failed. After alcohol cleansing, the toenail is clipped
    a    
until blood flows freely for collection into a microcollection
Using an appropriate-sized needle, blood can be collected
tube. After blood collection from the cut nail, hemostasis is
after cannulation of this vein either by aspiration into a
accomplished by applying a hemostatic agent such as silver
239
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 19.5 Blood collection from the basilic vein in a parrot (Amazona
Figure 19.7 Blood collction from the medial metatarsal vein in a
5p.3. Immage courtesy of Dr. Krystan Grant, Colorado State University.
turkey poult (Meleagris gallopavo). Image courtesy of Dr. Krystan Grant.
Colorado State University.
Figure 19.6 Location of the medial metatarsal vein in a turkey poult
(Meleagris galfopavo). Image courtesy of Dr. Krystan Grant, Colorado
Figure 19.8 Cannulation of the medial metatarsal vein in a macaw (Ara
State University.
 macao) using the drip method of blood collection.
nitrate or ferrous subsulfate. Blood collection by this tech-
skin using a lancet (i.e., needle), and the blood is allowed
nique yields a poor sample for hematologic studies, however.
to drip into a microcollection tube.
because the blood is from the capillary bed and usually
 Large volumes of blood can be collected from birds by
contains microclots, which interfere with cell counts. Capil-
cardiac puncture or occipital venous sinus puncture. These
lary blood also frequently is contaminated with tissue fluid
procedures are potentially dangerous, however, and should
that affects hermatologic data. Toenail clipping may result in 
 be reserved for birds that are used for research or are to be
temporary lameness because of nail damage. An alternative 
euthanized. Cardiac puncture can be perforrmed using an
to nail clipping for blood collection from small birds is to
anterior or a lateral approach.56 The heart is approached
collect blood after lancet wounding of vascular structures.
anteriorly by inserting a needle along the ventral floor of
such as the cutaneous ulnar vein, medial metatarsal vein.
the thoracic inlet with the bird in dorsal recumbency. Care
and external thoracic vein.? After alcohol cleansing of the
 should be taken to avoid the ingluvies (crop) in some avian
skin over lying the vein, the vessel is punctured through the
 species. The needle is inserted near the "v" that is formed
240
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
by the furcula, and it is directed toward the bird's dorsum
commonly used, and each has both advantages and disad-
and caudal toward the heart. Once the heart is penetrated.
vantages. The anticoagulant of choice for avian hematology
the vibration can be felt to ensure proper needle placement,
is EDTA, because it allows for proper staining of cells and
and blood is then aspirated. In galliforme birds, the heart
does not tend to clump leukocytes.28 Hematologic testing.
can be approached laterally by inserting the needle in the
however, should be performed soon after blood collection
fourth intercostal space near the sternum (keel) with the
to avoid artifacts, such as increased cell smudging. which is
bird held in lateral recumbency. This approach, however,
created by prolonged exposure to any anticoagulant. Exces-
may vary with the species.
sive liquid anticoagulants dilute the blood sample, thereby
Blood collection from the occipital venous sinus requires
resulting in artifactually decreased hematocrit and total cell
use of evacuated glass tubes with appropriate needles and
needle holders. The occipital venous sinus is located at the
shrinkage of red blood cells, thus affecting the hematocrit.
junction of the dorsal base of the skull and the first cervical
Blood from certain avian groups, such as crows and jays.
vertebra, and it can be located by palpation while holding
may show incomplete anticoagulation or partial hemolysis
the bird's head firmly flexed and positioned in a straight line
when collected in EDTA. Heparin has the advantage of pro-
with the cervical vertebrae. A needle is inserted through the
viding anticoagulated blood for hematology and plasma for
skin at a 30-40° angle to the vertebrae. As soon as the needle
evaluations of blood chemistry. Heparinized blood, however.
penetrates the skin, the rubber stopper of the evacuated tube
may result in improper staining of cells, thereby resulting in
is perforated gently and the needle advanced until the sinus
erroneous leukocyte counts and poor cellular morphology
is reached (Fig. 19.9). Penetration of the sinus results in a
in stained blood films. Heparin also causes clumping of leu-
rapid flow of blood into the tube. Blood collection by punc-
kocytes and thrombocytes and resultant, inaccurate cell 
ture of either the heart or the occipital venous sinus requires
counts. A 3.8% sodium citrate solution, used in a ratio of
one part citrate solution to nine parts blood, is the antico-
to the heart or brainstem—and even possible death of the
agulant of choice for coagulation studies; however, it should
patient.
not be used for other hematologic evaluations. Consistent 
The method of storage and handling of blood samples can
lse of the same anticoagulant is an important consideration
have a significant influence of the hematological results.
with serial evaluation of the hemogram in the avian patient.
Blood samples collected without use of an anticoagulant
For example, it has been demonstrated that although most
require immediate processing. Dilutions for cell counting
hematologic parameters were in agreement between blood
and preparation for blood films must be quickly performed
  '     s
with such samples. Because of the urgency for rapid process-
and the PCV are significantly lower and lymphocyte counts
ing of nonanticoagulated blood, most avian blood samples
were significantly higher in the heparinized samples.
are collected into tubes containing an anticoagulant. Ethyl-
Blood sampled during field studies often does not have
enediaminetetraacetic acid, heparin, and sodium citrate are
the advantage of immediate processing following blood col-
lection; therefore, artifactual changes may occur during
storage. The period of stability of the sample is influenced
by temperature, time, and species. In general, avian blood
samples collected into EDTA can be stored at 4°C for up to
72 hours and provide reliable results for packed cell volume
(PCV), hemoglobin concentration (Hb), total red blood cell
count (RBC), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) values.
and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
volume (MCV) and the total white blood cell count (WBC).1D
 Blood films can be made using a variety of techniques.
The standard two-slide wedge or push-slide method that is
commonly used for preparing human and mammalian blood
films also can provide adequate blood films for avian hema-
tology.21l This method usually provides good cellular distri-
bution and adequate monolayer felds for proper slide
evaluation. Use of precleaned, bevel-edged microscope slides
is advised to minimize cell damage during preparation of
blood films. To minimize cell damage, a drop of cormmer-
Figure 19.9 Blood collection from the dorsal occipital venous sinus in a
cially available, purified bovine albumin can be applied to a
puffin (Fratercula cirrhata).
glass slide, followed by the addition of an equal amount of
241
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Table 19.1 Semmiquantitative microscopic evaluation of avian erythrocyte morphology.:a
1+
2+
+E
4+
 Anisocytosis 
5-10
11-20
21-30
OE<
 Polychromasia
2-10
11-14 
15-30
OE<
Hypochromasia 
1-2
5-E
6-10
>10
Poikilocytosis
5-10
11-20
21-50
>50
Erythroplastids
1-2
3-5
6-10
>10
aBased on the average number of abnormal cells per 100ox monolayer field
blood before malking the blood film. The albumin should not
be allowed to dry before making the blood film. Alternately.
blood films can be prepared by using a slide and coverslip
or by using two coverslips. With proper attention to tech-
nique, these methods minimize cellular disruption while
maintaining good cellular distribution with monolayered
areas for examination. The coverslip is pulled across a drop
coverslip. A disadvantage of the coverslip method, however.
is the inability to use automatic staining methods.
Wright, Wright-Giemsa, Wright-Leishman, and May
Grinwald-Giemsa stains have been used for staining air-
 dried, avian blood films for hematologic examination. Quick
stains or modified Wright stains (Diff-Quik, American Sci-
entific Products, Division of American Hospital Supply Cor-
poration, McGraw Park, IL; Hemacolor, Miles Laboratories.
Ellhart, IN) also can be used to stain avian blood films. Use
 Figure 19.10 Normal erythrocytes in the blood filr of a cockato0
(Cacatua alba). Wright-Giemmsa stain.
of automatic slide stainers (Hema-Tek, Ames Division of
Miles Laboratories, Elkhart, IN; Harleco Midas II, EM Diag-
nostic Systems, Gibbstown, NJ) sirmplifies the staining pro-
cedure and provides a means for consistency and high-quality
erythrocytes based on the average number per monolayer
staining of blood films. Automatic stainers remove much of
xl000 field (Table 19.1).
the staining variation that occurs with hand-staining
Mature avian erythrocytes generally are larger than
methods.
      
cytes. Avian erythrocytes vary in size depending on the
species, but they generally range between 10.7 × 6.l μm
Erythrocytes
and 15.8 × 10.2μm.12 Erythrocytes of adult  Coturnix
quail for example measure 1l.06 ± 0.70 μm in length and
Morphology
6.80 ± 0.67μm in width in males and 11.40 ± 0.63 μm in
length and 6.73 ± 0.45 μum in width in females.3 Mature
vation of the cells in a monolayer xlooo field in which
avian erythrocytes are elliptical and have an elliptical, cen-
approximately half the erythrocytes are touching one
trally positioned nucleus. Nuclear chromatin is uniformly
another. In general, such fields represent approximately 200
clumped and becomes increasingly condensed with age. In
erythrocytes in most species of birds. Monolayer fields may
Wright-stained blood films. the nucleus stains purple,
be difficult to achieve, however, in severely anemic birds
whereas the cytoplasm stains orange-pink with a uniform
(i.e., films are too thin) or in poorly prepared blood films
texture (Fig. 19.10).
(i.e., films made too thick or thin). Avian erythrocytes
Changes in the size of avian erythrocytes include micro-
should be evaluated on the basis of size, shape, color.
cytosis, macrocytosis, and anisocytosis. A significant change
nucleus, and presence of cellular inclusions. A semiquantita-
in the mean size of the erythrocyte is reflected in the mean
tive scale can be used to estimate the number of abnormal
corpuscular volume (McV). The presence of macrocytes or
242
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
Figure 19.11 Polychromatic erythrocytes (arrows) in the blood filrm of a
hawk (Buteo jamaicensis). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Figure 19.12 Reticulocytes with a distinct ring of aggregated reticulum
encircling the red-cell nucleus in the blood film of an eagle (Aquila
chrysaetos). Brilliant cresyl blue stain .
microcytes also should be noted during assessment of the
blood film. The degree of variation in the size of erythrocytes
(anisocytosis) can be scored from l+ to 4+ based on the
number of variable-sized erythrocytes in a monolayer field
(Table 19.1 ). Erythrocyte subpopulations have been reported
in ducks, in which larger erythrocytes (MCV, 308fL/cell)
most likely represent those most recently released from the
hematopoietic tissue and smaller cells (MCV, 128fL/cell)
most likely represent the older, aging cells.
Variations in erythrocyte color include polychromasia and
hypochromasia. Polychromatophilic erythrocytes occur in
low numbers (usually <5% of erythrocytes) in the periph-
eral blood of most normal birds. The degree of polychroma-
sia can be graded according to the guideline presented in
Table 19.l. The cytoplasm of polychromatophilic erythro-
cytes is weakly basophilic, and the nucleus is less condensed
than in mature erythrocytes (Fig. 19.ll). Polychromato-
philic erythrocytes are similar in size to mature erythrocytes.
Figure 19.13 Hypochromatic erythrocytes (arrows) in the blood film of
and they appear as reticulocytes when stained with vital
a parrot (Eclectus roratus). Wright-Giemsa stain.
stains such as new methylene blue.
Reticulocytes are the penultimate cell in the erythrocyte
maturation series, and their presence in the peripheral blood
of normal birds suggests that the final stages of red-cell
becomes more dispersed throughout the cytoplasm. With
maturation occur in circulating blood. Reticulocytes tend to
further maturation, the reticular material becomes nonag-
 be smaller in size and less elongated compared to the mature
erythrocyte. For example reticulocytes of adult Coturnix
felids. Most mature avian erythrocytes contain a varying
quail measure 9.80 ± 0.77 μm in length and 8.23 ± 0.72μm
amount of aggregate or punctate reticulum. Reticulocytes
in width in males and 9.80 ±0.77μm in length
and
that reflect the current erythrocyte regenerative response.
7.73 ± 0.70 μm in width in females."2 Determination of the
however, are those with a distinct ring of aggregated reticu-
reticulocyte concentration can be made by staining erythro-
lum that encircles the red-cell nucleus.
cytes with a vital stain such as new methylene blue. Reticu-
Hypochromatic erythrocytes are abnormally pale in color
locytes have a distinct ring of aggregated reticular material
compared with mature erythrocytes, and they have an
that encircles the nucleus (Fig. 19.12),.814 As the cell mature.
area of cytoplasmic pallor that is greater than half the cyto-
the amount of aggregated reticular material decreases and
plasmic volume (Fig. 19.13). They also may have cytoplasmic
243
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
vacuoles and round, pyknotic nuclei. A significant hypo-
chromasia is reflected as a decrease in the mean corpuscular
hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) and mean corpuscular
hemoglobin (MCH) values. The degree of hypochromasia
can be estimated using the scale presented in Table 19.1.
 In most species of birds, the shape of erythrocytes is rela-
tively uniform. The degree of poikilocytosis can be estimated
using the scale outlined in Table 19.1.
Atypical erythrocytes occasionally are present in the
peripheral blood of normal birds, and such erythrocytes may
represent artifacts associated with preparation of the blood
film. Careful examination of erythrocyte morphology may
reveal significant clues in the detection of disorders affecting
avian erythrocytes. As mentioned, the degree of polychro-
masia and reticulocytosis and the presence of immature
erythrocytes in the peripheral blood aid in the assessment
of red-blood-cell regeneration. The presence of many hypo-
Figure 19.14 Erytrhoplastids (large arrows), erythrocyte fragmments
chromatic erythrocytes (i.e., 2+ hypochromasia or greater)
(small arrow), and dactylocytes (arrowhead) in a blood film with marked
indicates an erythrocyte disorder such as iron deficiency.
anisocytosis and poikilocytosis from a lovebird (Agapornis roseicollis)
Atypical erythrocytes may vary in both size and shape. A
Wright-Giemmsa stain.
slight variation in the size of erythrocytes (l+ anisocytosis) is
considered to be normal for birds. A greater degree of aniso-
cytosis, however, usuallyis observed in birds with a regenera-
tive anemia and is associated with polychromasia. Likewise.
minor deviations from the normal shape of avian erythro
cytes (l+ poilkilocytosis) are considered to be normal in the
peripheral blood of birds, but marked poikilocytosis may indi-
cate erythrocytic dysgenesis. Round erythrocytes with oval
nuclei occasionally are found in the blood films of anemic
birds and suggest a dysmaturation of the cell cytoplasm and
nucleus, which may be a result of accelerated erythropoiesis.
The nucleus may vary in its cellular location and contain
indentions, protrusions, or constrictions. Anucleated eryth-
rocytes (erythroplastids) or cytoplasmic fra gments occasion-
ally are found in normal avian blood films (Fig. 19.14).? The
nucleus may contain chromophobic streaking. which sug-
gests chromatolysis, or achromic bands, which indicate
nuclear fracture with displacement of the fragments. Mitotic
activity associated with erythrocytes in blood films suggests
a marked regenerative response or erythrocytic dyscrasia
Figure 19.15 Dividing erythrocytes (arrow) in the blood film of an owl
(Fig. l9.l5). Perinuclear rings are common artifacts of
(Nyctea scandiaca), Modified Wright-Giemnsa stain, 500x.
improper slide preparation (e.g., exposure to solvent or for-
malin fumes, or allowing the slide to dry too slowly). and
they represent nuclear shrinkage. Clear, irregular, refractile
plus other features of red-blood-cell dyscrasia, however.
spaces in the cytoplasm occur when blood films are allowed
suggest neoplastic, viral, or genetic disease.'5
to dry too slowly. This artifact, which is a form of erythrocyte
 Punctate basophilia is characterized by punctate aggrega-
crenation, should not be confused with avian blood para-
tions of small, irregular, basophilic-staining granules
sites, such as gametocytes of Hemoproteus and Plasmodium.
throughout the cytoplasm of erythrocytes in Wright-stained
 Disruption or smudging of avian erythrocytes is the most
smears. As in mammalian hematology. punctate basophilia
common artifact of slide preparation. Severely ruptured cells
is most lilkely associated with degenerative changes in ribo-
result in the presence of purple, amorphous nuclear material
somal ribonucleic acid and is indicative of a response to
in the blood film.
anemia or, rarely, lead poisoning. Basophilic stippling can be
Binucleate erythrocytes rarely occur in the blood films of
affected by preparation and staining of the blood film. Using
normal birds. Large numbers of binucleated erythrocytes
fresh blood without an anticoagulant or rapid drying of
244
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
blood films made from EDTA-anticoagulated blood provides
Table 19.2 Natt and Herrick's solution and stain.?
the best films for demonstrating basophilic stippling.' Such
stippling is less apparent when alcohol fixation of blood is
Sodium chloride [NaCl]
3.88g
used. Heinz bodies rarely are reported in birds and are the
Sodium sulfate [Na SO4]
2.50g
result of hemoglobin denaturation (oxidized hemoglobin ).17
Sodium phosphate [NazHPO]
1.74g
Heinz bodies appear as round to irregularly shaped, pale-
Potassiumm phosphate [KH2PO]
0.25g
blue, cytoplasmic inclusions with new methylene blue stain;
Formalin [37%] 
7.50mL
as round to irregular inclusions of densely stained hemoglo-
Methyl violet
0.10g
bin with Wright stain; or as refractile inclusions in unstained
erythrocytes. Agglutination of erythrocytes in blood films
 aBring to 1000mL with distilled water and filter through Whatman 
 also is a rare, abnormal finding.
#10 medium filter paper.
Laboratory evaluation
Laboratory evaluation of avian erythrocytes involves the
same routine procedures as that used in mammalian hema-
tology, but with a few modifications. The standard manual
technique for using microhematocrit capillary tubes and
centrifugation (12,000 g for 5 min) can be used to obtain a
PCV (hematocrit). Hemoglobin concentration is measured
using the same methods for mammalian blood samples;
however, removal of free erythrocyte nuclei by centrifuga-
tion is required.9
 The total erythrocyte concentration in birds can be deter-
mined using the same automated or manual methods as
those used for obtaining the total erythrocyte counts in
mammalian blood. Automated cell counters (Coulter
counter, Coulter Corporation, Miami, FL) provide a rapid.
reliable method for obtaining total red-blood-cell concentra-
tions. Two manual methods for obtaining total red-blood-cell
count in birds are the erythrocyte Unopette (Becton-
 Dickinson) method used in mammalian hematology and the
Figure 19.16 Appearance of erythrocytes (arrows) and leukocytes
Natt-Herrick method, which involves preparation of Natt-
(arrow head) in a hemocytometer using the erythrocyte Unopette
Herrick solution to be used as a stain and diluent (Table
method.
19.2)." A 1 :200 dilution of the blood is made using the Natt
and Herrick solution and red-blood-cell diluting pipettes.
After mixing. the diluted blood is discharged into a hemacy-
tometer counting chamber, and the cells are allowed to settle
for 5 minutes, to the ruled surface, before counting. Eryth-
rocytes located in the four corner and the central squares of
the hemacytometer chamber are counted when using either
of the manual methods (Figs. 19.16 and 19.17). The number
obtained then is multiplied by 10,000 to calculate the total
red-blood-cell count per cubic millimeter (mm?) of blood.
The MCV, MCH, and MCHC also can be calculated for
avian hematology using the same formulas as those used for
mammals.
Normal erythrocyte physiology
Normal reference values vary among species of birds:
however, with a few exceptions, psittacine birds in captivity
have similar erythrocyte parameters: PCV of 35-55%: RBC
count of 2.4-5.0 x 10°/μL; Hemoglobin concentration of
11-16mg/dL; MCV of 90-200fl; and MCHC of 22-33%
Figure 19.17 Appearance of erythrocytes (arrows) and granulocyte
(Table 19.3).
(arrowheadl) in a hermocytometer using Natt and Herrick method.
245
Table 19.3 Erythrocyte parameters for selected birds.
PCV
RBC
Hb
McV
MCHC
(%)
(x 10°/μL)
(7P/6)
(fl)
(%)
Psittacines
 African Grey parrot 1.3
43-55
2.4-4.5
11.0-16.0
90-180
26-22
 Amazon parrots 1.2
45-55
2.5-4.5
12.5-25
160-175
29.1-31.0
Blue-fronted Amazon5
44-58
2.1-3.5
16.0-18.4
163-209
31.7-37.8
Cuban Amazon5
44-54
3.1-3.5
15.2-17.7
142-162
31.4-37.2
Festive Amazon5
47-53
3.1-3.8
16.1-17.4
135-164
31.5-34.5
Orange-wing Amazons
46-51
2.8-3.3
15.5-17.5
151-166
32.1-36.0
Vinaceous Amazon5
46-52
E'6-0'6
15.0-17.5
145-174
31.7-35.6
Yellow Amazons
38-51
2.1-3.5
12.1-17.4
135-175
31.0-34.1
Budgerigar1.3
44-58
2.3-3.9
13-18
90-190
22-32
Cockatiel 1.3
45-54
2.5-4.7
11-16
90-200
22-33
Cockatoos 1,3
42-54
2-4
12-16
120-175
28-33
Black cockatoos
40-46
2.4-2.7
12-17
154-184 
32-37
Goffin's cockatoos
37-47
2.4-3.4
12-16
119-175
6E-EE
Palrm cockatoos
36-47
2.0-3.6
13-17
131-235
9E-LE
White cockatoos
37-48
2.8-3.2
14-18
132-171
6E-0E
s't saunuo
42-54
2.9-4.5
12-16
90-190
23-31
Golden conures
50-54
3.6-4.0
17.6-20.4
126-144
33.9-40.7
Patagonian conures
45-52
3.2-4.1
14.3-16.2
127-146
30.9-32.3
 Eclectus parrot 1.3
45-55
2.7-3.8
13.5-16.0
125-175
29-32
Jardine's parrot!
35-48
2.4-4.0
11-16
90-190
21-33
Lovebird 1,3
44-57
3.0-5.1
13-18
90-190
22-32
Macaw 1.3
47-55
2.7-4.5
15-17
125-170
29-35
Green-wing macaws
39-54
2.7-4.1
9.6-18.7
116-177
21.9-34.9
Military macaws
37-55
2.7-5.2
11.1-19.6
106-173
33.9-40.7
 Scarlet macaws
40-54
2.3-3.7
13.1-19.9
135-169
29.7-37.3
 Pionus parrot! 
35-54
2.4-4.0
11-16
85-210
24-31
Quaker 1,3
85-0E
2.8-3.9
11-15
90-200
22-32
Senegal parrot
36-48
2.4-4.0
11-16
90-200
23-32
Others
Canary 1,3
37-49
2.5-3.8
12-16
90-210
22-32
Pigeon²
05-86
3.1-4.5
13-17.5
85-200
22-33
Chicken 1.3
23-55
1.3-4.5
7.0-18.6
100-139
20-34
30.4-45.6
1.74-3.70
8.8-13.4
112-168
23.2-35.3
Quaill 
30.0-45.1
4.0-5.2
10.7-14.3
60-100
28.0-38.5
 Canada goose1
85-8E
1.6-2.6
12.7-19.1
118-144
20-30
*Mallard duck 
46-51
3.05-3.65
14.8-16.4
134 -162
31.4-31.8
**Mallard duck4
34-44
1.61-2.41
11-13
172-227
27-31
 Peregrine falcon'
37-53
3-4
11.8-18.8
118-146
31.9-35.2
 Red tailed hawk!
31-43
2.41-3.59
10.7-16.6
150-178
29.7-34.5
Tawny owl6
29-47
1.5-2.4
E'81-0'8
154-221
33.1-62.1
White-back vulture?
35-54
21-3.0
1632-23.0
186-208
36.2-42.3
+ January.
*+June.
1.Pollack C. Carpenter JW, Antinoff N.In: Birds, 3rd ed. J Carpenter ed. Exotic Animal Formulary. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
2-Tell, LA, and SB Citino. Hematologic and serum chermistry reference intervals for Cuban A mazon parrots (Amazona leucocephala leucocephala).
J Zoo and Wildlife Med 1992; 23: 62-4.
3.Cray C. Blood and chermistry tables. In: Manual of Avian Medicine. G Olsen, S Orosz eds, St. Louis, MO: Mosby, 2000.
4.Campbell, TW. Normal hematology of waterfowl. Edited by B. Feldman, J. Zinkl and M. Jain. 5 ed, Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
5Polo FJ, Peinado Vl, Viscor G, Palomeque J. Hematologic and plasma chemistry values in captive psittacine birds. Avian Diseases 1998; 42: 523-35.
6Spagnolo V, Crippa, V, Marzia A, Alberti I, Sartorelli P. Hematologic, biochemical, and protein electrophoretic values in captive tawny owls [Strix
aluco]. Vet Clin Pathof 2008: 37: 225-8
7.Naidoo V, Diekmann M, Wolters K. Swan GE. Establishment of selected baseline blood chemistry and hemmatologic pararmeters in captive and 
wild-caught African white-backed vultures [Gyps africanaus]. J Wild Dis 2008; 44: 649-54.
246
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
The total erythrocyte concentration and PCV of birds are
curve to the right of the mammalian curve. Therefore, avian
infuenced by species, age, sex, hormonal influences.
tissues can extract oxygen more readily from hemoglobin
hypoxia, environmental factors, and disease.21-2 In general.
than mammalian tissues can.
the total erythrocyte count, PCV, and MCV increase with
age. The Hb does not appear to be affected by age: therefore.
Responses in disease
a decline in MCHC is a function of the increase in MCV.
The PCv is the quickest and most practical method for evalu-
  aq i an    a l
ating the red-cell mass of birds. As in mammals, the PCV in
male compared to female birds. The reason for this may be
birds is affected by the number and size of the erythrocytes
a hormonal effect where estrogen depresses erythropoiesis.
as well as by changes in the plasma volume that do not affect
whereas androgens and thyroxin stimulate erythropoiesis.
the actual cell concentrations. These include increased
Variations in erythrocyte parameters associated with gender
plasma volume (hemodilution), decreased plasma volume
in birds are generally not statistically significant; however.
(hemoconcentration), improper blood sampling (hemodilu-
reported differences between males and females have been
tion). and epinephrine administration and hypothermia.
reported and reflect a seasonal variation, where females
which may result in hemoconcentration. The normal PCV
tend to have higher PCV, Hb, TRBC, and MCHC values
for many species of birds ranges between 35% and 55%.
 cormpared to males in the pre-nesting period.
Therefore, a PCV of less than 35% suggests anemia, and a
Studies with free-ranging ducks and geese have shown
 PCV of greater than 55% suggests dehydration or erythro-
that averages for PCV, Hb, TRBC, and MCHC values tend to
cytosis (polycythemia). The latter condition can be differen-
be higher in the winter and pre-nesting period in adults
tiated by the total serum protein: increased total protein
pue poad susausod aui oi paredos iapuaa po ssaireaa
indicates dehydration, whereas normal or low total protein
fall."s During migration, ducks tend to have slightly lower
indicates erythrocytosis.
erythrocyte counts compared to wintering ducks and post-
Typically, polychromatic erythrocytes make up 5% or less
 a aq n n si an rn snaae A sus
of the erythrocyte population in blood films from normal
the winter or pre-nesting periods.3 Interestingly, these
birds. The degree of erythrocyte polychromasia and reticu-
changes also occur in captive ducks that are not able to
locytosis indicates the degree of erythrogenesis. Anemic
migrate. Feather molting. a seasonal event, has an effect on
birds with greater than 10% polychromasia (3+ and 4+ poly-
the hemogram where the PCV, RBC. and Hb have been
chromasia) are exhibiting an appropriate regenerative
 shown to decrease in ducks during and after remige molt.
response to their anemia. Those with a smaller response.
The normal erythrocyte parameters vary among avian
however, are not. The number of reticulocytes also indicates
species. For example, in Anseriformes, mallard ducks (Anas
a bird's current response to anemia. Therefore, the reticulo-
platyrhynchos), a dabbling duck, have higher average PCV and
 cyte count can be used in conjunction with assessment of
TRBC values in the winter and pre-nesting period compared
the degree of polychromasia to determine the bird's current 
to diving ducks (Aythya spp and Oxyura jamaicensis): whereas.
erythropoietic response.
diving ducks have higher McV values during the winter and
 Other evidence of active erythropoiesis is the presence of
pre-nesting period compared to mallards." In general, ducks
 binucleate, immature erythrocytes and an increased number
tend to have higher TRBC values than geese, but geese have
of normal, immature erythrocytes in the peripheral blood.
higher MCV and Hb than ducks during the winter.
Immature erythrocytes (i.e., rubricytes) in peripheral blood
Birds, like mammals, respond to blood loss and blood
films in addition to increased polychromasia indicate a
destruction by increasing erythropoietin production, which
marked erythrocyte response (Fig. 19.18). In cases of non-
stimulates erythropoiesis. Avian erythropoietin (a glycopro-
anemic birds, however, these cells indicate abnormal eryth-
tein produced by the kidney) acts directly on the bone
ropoiesis. Immature erythrocytes also may suggest early
release from the hematopoietic tissue after anoxic insult or
poietin does not stimulate mammalian erythropoiesis.
toxicity (i.e., lead poisoning).
however, and mammalian erythropoietin has no effect on
The causes of anemia in birds include blood loss (hemor-
avian hematopoiesis.12
rhagic anemia). increased red cell destruction (hemolytic
Avian hemoglobin has four iron-containing heme sub-
anemia). and decreased red cell production (depression
units, as with mammalian hemoglobin, but the protein moi-
anemia). The most common causes of hemorrhagicanemia in
eties (i.e., globulins) are different.?" In avian erythrocytes.
birds include traumaticinjury, bloodsucking parasites, coa gu-
the phosphate compounds influencing the affinity of hemo-
lopathies, and hemorrhagic lesions of internal organs, such as
globin for oxygen also differ from those in mammals. The
ulcerated neoplasms, gastric ulcerations, and rupture of the
liver or spleen. Heavy infestation with bloodsucking ectopar-
phosphate, not the 2,3-diphosglycerate as in mammals. Ino-
asites such as ticks or mites (i.e., Dermanyssus mites) or with
sitol pentophosphate causes hemoglobin to have a lower
gastrointestinal parasites such as coccidia can lead to severe
affinity for oxygen, and it shifts the oxygen dissociation
blood loss anemia in birds. Coagulopathies that result in
247
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
10.0μm
Figure 19.18 Immature erythrocytes (arrows) represented by mid-
Figure 19.19 Marked numbers of immature erythrocytes (arrows) in a
polychromatic rubricytes in the blood film of a conure (Aratinga
blood film from a vulture (Cathartes aura) with a normal packed cell
sofstitialis). Wright-Giemsa stain .
volume (46%). The vulture has lead poisoning. Wright-Giemsa stain.
blood loss anemia usually are acquired and often are associ-
which can develop rapidly in birds with inflammatory dis-
ated with toxicities such as aflatoxicosis or coumarin poison-
eases, especially those involving infectious agents. Birds
appear to develop anemias from a lack of erythropoiesis
 Birds can tolerate acute blood loss better than mammals and
more quickly than mammals, perhaps because of the rela-
diving and flying birds are more resistant to blood loss than
tively short erythrocyte half-life in birds compared with
 nondiving birds such as galliformes.* The mobilization and
that in mammals.4s Although the avian erythrocyte life
 restora tion of fuid during the first 90 minutes after bleeding
span varies with the species, it is generally shorter than
in chickens is approximately 13% to 17% of the initial blood
those in mammals. For example, the erythrocyte life span
volume per hour, which is twice that of dogs.37
is 28-35 days in chickens, 42 days in pigs. 35 t0 45 days
Hemolytic anemia can result from parasitemias, septice-
in pigeons, and 33-35 days in quail. The degree of poly-
mia, and toxicities. Most avian blood parasites have the
chromasia or reticulocytosis is poor to absent in birds with
potential to cause anemia in the host; however, the two
depression anemias. Infectious diseases frequently associ-
parasites that most frequently are associated with hemolytic
ated with depression anemia in birds include tuberculosis.
anemia are Plasmodium and Aegyptianella. Salmonellosis or
aspergillosis, and chlamydiosis. Chronic hepatic and renal
spirochetoses commonly cause bacterial septicemia that
disease and hypothyroidism can also result in a depression
result in severe hemolytic anemia.3s Toxicoses that lead to
 anemia.* Neoplasia resulting in infiltration of neoplastic
increased erythrocyte destruction include aflatoxins, certain
cells into the bone marrow can also cause a depression
plant chemicals (i.e., mustards). drugs. and petroleum
anemia.50-52
products.3-43 Ingestion of petroleum products may produce
Hypochromasia can be seen with iron deficiency, chronic
a Heinz body anemia. Hemolytic anemia occurs in marine
inflammatory diseases, and lead toxicosis. Hypochromasia
birds associated with oil pollution and is characterized by
 can also be associated with nutritional deficiencies, espe-
cially iron deficiency anemia. Hypochromatic erythrocytes
Although rare, immune-mediated anemia may result in
frequently appear in the blood films from birds with chronic
hemolysis, with red-cell agglutination being present in the
inflammatory diseases, presumably related to iron seques-
blood film. Hemolytic anemias typically are characterized by
tration as part of the bird's defense against infectious agents.
a marked regenerative response. Although hemochromato-
In such cases, hypochromatic cells often are observed in
sis usually does not affect the hemogram, one report in a
blood films before the red-cell indices (MCHC and MCH)
psittacine with hemochromatosis indicated a severe anemia
suggest hypochromasia (Fig. 19.13).
with a marked regenerative response (4+ polychromasia and
Heavy metal poisoning. especially with lead and zinc
immature erythrocytes as early as prorubricytes). The hemo-
intoxication, can result in the appearance of immature and
chromatosis may have altered the maturation of erythro-
cytes as a result of defective iron uptake.
lead toxicosis also may be associated with an in appropriate
A nonregenerative, normocytic, normochromic anemia
release of normal-appearing. immature erythrocytes into
indicates decreased erythropoiesis (depression anemia),
the peripheral blood of nonanemic birds (Fig. 19.19). In
248
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
this condition, the blood film reveals small, senescent,
mature erythrocytes with pyknotic nuclei and immature
erythrocytes (usually rubricytes) without the presence of
normal, mature erythrocytes. This hematologic response
resembles the inappropriate release of nucleated erythro-
cytes in the blood of nonanemic dogs affected by chronic
lead poisoning. Basophilic stippling in the cytoplasm of
erythrocytes may be seen with lead poisoning in birds, but
can also be associated with erythrocyte regeneration and
hypochromic anemia. Changes in PCV, Hb, and MCHC
occur in a predictable manner with increasing blood lead
20.0μn
changes tend to occur when blood lead concentrations
are greater than 3mg/L and therefore are associated
with severe lead toxicosis. A decreased MCHC is a more
sensitive indicator of lead poisoning in birds than is
Figure 19.20 Normal heterophils (arrows) in the blood film of a parrot
hypochromasia.
(clectus roratus). Wright-Giermsa stain.
A macrocytic, normochromic anemia occurs in birds with
food restriction or folic acid deficiency.7 Folic acid deficiency
causes defective DNA synthesis, thereby causing nuclear
maturation to be out of step with hemoglobinization of the
Leukocytes
cytoplasm. Food restriction anemia also is associated with
leukopenia,
thrombocytopenia,
abnormal
erythrocyte
Morphology
 shapes (marked poikilocytosis), and hypersegmentation of
Leukopoiesis in normal birds appears to be similar to that in
granulocytes.
mammals, in that leukocytes are released into the peripheral 
Erythrocytosis  (polycythemia)  rarely  is  reported
in
circulation only when they are mature. Leukocytes in avian
birds.ss The conditions associated with polycythemia in
blood include lymphocytes, monocytes, and granulocytes.
mammals most likely cause polycythemia in birds as well.
The granulocytes are classified as heterophils, eosinophils,
A primary erythrocytosis is a myeloproliferative disorder
and basophils. Heterophils are the most abundant granulo-
resulting in an absolute erythrocytosis. Most reported cases
cyte in most birds. The cytoplasm of normal, mature hetero-
 n (   sio   jo
phils appears colorless and contains eosinophilic granules
are secondary and associated with chronic pulmonary
(dark orange to brown-red) with Romanowsky stains (Fig.
disease. Cardiac insufficiency, however, also may result in
19.20). The cytoplasmic granules typically are elongate (rod
an erythrocytosis. An increase in erythropoietin associated
 or spiculated shaped), but they may appear oval to round in 
with renal disease is another causative consideration for
some species. Heterophil granules frequently have a distinct
this disorder. A relative erythrocytosis associated with dehy-
central body that appears to be refractile. The granules may
dration is responsible for most avian cases with an
be affected by the staining process and appear atypical (i.e..
erythrocytosis.
poorly stained, partially dissolved, or fused). The nucleus of
The presence of numerous immature erythrocytes (espe-
mature heterophils is lobed (usually two to three lobes) with
cially rubriblasts) and abnormal-appearing immature eryth-
coarse, clumped chromatin that stains purple. The nucleus
rocytes in the peripheral blood of birds indicates erythrocytic
 often is partially hidden by the cytoplasmic granules.
neoplasia. Erythroblastosis in poultry with avian leukosis
Avian heterophils are considered to be functionally equiv-
complex is an example of this condition.
alent to mammalian neutrophils: however, there are differ-
The genotoxicity of cyclophosphamide and mitomycin-C
cause a decrease in the PCV and the formation of erythro-
they are phagocytic. The cytoplasmic granules of heterophils 
 contain lysozyme and proteins needed for bactericidal activ-
micronuclei are seen in erythrocytes at the rubriblasts and
ity, although some avian species, such as chickens, have
prorubricytes stages of development. These effects are seen
heterophils that lack peroxidase activity 3161-67 Heterophils
up to day 8 following secession of cyclophosphamide
phagocytize microorganisms and destroy them by oxygen-
therapy. Recovery is signaled by a large increase in imma-
ture erythrocytes with complete resolution by day 13. Thus.
chicken heterophils lack the alkaline phosphatase, catalase.
detection of nuclear budding and micronuclei in avian
and myeloperoxidase needed for oxygen-dependent killing
erythrocytes in blood films is an indication of exposure to a
 of microorganisms, they do consume oxygen and produce 
therapeutic or environmental genotoxin.
oxygen radicals and hydrogen peroxide, but to a lesser
249
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
extent than in mammalian neutrophils.6i6s Therefore, avian
heterophils rely more heavily on oxygen-independent
mechanisms, lysozyme, and cationic proteins (i.e. acid
hydrolases and cathepsin) to destroy microorganisms. Avian
(chicken and turkey) heterophils do not respond to the
chemoattractant
formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine
(fMLP) as do mammalian neutrophils.
Ultrastructural studies of avian heterophils reveal primary.
the most numerous, and they appear as electron-dense.
fusiform rods (l.5 x0.5μm) with a circular central body.
Secondary granules (diameter, 0.5 μm) are less dense and
contain eccentric inclusions composed of loose, filamentous
material. Tertiary granules (0.l μm) have a dense core that
is separated from a membranous envelope of an electron-
luscent area. Based on the results of biochemical evaluations
of chicken heterophils, myeloperoxidase and alkaline phos-
Figure 19.21 Aheterophil metamyelocyte (arrow) in the blood film of a
phatase also are absent. Chicken heterophil granules do not
parrot (Amazona oratrix). Wright-Giemsa stain.
stain with alkaline phosphatase, peroxidase, Sudan black B,
acid phosphatase, naphthol AS-D chloroacetate esterase
methods, or periodic acid-Schiff. Small and medium gran-
ules may be seen ultrastructurally in avian heterophils, and
these probably represent maturation stages of the cytoplas-
mic granules.
Abnormal appearing heterophils in blood films include
 both immature and toxic heterophils. Immature heterophils
have increased cytoplasmic basophilia. nonsegmented
nuclei, and immature cytoplasmic granules compared with
normal, mature heterophils (Fig. 19.20). Immature hetero-
phils most frequently encountered in the blood are myelo-
B a sa ai s  s
than mature heterophils, and they have blue cytoplasm as
well as secondary, rod-shaped granules, which occupy less
than half the cytoplasmic volume, and a round to oval.
nonsegmented nucleus. Heterophil metamyelocytes resem-
ble myelocytes, except that the nucleus is indented and the
Figure 19.22 Mildly toxic (1+) heterophils in the blood film of an owl 
rod-shaped granules occupy more than half the cytoplasmic
(Bubo virginianus). Wright-Giemsa stain.
volume. Band heterophils resemble mature heterophils.
except that the nucleus is not lobed. It often is difficult to
recognize a band cell, because the nucleus is hidden by the
cytoplasmic granules. Therefore, a true assessment regarding
be rated subjectively on a scale of l+ to 4+. A l+ degree of
the concentration of band cells in avian blood films requires
toxicity or mild toxicity is assigned when heterophils exhibit
use of a nuclear stain, such as hematoxylin, which stains
increased cytoplasmic basophilia. A 2+ or mild to moderate
only the nucleus and not the cytoplasmic granules.
degree of toxicity is assigned when heterophils have deeper
 In response to severe systemic illness, avian heterophils
cytoplasmic basophilia and partial degranulation. A 3+
exhibit toxic changes similar to those in mammalian nell-
degree of toxicity or moderate toxicity is assigned when
trophils. Toxic changes in avian heterophils are subjectively
heterophils exhibit deep cytoplasmic basophilia, moderate
quantified as to the number of toxic cells and the severity
degranulation, abnormal granules, and cytoplasmic vacuol-
of toxicity, as in mammalian hematology. Toxic heterophils 
ization, and a 4+ or marked degree of toxicity is assigned
have increased cytoplasmic basophilia, vacuolization, abnor-
when heterophils exhibit deep cytoplasmic basophilia, mod-
mal granulation (degranulation, granules that appear deeply
erate to marked degranulation with abnormal granules.
basophilic, and granules that appear to coalesce into large.
cytoplasmic vacuolization, and karyorrhexis or karyolysis.
round granules), and degeneration of the cell nucleus (Figs.
The number of toxic heterophils are graded as few (5-10%).
19.21 through 19.25). The degree of heterophil toxicity can
moderate (11-30%), and marked (>30%).
250
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
20.0μm
Figure 19.23 Mildly toxic (1+) heterophils (arrows) and a toxic (1+)
Figure 19.25 A heterophil exhibiting marked (4+) toxicity in the blood
band heterophil (arrowhead) in the blood filr of a hawk (Buteo regalis)
filn of a hawk (Buteo regalis). Wright-Giernsa stain.
Wright-Giernsa stain .
20.0
Figure 19.24 Moderate to marked toxic (3+) band heterophil in the
Figure 19.26 An eosinophil (arrow) and a heterophil (arrowhead) in the
blood film of a parrot (Eclectus roratus). Wright-Giermsa stain.
blood film of an owl (Strix varia). Wright-Giermsa stain.
Most avian eosinophils are nearly the same size as hetero-
cytoplasm of normal, mature heterophils. The nuclei of
phils in most blood films.? For example, heterophils of adult
eosinophils are lobed and usually stain darker than hetero-
Coturnix quail measure 10.22 ± 1.20μm in diameter for
phil nuclei. The cytoplasmic granules of eosinophils fre-
males and 9.80 ± 1.14μm in diameter in females compared
quently are affected by Romanowsky stains. The granules
to eosinophils that measured 9.76 ± 1.13 μm in diameter for
may appear to be large, swollen, and round, and they also 
males and 9.55 ± 1.23 μm in diameter in females.'' In con-
may appear colorless or to stain pale blue (Fig. 19.29). Eosin-
trast to mature heterophils, avian eosinophils in general
ophils vary in appearance species of birds.
have round, strongly eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules.
Avian eosinophils have some features in common with
although the granules in some species are oval to elongate.
 mammalian eosinophils.77l The ultrastructure of avian 
In general, eosinophil granules stain more intensely that
eosinophils reveals large. spherical, primary granules and
heterophil granules (Figs. 19.26, 19.27, and 19.28). The
mature, rod-shaped, specific granules. In some birds, the
cytoplasmic granules of eosinophils lack the central, refrac-
specific granules possess a crystalline core, a prominent
tile body seen in many avian heterophils. The cytoplasm of
feature of mammalian eosinophils; however, this feature is
eosinophils stains clear blue, in contrast to the colorless
missing in other species (e.g. chicken and duck).3 The larger
251
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
10.0μm
10.0μm
Figure 19.27 An eosinophil (arrow) and a heterophil (arrowhead) in the
Figure 19.29 An eosinophil with blue-staining granules in the blood 
blood film of an eagle (Aquifa chrysaetos). Wright-Giemmsa stain.
film of a parrot (Psitticus erithacus). Wright-Giemsa stain
福
20.0μm
Figure 19.28 An eosinophil (arrow) and a mildly toxic (1+) heterophil
Figure 19.30 A basophil (arrow) and a heterophil (arrowhead) in the
(arrowhead) in the blood filmn of a hawk (Buteo jamaicensis). Wright-
blood film of a chicken (Galus gallus domesticus). Wright-Giemnsa stain.
Giemsa stain.
eosinophils have been shown to participate in delayed
primary granules most likely are precursors to the smaller.
hypersensitivity reactions, a feature not seen with mam-
specific granules. Similar to mammalian eosinophils, specific 
malian eosinophils.
granules possess a high concentration of arginine and
Avian basophils tend to be smaller than heterophils
 enzymes, such as peroxidase, acid phosphatase, and arylsul-
and eosinophils. For example, basophils of adult Coturnix
fatase. Cytochemical staining of chicken eosinophils indicate 
quail measure 9.23 ± 1.35μm in diameter for males and
a positive reactivity for peroxidase, acid phosphatase, and
9.55 ±1.26μm in diameter in females.'3 Avian basophils
Sudan black B. Avian eosinophils (chicken and duck) contain
contain deeply metachromic granules that often obscure the
nucleus. The nucleus usually is nonlobed, thereby causing
ophils, but not neutrophils. Therefore, these reactions can
avian basophils to resemble mammalian mast cells (Figs.
be used to distinguish eosinophils from heterophils. Unlike
19.30 and 19.3l). The cytoplasmic granules of basophils
heterophils, avian eosinophils, although they are immotile
frequently are affected by alcohol-solubilized stains, and
and nonphagocytic, do respond to fMLP by forming surface
they may partially dissolve or coalesce and appear abnormal
 projections and clumping to form large aggregates. Avian
 in blood films stained with Romanowsky stains. Avian baso-
252
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds 
Figure 19.31 A basophil (arrow) in the blood filrm of a parrot (Eclectus
Figure 19.33 A small lymphocyte (arrow) in the blood film of a parrot
roratus). Wright-Giemsa stain
(Amazona oratrix). Wright-Giemmsa stain.
Figure 19.32 A small lymphocyte (arrow) in the blood film of a quail
ldoaay peiui ue pue (smane) saoydu wnia te'al anai
(Colinus virginianus). Wright-Giemsa stain.
(arrowhead) in the blood filrm of a parrot (Amazona aestiva). Wright-
Giemsa stain
phils frequently are found in the peripheral blood, in con-
are round cells that often show cytoplasmic irregularity
trast to mammalian basophils, which rarely are found in the
when they mold around adjacent erythrocytes in the blood
blood films of normal animals. The function of avian baso-
film. Lymphocytes have a round, occasionally slightly
phils is not known. However, it is presumed to be similar to
indented, centrally or slightly eccentrically positioned
that of mammalian basophils and mast cells, because their
nucleus. The nuclear chromatin is heavily clumped or retic-
cytoplasmic granules contain histamine. They also partici-
 ulated in mature lymphocytes, and the cytoplasm typically
pate in acute inflammatory and type IV hypersensitivity
is scant, except in large lymphocytes, thereby giving lym-
reactions.
phocytes their high nucleus:cytoplasm (N:C) ratio. Large 
Avian lymphocytes resemble mammalian lymphocytes
lymphocytes that resemble those found in bovine blood
and generally come in two sizes, small and medium (Figs.
films can also be found in the blood of normal birds. Large
19.32 through 19.36) .72.73 Small lymphocytes of adult Cotur-
lymphocytes can be confused with monocytes, however.
 sa  a u  to t 't aa  x
because of their size, cytoplasmic volume, and pale-staining
4.86 ± 0.22μm in diameter in females, whereas medium
nuclei. The lymphocyte cytoplasm usually appears to be
lymphocytes measure 7.73 ± 1.33 μm in diameter for males
homogenous and weakly basophilic (pale blue). and it 
and 8.53 ± 1.40 μm in diameter in females. 13 Typically. they
lacks both vacuoles and granules. Cytoplasmic features are
253
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
®
®
®
®
®
®
+
春
福
20.0 μmP
®
10.0 μm
®
福
福
Figure 19.35 A large lymphocyte (long arrow), heterophils (short
 Figure 19.37 A lymphocyte (arrow) and thrombocytes (arrowheads) in
arrow), and irnmature erythrocyte (arrowhead) in the blood film of a
the blood film of a chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus). Wright-Giemsa
conure (Aratinga solstitialis). Wright-Giemsa stain.
 stain.
®
®
、
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
?
?
®
®
®
®
O
20.0um
20.0 μm
C
®
Figure 19.36 Medium lymphocytes (long arrows), a small lyrmphocyte
Figure 19.38 A lymphocyte (arrow) and a thrombocyte (arrowhead) in
(short arrow), and a thrombocyte (arrowhead) in the blood filrm of a
the blood film of a parrot (Eclectus roratus). Wright-Giemsa stain.
chicken (Gallus gallus cfomesticus). Wright-Giermsa stain.
important when differentiating small lymphocytes from
cells, the significance of lymphocytes with azurophilic gran-
thrombocytes (Figs. 19.36 through 19.39). The latter have
ules is not known. Irregular cytoplasmic projections are
clear, colorless cytoplasm that often appears to be vacuo-
indicative of cellular degeneration, a significant finding if
lated, with a few distinct specific granules. Occasionally, cells 
 represented by the majority of lymphocytes.
in the blood films of birds have features of both thrombo-
Abnormal lymphocytes are classifed as either reactive or
cytes and lymphocytes. These intermediate cells have small,
blast-transformed lymphocytes. Reactive lymphocytes are
round to oval nuclei with coarsely clumped chromatin and
small to medium lymphocytes with heavily clumped nuclear
 moderately abundant, blue-tinged cytoplasm that lacks both
chromatin and deeply basophilic cytoplasm. Lymphocytes
vacuoles and granules. Cytochemical properties indicate
develop into reactive lymphocytes when antigenically stim-
these cellsto be lymphocytes. 74
cytes with dispersed, smooth nuclear chromatin, which may
contain nucleoli (Figs. 19.4l). They have basophilic cyto-
19.40). Although sometimes considered to be natural killer
plasm that may exhibit a prominent, clear, perinuclear halo
254
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
Figure 19.39 A lymphocyte (long arrow), thrombocytes (short arrows).
Figure 19.41 A reactive lymphocyte (long arrow). small mature 
and an irnmature erythrocyte (arrowhead) in the blood film of a conure
lyrmphocytes (short arrows), and thrombocytes (arrowheads) in the blood 
(Aratinga sofstitialis). A heterophil is also present in the lower left hand
filn of a chicken (Gallus galfus comesticus). Wright-Giemsa stain.
 cormer of the irnage. Wright-Giermsa stain
Figure 19.40 A lymphocyte with azurophilic granules (arrow) in the
Figure 19.42 A monocyte (arrow) and heterophils (arrowhead) in the
blood filrn of an owl (Strix varia). Wright-Giemnsa stain.
blood film of a conure (Aratinga sofstitialis). A thrombocyte is also
present in the upper right hand cormer of the irmage. Wright-Giemsa 
stain .
or Golgi zone. These lymphocytes have anaplastic features
and may be neoplastic, but they also may result from immu-
nologic stimulation.7 Plasma cells also can be found in the
Monocytes have abundant, blue-gray cytoplasm that may
peripheral blood of birds. These are large B lymphocytes
appear to be slightly opaque, and they contain vacuoles or 
with eccentrically positioned mature nuclei; abundant,
fine, dustlilke eosinophilic granules (Figs. 19.42 through
deeply basophilic cytoplasm; and a distinct Golgi zone. Lym-
19.44). Avian monocytes frequently exhibit two distinct
phocytes that contain prominent azurophilic granules are
zones in the cytoplasm: a light-staining perinuclear area, and
also considered to be reactive.
a darker-staining area. The monocyte nucleus can vary in
 '  a  n s 
shape and is relatively pale, with less chromatin clumping
they resemble their mammalian counterpart, varying in
compared with lymphocyte nuclei. The ultrastructure of
shape from round to ameboid. For example, monocytes of 
avian monocytes and macrophages reveals a cytoplasmic
adult Coturnix quail measure 13.53 ± 0.74μm in diameter
membrane that is composed of blebs or filaments, a promi-
for males and 13.26 ± 0.45μm in diameter in females.13
nent Golgi apparatus, many ribosomes, and a variable
255
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 19.43 Two monocytes in the blood film of a hawk (Buteo
jamaicensis). Wright-Giermsa stain.
Figure 19.45 The appearance of acidophils stained with phloxine dye in
 a hermocytometer chamber, 100x.
cytes also are similar in size. Therefore, direct and semidi-
rect,
.manual methods for obtaining total leukocyte
 concentrations in birds have been developed. A commonly
Used semidirect method involves the staining of avian het-
erophils and eosinophils with phloxine B as the diluent.2.73
Phloxine B commonly is used as a specific stain for eosino-
phils in mammalian blood. The procedure is simplified by
using the Eosinophil Unopette 5877 system (Becton-
Dickinson). which was developed for determining total
eosinophil concentrations in mammalian blood.7 The blood
10.0μm
is diluted 1: 32 with the phloxine B solution in the Unopette
vial using the 25-pμL pipette that is provided. After a
Neubauer-ruled hemacytometer chamber has been properly
loaded with the blood-phloxine mixture and allowed to
stand in a humid chamber for a minimum of 5 minutes, the
Figure 19.44 Eight monocytes and two heterophils in the blood film of
eosin-stained heterophils and eosinophils are counted in
a gannet (Morus sp) with a marked monocytosis. Wright-Giemsa stain
both sides of the chamber (18 large squares) (Fig. 19.45).
The hemacytometer should be loaded immediately after
number of pinocytic vesicles and lysosomes.3 Monocytes
proper mixing of the blood and phloxine diluent, because
exhibit phagocytic activity and migrate into tissues to become
red blood cells also may stain after prolonged exposure. The
macrophages.76 They possess biologically active chemicals
total heterophil and eosinophil concentration per cubic mil-
that are involved in inflammation and oxidative destruction
limeter of blood (heterophils + eosinophils/mm²) is calcu-
of invading organisms. Monocytes also have an important
lated using the formula for obtaining a total eosinophil
immunologic role in antigen processing.31
count in mammalian blood:
Laboratory evaluation
The presence of nucleated erythrocytes and thrombocytes in
avian blood precludes use of the routine methods used to
 count leukocytes in mammalian blood. Automated methods
The total leukocyte concentration (TwBC/mm') is calcu-
for counting white blood cells in mammalian blood produce
lated after completing a leukocyte differential using the
erroneous results when applied to avian blood, because all
following formula:
the cells in the peripheral blood of birds are nucleated.77
Also, the size of the erythrocytes is similar to the size of
many of the leukocytes; thrombocytes and small lympho-
256
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
The TwBC/mm? can be obtained using one calculation with
TWBC×100
Corrected TWBC/mm’ =
the following formula:
100 + No.immature RBCs
per l00 leukocytes
% Heterophils and eosinophils
With counting methods requiring use of a hemocytome-
ter, the difference between the counts obtained from each
where the number of eosin-stained cells are counted in both
chamber should not exceed 10% to ensure accuracy between
sides of the hemacytometer (18 large squares).
the two sides. If the difference does exceed l0%, the proce-
A direct method for obtaining total leukocyte concentra-
dure should be repeated. The semidirect method using the
tions in avian blood is to make a l:200 dilution with Natt-
phloxine stain is easier to perform and is more precise for
Herrick solution (Table 19.2) using a standard red blood
hemocytometer counting than the Natt and Herrick method.
cell-diluting pipette or by adding 20 μL of blood to 4mL of
To our knowledge, no comparisons have been made for the
the Natt-Herrick solution (Fig. 19.17)." The total leukocyte
toluidine blue method; however, the results should be
concentration is obtained by counting all the leukocytes
similar to those with the Natt and Herrick method. Because
the semidirect method using phloxine B stain for determina-
of the hemacytometer chamber using the following formula:
tion of total leukocyte counts in birds depends on the lell-
kocyte differential, especially the number of heterophils and
TWBC/mm² =(Total cells in nine large squares +10%)×200
eosinophils, it becomes less accurate as the level of mono-
nuclear leukocytes exceeds that of the granulocytes.
The advantage to this method is that a total erythrocyte
Crude estimation of the cell numbers from blood films is
and thrombocyte count also can be obtained using the same
an inappropriate method for obtaining a total leukocyte
charged hemacytometer. A disadvantage is that differentiat-
count in birds. Estimated leukocyte counts should be used
only when quantitative counts (i.e., phloxine B, Natt and
thus creating errors in the counts. Staining for 60 minutes
Herrick, or toluidine blue methods) are unavailable or as a
in the Natt-Herrick solution, however, improves the differ-
means of detecting submission or laboratory error (e.g., if
entiation between small lymphocytes and thrombocytes.
the number of leukocytes observed in a blood film appears 
A second method for obtaining a direct total leukocyte
to be less than that reported from a quantitative count).81
count in birds is to dilute the anticoagulated blood 1:100 with
Crude estimation of the leukocyte concentration in a well-
0.0l% toluidine blue in phosphate-buffered saline before
prepared blood film is made by obtaining the average
charging a Neubauer-ruled hemocytometer.s Cells that are
equal to or larger than the width of the erythrocytes are
immersion) fields and using the following formula:
 a al n s a  a  n
total leukocyte count is calculated using the standard formula:
Number of WBC in 5 fields
×3,500,000
Estimated WBC/mm² =
1000
9
Or, to simplify the math.
The number looo is the average number of erythrocytes in
five monolayer x1000 fields, and 3,500,000 is the approxi-
TWBC/mm² = (Number of cells +10%)×100
mate number of erythrocytes per cubic millimeter in birds
with normal PCVs. If the PCV is outside the normal range
Toluidine blue stains leukocytes blue, erythrocytes pale
of 35% to 55%, then the estimated count should be cor-
orange, and thrombocytes pale blue. Counting cells that are
rected for the PCV using the following formula:
equal to or larger than the width of erythrocytes should rule
out thrombocytes, which tend to be smaller in width than
Estimated WBC
erythrocytes. Small lymphocytes tend to be equal to or
x Observed PCV
Corrected Estimated WBC/mm? :
larger than the width of erythrocytes. Immature erythro-
Normal PCV (45%)
cytes are distinguished from small lymphocytes by their
round to irregular shape; their round, centrally positioned
   on i   a s
nucleus with dark, irregularly clumped chromatin; and their
mated total leukocyte count by determining the average
moderate volume of basophilic hyalin cytoplasm. A cor-
number of leukocytes per field in ten monolayer x40 (high-
rected total leukocyte concentration can be obtained when
 dry) fields and then multiplying by 2000.82
a large number of immature erythrocytes are present by
Accurate interpretation of leukocyte counts, especially
using the following formula:
when determined by the semidirect method, depends on the
257
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
accurate identification and differentiation of leukocytes in
avian leukogram values must differ greatly from the normal
the blood film.
reference intervals to have diagnostic significance.
In general, gender differences in the normal leukogram of
Responses in disease
birds are not clinically significant; however, age differences
Avian leukograms often vary widely between normal birds
can be. Generally, percentages of heterophils and lympho-
of the same species (Table 19.4). Because birds often become
cytes and absolute lymphocyte counts vary significantly
excited when handled, the blood collection process usually
between adult and juvenile birds where younger birds tend
results in a physiologic leukocytosis, and this physiologic
response increases the concentration of heterophils and
also be affected by seasonal influences, especially in free-
lymphocytes in the peripheral blood. Normal total leukocyte
ranging birds. For example, the absolute leukocyte, hetero-
reference intervals obtained from birds generally are broader
phil, and lymphocyte counts of ducks decrease during and
than those obtained from domestic mammals.2.s3 Thus.
 after the remige molt, a seasonal event.s4
Table 19.4 Leukocyte parameters for selected birds.
WBC x 10*/μL
Heterophils %
Lymphocytes %
Monocytes %
Eosinophils %
Basophils %
 Psittacines
 African grey parrotl.3
5-15
45-75
20-50
E-0
0-2
0-22
 Grey parrots
4.0-20.0
29-83
16-68
1-6
E-0
0
Amazon parrots1.2
6-11
30-75
20-65
E-0
0-1
0-5
Blue-fronted Amazons
4.7-11.0
12-47
52-84
1-3
0-1
0-1
Cuban Amazon5
1.9-24.7
19-28
71-75
0-5
0-5
0-1
Festive Ammazon5
2.2-7.0
22-32
94-99
014
0-2
0
Orange-wing Amazon5
1.2-10.1
22-41
56-73
2-5
0-5
0-2
Yellow Amazon5
2.2-7.2
12-52
48-80
8-0
0-1
0-1
Budgerigarl.3
8-2
40-65
20-45
011
0-1
0-1
Caiquel
8-15
39-72
20-61
0-2
0-2
0-2
Cockatiell.3
5-13
40-70
25-55
0-2
0-2
9-0
Cockatoos1,3
5-10
55-80
20-45
0-2
0-1
E-0
 Black cockatoos
3.7-22.1
7-61
06-EE
3-7
0
0-2
Palm cockatoos
1.4-17.6
24-75
24-69
1-7
0-1
0-1
White cockatoo5
1.3-18.7
18-83
15-80
014
0-1
0-1
Conures',3
4-13
40-70
20-50
E-0
E-0
0-5
Golden conures
4.2-8.0
22-49
49-69
1-3
0-2
0
 Patagonian conures
2.5-8.7
24-63
99-56
E-0
0-1
0
Eclectus parrot1.3
9-20
35-50
45-65
0-2
0-1
E-0
Grey-cheek parakeet'
4.5-12.0
40-75
20-60
E-0
0-1
0-5
Jardine's parrot!
4-10
55-75
25-45
0-2
0-1
0-1
Loryl
8-13
40-60
22-69
0-2
0-1
0-1
Red Lonys
0.8-9.0
26-79
19-70
5-0
0-5
0-1
Lovebird!,3
3-16
40-75
20-55
0-2
0-1
9-0
Macawl.3
7-22
40-60
35-60
E-0
0-1
0-1
 Blue and gold macaws
1.7-36.0
13-60
36-84
0-2
0-2
0-2
Green-wing macaw5
0'00-8'5
14-62
35-84
8-0
E-0
0-2
Hyacinthine macaws
1.5-19.2
52-89
10-77
0-2
014
0
 Military macaws
13.7-18.0
12-63
43-80
8-0
0-2
0-1
Scarlet macaws
4.7-22.0
26-67
89-9E
8-0
014
0-2
 Pionus parrot
4.0-11.5
50-75
25-45
0-2
0-2
0-1
Quaker1.3
4-10
55-80
20-45
014
0-2
9-0
Senegal parrot!
4-14 
55-75
25-45
0-2
0-1
0-1
Others
Canany.3
4-9
50-80
20-45
O-1
0-2
0-1
Finch 1.3
8-E
20-65
20-65
0-1
0-1
0-5
258
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
Table 19.4 (Continued)
WBC x 10²/μL
Heterophils %
Lymphocytes %
Monocytes %
Eosinophils %
Basophils %
Mynah'
6-11
25-65
20-60
E-0
E-0
0-7
Toucan 
4-10
35-65
25-50
0-4
0-5
Pigeonl.2
1.3-2.3
50-60
20-40
E-0
E-0
E-0
Chicken 1l,3
0.9-3.2
15-50
29-84
0-7
0-16
0-8
 Ringneck pheasant!
1.8-3.9
12-30
28-29
2-9
0-1
E-0
Turkey!
1.6-2.5
29-52
35-48
3-10
0-5
6-0
Quaill
1.3-2.5
25-50
50-70
0-4
0-15
0-2
Canada goose
1.3-1.9
*Mallard duck 4 
2.3-2.5
35-40
52-56
9-0
0-1
014
**Mallard duck4
2.3-2.5
27-31
64-68
E-0
0-1
E-0
Golden eagle
1.2-1.5
81-86
14-22
0-1
2-5
0-1
 Peregrine falcon
3.3-11.0
1-9
1-3
0-1
0-1
0-1
Tawny owl6
4.0-59.0
1.6-9.6 x 10/μL
2.1-7.2 x 103/μL
0-0.5 × 10°/μL
0.2-3.0 x 103/μL
0.1-0.4 x 10/μL
White-back vulture?
1.3-2.0
1.5-25.9 x 10²/μl
0-4.8 x 10/μL
0-3.7 x 10°/μL
0-2.2 x 10/μl
 0-0 x 10°/μL
+ January.
*+ June.
1.Pollack C, Carpenter JW, Antinoff N. In: Birds, 3rd ed. J Carpenter ed. Exotic Animal Formuiary. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders, 2005
2.Tell, LA, and SB Citino. Hematologic and serum chemistry reference intervals for Cuban A mazon parrots (Amazona leucocephala feucocephala)
J Zoo and Wildlife Med 1992: 23: 62-4.
 s  'sinon is 'sa zo s 'uaso  aui e yo jenue u saln Asao pue pola  Aes
4.Carmpbell TW. Normal hermatology of waterfowl. Eedited by B. Feldrman, J. Zinkl and M. Jain. 5 ed, Scham's Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
5.Polo FJ, Peinado Vl. Viscor G, Palormeque J. Hematologic and plasma chemmistry values in captive psittacine birds. Avian Diseases 1998; 42: 523-35
6Spagnolo V, Crippa, V, Marzia A, Alberti I, Sartorelli P. Hematologic, biochemical, and protein electrophoretic values in captive tawny owls [Strix
altuco]. Vet Clin Pathof 2008; 37: 225-8.
7-Naidoo V, Diekmann M, Wolters K, Swan GE. Establishment of selected baseline blood chermistry and hermatologic pararmeters in captive and 
wild-caught African white-backed vultures [Gyps africanaus] .  Wild Dis 2008; 44: 649-54.
The general causes of a leukocytosis in birds include
t0 moderate, mature heterophilia and lymphopenia 929 The
inflammation, which may be associated with infectious or
heterophil:lymphocyte (H:L) ratio has been used as an
noninfectious causes, toxicities (i.e zinc), hemorrhage into
a body cavity, rapidly growing neoplasms, and leukemia. A
unreliable indicator of stress owing to the lack of correlation
leukocyte differential aids in the assessment of a leukocyto-
between that ratio and plasma corticosterone concentra-
sis. Because leukocytosis often is caused by inflammation, a
tions. The magnitude of leukocytosis and heterophilia during
heterophilia usually is present as well. The magnitude of the
disease or corticosteroid excess varies with the H:L ratio.
 heterophilia depends on both the cause and the severity of
with greater responses being seen in species with normal
 the inflammation: the greater the degree of heterophilia, the
H : L ratios of 3.0 : 1 versus those with ratios of 0.5: 1. Initially.
greater the severity of the inflammation. A leukocytosis and
species that normally have high numbers of circulating lym-
 heterophilia can be associated with inflammation in response
phocytes (e.g., Anseriformes) may show a leukopenia but,
to localized or systemic infections caused by a spectrum of
later (i.e., up to 12 hours) demonstrate typical leukocytosis.
infectious agents (i.e., bacteria, fungi, Chlamydophila, viruses.
heterophilia, and lymphopenia. Species that normally have
and parasites) and noninfectious causes (i.e., traumatic
greater numbers of circulating heterophils (e.g.. galliformes)
show a less dramatic change in the stress leukogram.
kocytosis and heterophilia often are associated with diseases
Immature heterophils rarely are present in the peripheral
produced by common avian pathogens, such as Chla-
blood of normal birds. When they do occur, however, their
A slight to
presence usually results from excessive peripheral utilization
moderate leukocytosis in birds also can occur with excess
of mature heterophils, with depletion of the mature storage
endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids (stress leuko-
pool in the hematopoietic tissue that indicates a severe
gram). A corticosteroid-induced leukocytosis reveals a slight
inflammatory response, especially when associated with a
259
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
leukopenia. Marked increases in the concentration of imma-
of toxic heterophils or by following the decreasing leukocyte
count with serial leukograms. Bone marrow evaluation also
which is a rare condition in birds.
may be helpful. In general, a degenerative response in the
Toxic heterophils are associated with severe, systemic
leukogram of a bird indicates a poor prognosis for survival.
illness such as septicemia. viremia. chlamydophilosis,
As discussed, leukopenia and lymphopenia can occur as an
mycotic infections, and severe tissue necrosis. The degree of
early, corticosteroid-induced leulkogram response in some
heterophil toxicity usually indicates the severity of the bird's
species of birds. Leukopenias and lymphopenia also may
condition, and a marked number of 4+ toxic heterophils
 suggest a viral cause, although such causes have been poorly
indicates a grave prognosis.
documented in birds.1o Leukopenia and lymphopenia has
Hematological indicators of inflammation are species and
been associated with mycotoxins poisoning and other toxici-
etiologic dependent; however, the presence of a mild to mod-
ties in birds.40,64,101,102
erate anemia, heterophilia, monocytosis, and heterophil
Lymphocytosis may occur with antigenic stimulation. An
morphological atypia appears to be the most consistent hema-
occasional reactive lymphocyte may be found in blood films
tologic changes associated with inflammation in birds. Inter-
from normal birds: however, many reactive lymphocytes
pretive guidelines have been developed for some species of
suggest antigenic stimulation associated with infectious
birds. For example, in free-ranging black cockatoos (Calypto-
disease (Fig. 19.41). Lymphocytosis also can occur with lym-
rhynchus spp). anemia can be graded based upon a PCV of
30-35% as a mild anemia, 20-30% as moderate anemia, and
less than 20% as severe anermia.87 A mild leukocytosis in
present in the blood film. A marked lymphocytosis in which
black cockatoos is represented by a leukocyte count less than
25,000/μL, whereas a count between 25.000 and 40,000/μL
with scalloped cytoplasmic margins also has been associated
with lymphoid neoplasia.104
responses respectively. Significant heterophilias in black
Lymphopenia can occur with glucocorticosteroid excess,
cockatoos are represented by counts less than 20,000/μL as
which may be more pronounced in some avian species than
mild, 2l,000-30,000/μL as moderate, and greater than
others. Immunosuppressive drugs also may cause lympho-
 30.0oo/μL as severe. Toxic heterophils were not a common
penia. Lymphopenia may also be associated with toxicities.
finding in black cockatoos with inflammatory disorders.
such as zinc intoxication.105
 In contrast to black cockatoos, the inflammatory response
Monocytosis often is associated with infectious diseases
in falcons (Faico spp) appears different. Normal falcons in
caused by organisms that typically cause granulomatous
general are reported to have a PCV between 37% and 53%:
inflammation, such as Mycobacterium and Chlamydophila, and
hemoglobin concentration between 12 and 2l g/dL; total
fungi, such as Aspergillus. Chronic bacterial granulormas and
leukocyte count between 3000 and 11,000 μL; and an abso-
massive tissue necrosis also may result in monocytosis. In
lute heterophil count greater than the absolute lymphocyte
most situations, a monocytosis is most commonly associated
count.$ Falcons rarely exhibit a leukocytosis greater than
with a concurrent heterophilia. A monocytosis has been
17,00o/ μL in response to inflammation regardless of the
seen in certain nutritional deficiencies, such as zinc defi-
etiology. Aspergillosis, a common mycotic disease of birds,
ciency, as well.10s.106
 Because the exact functions of avian eosinophils are not
however that response is variable between the species. For
known, interpreting the cause of peripheral eosinophilia is
example, falcons (Faico spp) with aspergillosis develop a
difficult in birds. Although this avian granulocyte was given
relatively mild leukocytosis compared to Buteo hawks that
the name "eosinophil," avian eosinophils may behave dif-
demonstrate a severe leukocytosis.96-9s
ferently than mammalian eosinophils. Studies have shown
Leukopenia is associated with either consumption of
 that avian eosinophils may participate in delayed (type IV)
peripheral leukocytes or decreased production. Heteropenia
hypersensitivity reactions, a participation that does not 
results from decreased survival of mature heterophils or
occur with mammalian eosinophils.ip7 Experiments using
from decreased or ineffective production. Leukopenias asso-
ciated with heteropenias can occur with severe bacterial
philias, although eosinophilias associated with gastrointesti-
infections or certain viral diseases (e.g., Pacheco's parrot
nal nematode infestations have been reported.ios The
disease)." Leukopenia and heteropenia with the presence of
responses of avian eosinophils to inflammation are variable
immature heterophils suggest exhaustion of the mature het-
and have not been reliably associated with a specific etiol-
erophil storage pool because of excessive peripheral demand
ogy. Despite limited knowledge regarding the function of
for heterophils, as seen with severe inflammation. A degen-
avian eosinophils, peripheral eosinophilia in birds can be
erative response is reflected by a leukopenia, heteropenia.
loosely interpreted as being a response to internal or exter-
immature heterophils, and toxic heterophils. Degenerative
nal parasitism or exposure to foreign antigens (i.e., hyper-
s a    a  ssn
 sensitivity response).
260
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
Eosinopenia may be difficult to document in birds. If
and may participate in removing foreign materials from the
present, it is expected to be associated with a stress response
blood.72.111
or with administra tion of glucocorticosteroids.
Basophilia is rare in birds. Because avian basophils
Laboratory evaluation
produce, store, and release histamine, they may have a func-
The thrombocyte concentration of most avian species studied
tion similar to that of mammalian basophils. Therefore.
ranges between 20,000 and 30.000 cells/mm'. or 10-15
avian basophils may participate in immediate hypersensitiv.
thrombocytes per loo0 erythrocytes. The actual thrombo-
ity reactions, release mediators for thrombocyte activation.
cyte concentration is difficult to determine, because throm-
cause smooth muscle contractions, initiate edema, and affect
coagulation.6 Basophils appear to participate in the initial
is reported as either normal, increased, or decreased, based
phase of acute inflammation in birds; however, this usually
on estimates made from peripheral blood films. Approxi-
is not reflected as a basophilia on the leukogram.'b Periph-
mately one to five thrombocytes can be seen in a monolayer
eral basophilia may suggest early inflammation or an imme-
xl0oo (oil-immersion) feld in a blood flm from a normal
diate hypersensitivity reaction in birds. A stress-related
bird, unless the thrombocytes clump excessively during
basophilia occurs in chickens subjected to food restriction,
preparation. Thrombocytopenia is suggested by thrombo-
but this response may be age or duration dependent.57,110
cyte numbers less than one per monolayer xlooo field, and
tration can be obtained with the same hemacytometer used
Thrombocytes and hemostasis
for obtaining total leukocyte and erythrocyte counts with
the Natt and Herrick method. The number of thrombocytes
Morphology
counted in the central large square on both sides of the
Thrombocytes are nucleated cells that are found in the
Neubauer-ruled hemocytometer is multiplied by 1o00 to
peripheral blood of birds. They tend to be round to oval cells
obtain the number of thrombocytes per microliter of blood.
with a round to oval nucleus that contains densely clumped
An estimated thrombocyte count can be obtained from the 
chromatin. They are generally the smallest cell in the periph-
blood film using the same formula as that for estimation of
eral blood, but only slightly smaller than small mature lym-
the total leukocyte count by counting the average number
phocytes. For example, thrombocyte measurements for
of thrombocytes in 5 oil immersion [xl0oo] fields:
adult Coturnix quail are 4.l0 ±0.30μm in diameter for
males and 4.06 ± 0.32μrm in diameter for females.13 The
 'sau aa    ao si s
cells have a high N:C ratio. Normal, mature thrombocytes
have a colorless to pale-gray cytoplasm, which often has a
reticulated appearance. The appearance of the cytoplasm is
Again, if the PCV is outside the normal range of 35-55%.
an important feature in differentiating thrombocytes from
then the estimated thrombocyte count should be adjusted
small, mature lymphocytes (Figs. 19.36 through 19.39 and 
for the PCV as follows:
19.4l). Cytoplasmic vacuolation can occur in activated or
phagocytic thrombocytes. Thrombocytes frequently contain
one or more distinct eosinophilic (specific) granules, which
usually are located in one area of the cytoplasm. Thrombo-
cytes participate in the hemostatic process and, like mam-
malian platelets, tend to clump in blood films. Activated
Responses in disease
thrombocytes occurring in aggregates may have indistinct
Avian thrombocytes are derived from mononuclear precur-
 cellular outlines or cytoplasmic pseudopodia.
sors in the bone marrow. Immature thrombocytes occasion-
Ultrastructurally, the cytoplasm resembles that of mam-
ally are present in the peripheral blood of birds. They are
malian platelets. The granules that frequently are seen in
round to oval cells with round to oval nuclei and basophilic
thrombocytes at light microscopy appear as aggregates of
cytoplasm compared with mature thrombocytes (Fig. 19.46).
many small granules at electron microscopy.3 The specific
The mid and late immature thrombocytes most commonly
granules contain primarily 5'-hydroxytryptamine, and they
are an unlikely source of thromboplastin.s Thrombocytes
of avian hematopoiesis). The presence of immature throm-
aggregated in clumps show degranulation of specific gran-
bocytes usually indicates a regenerative response to exces-
ules, cellular degeneration, and nuclear pyknosis. Avian
sive utilization of thrombocytes. Young birds tend to have
thrombocytes contain a large amount of serotonin, and
relatively higher numbers of circulating thrombocytes than
some studies suggest that they are capable of phagocytosis
adult birds.
261
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
20.0
20.0μm
Figure 19.46 Immature thrombocytes (arrows) and a mature
Figure 19.47 Haermoproteus gametocytes (long arrows), heterophils
thrombocyte (arrowhead) in the blood film of a parrot (Eclectus roratus).
(short arrows), and a monocyte (arrowhead) in the blood film of an owl
Wright-Giermsa stain .
(Bubo virginianus). Wright-Giernsa stain.
Thrombocytopenia results from either decreased bone
Plasmodium and the family Leucocytozoidae: Leukocytozoon
marrow production or excessive peripheral utilization or
are the most commonly encountered parasites in avian
destruction. Decreased thrombocyte concentrations often
 blood films.214-119 Their identification usually can be made
are associated with severe septicemia and, possibly, diffuse
using the stains commonly used for evaluating blood cells.
intravascular coagulation.
Films made from fresh blood, without addition of an anti-
The initial hemostatic plug of birds is formed through the
coagulant, provide samples with fewer artifacts affecting the
adhesion and aggregation of thrombocytes, and the second-
parasite.
ary hemostatic plug develops through the coagulation
cascade after injury to a blood vessel wall. Most clotting
Haemoproteus
factors involved in avian blood coagulation are similar to
Protozoan blood parasites of the genus Haemoproteus are
those in mammals. Although evidence suggests an intrinsic
common in many species of wild birds. The only forms of
clotting mechanism in some avian species, coagulation of
the parasite in the peripheral blood of birds are gametocytes.
avian blood appears to depend on the extrinsic clotting
which range in size from small, developing. ring forms to
system, which involves the release of tissue thromboplastin
 the elongate, crescent-shaped, mature gametocyte that par-
(i.e., factor I)."2 The extrinsic and common pathways can
tially encircles the erythrocyte nucleus to form the charac-
be evaluated using a one-step prothrombin time test. Avian
teristic "halter shape" (Fig. 19.47). The mature gametocyte
brain thromboplastin is required for avian prothrombin time
typically occupies greater than half the cytoplasmic volume
testing. because commercially available rabbit-brain throm-
of the host erythrocyte, and it causes minimal displacement
boplastin and other mammalian sources give unreliable
of the host cell nucleus: the nucleus is never pushed to the
results in birds.12.13 The normal prothrombin time for most
cell margin. Haemoproteus gametocytes contain refractile.
birds is 13 seconds or less. Studies suggest that the source of
yellow to brown pigment granules that represent iron
thromboplastin should be from the brain of the same species
pigment deposited as a result of hemoglobin utilization.
of bird as the patient for accurate prothrombin time
 Macrogametocytes stain dark blue with Romanowsky stains
determinations.112
and have iron pigment dispersed throughout the cytoplasm
 Whole blood (capillary) clotting times in birds usually are
of the parasite, whereas microgametocytes stain pale blue to
less than 5 minutes: however, normal values appear to range
us e o  nd un aa  
between 2 and 10 minutes. The whole-blood clotting time
mass. Occasionally, extraerythrocytic macrogametes and
is more variable than the prothrombin time.
microgametes can be found in blood films, especially those
made from blood collected several hours before the film was
actually prepared (Fig. 19.48). Extraerythrocytic macroga-
Blood parasites
metes are round and resemble those within erythrocytes.
Microgametes are small, spindle-shaped structures scattered
 The three genera of hemosporidian parasites in the phylum
throughout the blood film (Fig. 19.49). Usually, these forms
Apicomplexa in the family Plasmodiidae: Haemoproteus and
are found in the midgut of the insect host after a blood meal.
262
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
mere produces numerous merozoites that escape into the
bloodstream when the endothelial cell and cytomeres
rupture. Merozoites enter erythrocytes to become gameto-
cytes, which then are ingested by insect hosts to complete
the cycle.
The pathogenicity of Haemoproteus generally is low, and
parasitized birds rarely show evidence of disease. Clinical
disease, however, can occur in certain avian species, such as 
pigeons. jays, and quail, nestlings, and in birds suffering
from other diseases that, perhaps, result in immunodeficien-
cies.2.1zz-124 Mortalities associated with this parasite may also
be the result of infections in aberrant hosts. The clinical signs
include hemolytic anemia, anorexia, and depression. Hepa-
tomegaly and splenomegaly may be observed at postmortem
evaluation. Death may be associated with severe anemia and
 n   sn siu 
Figure 19.48 Haemoproteus gametocytes (long arrows) and an
megaloschizont-associated lesions (preerythrocytic stage)
extracellular macrogarmetocyte (short arrow) in the blood film of an owl
rather than the intraerythrocytic gametocytes.
(Bubo virginianus). Wright-Giernsa stain.
The degree of parasitemia associated with Haemoproteus
can be used as an index to assess the recovery of birds.
especially raptors, from traumatic injuries or diseases. For
example, an injured raptor may present with marked Hae-
moproteus parasitemia; with greater than 15% of the eryth-
rocytes being affected. As the bird recovers from its injuries.
however, the parasitemia decreases dramatically. Presum-
ably, this represents an improved immune status of the bird.
The intensity of the hematozoan infection can be calculated
from manual quantification of 2000 erythrocytes; however.
this method is significantly lower than the intensity calcu-
The later allows for a precise method to quantify infections 
of low to moderate intensity.
20.0un
Plasmodium
Parasites of the genus Plasmodium can be pathogenic and
responsible for malaria, which affects certain species of birds
Figure 19.49 Haemoproteus gametocytes and an extracelular
(e.g., canaries, penguins, ducks, pigeons, raptors, and
mnicrogarnetocyte (arrows) in the blood film of a kestrel (Failco sparverius).
domestic poultry). Many avian species appear to be asymp-
Wright-Giermsa stain.
tomatic carriers of the parasite, however, and do not develop
the clinical disease. Outbreaks of avian malaria occur
sporadically in endemic areas, especially during seasons
Bloodsucking insect vectors, such as hippoboscid flies
associated with increased mosquito populations. Clinical
(Hippoboscidae) and midges of the genus Culicoides (Cerato-
signs associated with avian malaria include anemia.
pogonidae), transmit Haemoproteus.12 The insect host ingests
anorexia, depression, and acute death. The hemogram often
gametocytes when it feeds, and the parasites then undergo
a series of developmental stages to become sporozoites
Hemoglobinuria or biliverdinuria also may occur. Spleno-
within the salivary gland. Sporozoites are injected into the
megaly and hepatomegaly often are seen on postmortem
new avian host when the insect feeds. The sporozoites enter
examination.
the bird's vascular endothelial cells in various tissues (pri-
 Detection of Plasmodium is based on presence of the organ-
marily the lung. liver, bone marrow, and spleen) and then
ism in blood films. Unlike Haemoproteus, stages other than
undergo schizogony.'2l Haemoproteus schizonts occasionally
the gametocyte, such as schizonts and trophozoites, can be
are found in cytologic or histologic samples of infected
found within erythrocytes, thrombocytes, and leukocytes
tissue, and they appear as large, round cysts containing
(Figs. 19.50 and 19.51). Certain Plasmodium sp. have round
numerous multinucleated bodies or cytomeres. Each cyto-
to irregular gametocytes that cause marked displacement of
263
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 19.50 Plasmodium gametocytes (arrows) and schizogony
Figure 19.52 Leukocytozoon macrogarmetocytes (arrows) and
(arrowhead) in the blood filr of a skua (Stercorarius skua). Wright-
 microgarmetocytes (arrowheads) in the blood filrn of a hawk (Buteo
Giemsa stain.
jamaicensis). Wright-Giemsa stain
appear to be fused, which is in contrast to mature merozo-
ites, which appear to be distinct bodies and separate frorm
each other. Identification of the Plasmodium species depends
on the location and appearance of the schizonts and
gametocytes.
The life-cycle of Plasmodium is similar to that of Haemopro-
feus, except that mosquitoes (Culicidae) act as intermediate
hosts and schizogony occurs in the red blood and endothelial
 cells of various organs.67 The key features used to differenti-
ate Plasmodium from Haemoproteus are the presence of schi-
zogony in the peripheral blood, parasite stages within
thrombocytes and leukocytes, and gametocytes causing
marked displacement of the erythrocyte nucleus.?
Leukocytozoon
Figure 19.51 Plasmodium gametocytes (arrow) and schizogony
Leukocytozoon, which is a protozoan parasite commonly
(arrowhead) in the blood filmn of a skua (Stercorarius skua). Wright-
found in the blood of wild birds, is identified by large, dark-
Giemsa stain.
staining macrogametocytes or light-staining microgameto-
cytes. The large gametocytes grossly distort the infected host
 cell, thereby elongating and distending the cell and making
the host-cell nucleus, whereas other species have elongate
the identification of the cell diffcult (Fig. 19.52).12 Some
gametocytes that do not displace the host-cell nucleus.121
parasitologists believe that immature erythrocytes rather
Like those of Haemoproteus, Plasmodium gametocytes contain
than leukocytes, as suggested by the name of the parasite.
refractile, yellow to brown, iron pigment granules, which
serve as the host cell for Leukocytozoon.12 As with Haemopro-
tend to be scattered, and macrogametocytes stain deeper
teus, only the gametocytes of Leukocytozoon occur in the
blue than microgametocytes. Plasmodium trophozoites are
peripheral blood. Parasitized cells appear to have two nuclei:
small, round to oval, ameboid forms containing a large
a dark-staining. host-cell nucleus that lies along the cell
vacuole that pushes the parasite nucleus to one edge.
membrane; and a pale pink-staining. parasite nucleus that
thereby giving the trophozoite a "signet-ring" appearance.
lies adjacent to the host-cell nucleus. Leukocytozoon gameto-
Schizonts are round to oval inclusions that contain several
cytes do not contain the refractile pigment granules seen in
deeply staining merozoites; the number of merozoites is
the gametocytes of Haemoproteus and Plasmodium.
used to determine the Plasmodium species. Schizonts with
Leukocytozoon is transmitted by black flies (Simulidae).
developing merozoites exhibit clusters of merozoites that
264
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
the blood of susceptible avian species. The sporozoites invade
panosoma, and Borrelia. Atoxoplasma is a coccidian parasite
the endothelial and parenchymal cells of various tissues
that often is found in passerine birds, which can be highly
such as the liver, heart, and kidney, in which schizogony
pathogenic, especially to canaries. 128 It is transmitted directly
occurs. Schizonts mature and then rupture to release mero-
via oocysts in the feces. Atoxoplasmosis is diagnosed on the
zoites that infect erythrocytes and, possibly, leukocytes.
basis of demonstrating characteristic sporozoites within the
Merozoites become gametocytes in the peripheral blood or
lymphocytes on peripheral blood films or cytologic imprints
are ingested by macrophages to become megaloschizonts in
of the liver, spleen, or lung. The sporozoites appear as pale,
tissues such as the liver, lung. and kidney. Megaloschizonts
eosinophilic, round to oval, intracytoplasmic inclusions within
 also release merozoites that develop into gametocytes.
lymphocytes, monocytes, or macrophages in Romanowsky-
The pathogenicity of Leu kocytozoon usually is low; however.
stained preparations (Fig. 19.54). The sporozoites indent the
certain species can be highly pathogenic for some birds, such
host lymphocyte nucleus, thereby resulting in a character-
as young waterfowl and turkeys. 126,17 The clinical signs asso-
istic crescent shape. Sporozoites of Atoxoplasma lack pigment
ciated with this parasite include anemia, anorexia, and
granules, but detection of Afoxoplasma in the peripheral
depression. Clinical laboratory evaluation may reveal a
blood can be improved by using a preparation of a buffy-coat
hemolytic anemia, leukocytosis, and elevated serum
film to concentrate the leukocytes for examination.
enzymes such as aspartate aminotransferase or alanine ami-
 Aegyptianella is a minute parasite of avian erythrocytes
notransferase, thereby suggesting hepatocellular necrosis.
that lacks pigment granules. It is a piroplasma that can affect 
 Postmortem findings may include splenomegaly and hepa-
several avian species, usually those originating in tropical or
tomegaly with hepatic necrosis.
subtropical climates. Aegyptianella pullorum occurs in chick-
ens, geese, ducks, and turkeys. The organism is detected by
Microfilaria
demonstrating the developing forms within erythrocytes in
Microfilaria of filarial nematodes commonly are found in the
blood films (Fig. 19.55). Three forms can occur. One form,
peripheral blood of many species of birds (Fig. 19.53). The
the initial body, is a small, anaplasma-like structure that is
adult filarial nematodes usually are not seen unless they
less than l mm in diameter and appears as a round, baso-
occur in peripheral locations, such as in the fluid of dis-
philic, intracytoplasmic inclusion. A second form is a round-
tended joints. Adult filarial nematodes may occur anywhere
to piriform-shaped inclusion with pale-blue cytoplasm and
within the body of birds, but they most frequently are seen
a chromatin body at one pole resembling those of Babesia.
in the air sacs, subcutaneously, or in the body cavities. Most
The third form is a larger (2-4 mm), round to elliptical inclu-
of these parasites are considered to be nonpathogenic and
sion. Aegypfianella can be pathogenic, resulting in anemia,
cause little harm to their host.
anorexia, and diarrhea. Postmortem findings include sple-
nomegaly. hepatomegaly. and hepatic as well as renal
Less common avian blood parasites
degeneration.
Other parasites that are seen less frequently in the periph-
Trypanosomes (Trypanosoma) occasionally are found in
eral blood of birds include Atoxoplasma, Aegyptianella, Try-
the peripheral blood of wild birds, especially passerines.
20.0um
Figure 19.53 A microfilaria in the blood film of a cockatoo (Cacatua
Figure 19.54 Atoxopiasma inclusions within lymphocytes from a buffy
mofuccensis). Wright-Giemsa stain.
coat film of a thrush (Garru/ax chinensis). Wright-Giernsa stain.
265
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
mature birds is more diffuse and is found in a variety of
tissues.13 During embryonic development, granulocyte stem
cells colonize to create foci of granulopoiesis in the spleen,
kidney, lungs, thymus, gonad, pancreas, and other tissues.
including the bone marrow.,4,131,132 The bone marrow also
provides an 
environment for lymphocyte maturation.
Because it is the most readily available source of hemato-
poietic tissue in birds, the bone marrow is used to evaluate
disorders of blood cells. Cytologic evaluation of the bone
marrow is indicated in avian patients with nonregenerative
anemia, heteropenia, and other unexplained alterations
involving the cellular elements in circulating blood.
Bone marrow collection
Marrow samples for cytologic evaluation can be successfully
obtained in most avian species via bone marrow aspiration.
The best source of bone marrow for most birds is the proxi
Figure 19.55 Aegyptianella inclusions within erythrocytes of a parrot
mal tibiotarsus, because the procedure at this location is
(Amazona finschi). Wright-Giemsa 5tain.
relatively simple.? Marrow may also be collected from the
sternum (keel),. however, and from most of the long bones.
except the pneumatic bones. A general anesthetic usually is
galliformes, waterfowl, and pigeons. They are transmitted
not required, but a local anesthetic can be used with caution
by biting insects such as mosquitoes, hippoboscid flies, and
in large birds. The type of biopsy needle used for aspiration
blackflies or mites. Avian trypanosomes resemble those
depends on the size of the bird, location of the biopsy site.
found in mammals. They have an undulating membrane; a
and preference of the cytologist. Biopsy needles commonly
slender, tapering posterior end; and a short, anteriorly
Used for bone marrow collection in both domestic mammals
directed flagellum. Trypanosomes usually are considered to
and humans (Jamshidi bone marrow biopsy-aspiration
be an incidental finding.
needles and disposable Jamshidi Illinois-Sternal/lliac aspira-
Borrelia anserina is the causative agent of avian spirochet-
tion needles, Kormed Corp., Minneapolis, MN) can be used
osis, which can affect several species of birds, especially
for marrow collection in birds. The pediatric sizes are pre-
galliformes and waterfowl. It is transmitted by arthropod
ferred, however, because of the relatively small bone size in
vectors such as ticks and mites. Borrelia is a loosely spiraled
most birds compared with mammals. Spinal needles con-
spirochete that tapers into fine filaments and is found free
taining a stylet can be used for marrow collection in very
in the plasma. During the acute stages of the disease, the
small birds.
organism is spiral shaped; however, as the disease progresses
The procedure for collecting bone marrow from the proxi-
and the bird nears death, the organism may appear abnor-
mal tibiotarsus begins with application of a skin disinfectant.
mal or clumped and often is difficult to find. In acute avian
as for any surgical procedure. The medial or cranial aspect
spirochetosis, affected birds are depressed, anemic, and
of the proximal tibiotarsus just below the femoral-tibiotarsal
weak. Postmortem findings include splenomegaly and hepa-
joint is a suitable location for aspiration, because only a
tomegaly. Birds recovering from the disease exhibit a regen-
minimal amount of soft tissue overlies the bone in this area.
erative anemia.
After application of a local anesthetic, a small incision is
made using a scalpel blade to facilitate passage of the needle
through the skin. The needle with stylet is placed against
Hematopoiesis
the bone (Figs. 19.56 and 19.57), and using gentle pressure
and rotary movements, the needle then is advanced into
Bone marrow
the marrow cavity. A perpendicular approach to the bone
The bone marrow is the primary site for erythropoiesis.
should be used. The hand not being used to manipulate
granulopoiesis, and thrombopoiesis during late embryonic
the needle is used to stabilize the tibiotarsus. Once the
development and post-hatched birds. 122 In some adult birds,
needle is positioned into the marrow cavity. the stylet is
removed, and a 6- to 12-mL syringe is attached (Figs. 19.58
marrow primarily is associated with erythropoiesis and, pos-
and 19.59). Marrow is aspirated into the lumen of the needle
sibly, thrombopoiesis, with only a small reserve of granulo-
by applying negative pressure to the syringe using the
poiesis compared to that of mammalian bone marrow.
 syringe plunger (Figs. 19.60 and 19.61). Excessive or pro-
Therefore, compared with mammals. granulopoiesis in
longed negative pressure should be avoided to minimize
266
Figure 19.59 Removal of the stylet fromm a spinal needle placed in the
Figure 19.56 Placement of a Jammshidi Illinois-Sternal/liac aspiration 
proximal tibiotarsus of a pigeon (Columba fivia).
needle (Kormed Corp, Minneapolis, MN) in the proximal tibiotarsus of a
flamingo chick (Phoenicopterus ruber).
Figure 19.60 Aspiration of a bone marrow sample frorm a Jarmshidi
Figure 19.57 Placement of a spinal needle in the proximal tibiotarsu5
llinois-Sternal/liac aspiration needle (Kormed Corp. Minneapolis, MN)
of a pigeon (Columba livia).
snaidosuaoua) yiyo ohuiell e jo snseioian leixod aur u pareld
ruber).
Figure 19.58 Remmoval of the stylet fromm a Jammshidi Illinois-Sternal/liac
aspiration needle (Kormed Corp. Minneapolis, MN) placed in the proximal 
alaau leuids e woy aldwes moeu auog e jo uoends g'bl anoi
tibiotarsus of a flarmingo chick (Phoenicopterus ruber).
 placed in the proximal tibiotarsus of a pigeon (Columba livia).
267
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
blood contamination of the marrow sample. Unlilke collec-
In addition to estimating the degree of cellularity and
tion of bone marrow from most mammals, avian marrow
evaluating the distribution of cell types in the marrow
should not appear in the syringe (except in very large birds)
sample, the cytologist also should estimate the myeloid:
because of the small marrow volume in most birds. There-
erythroid (M:E) ratio. Any changes involving the matura-
fore, the marrow sample is found in the lumen of the biopsy
tion sequence of each cell line should be noted as well. The
needle.
cell lines include erythrocytes, granulocytes (heterophils.
When aspiration is completed, the needle and syringe are
eosinophils, and basophils), monocytes, and thrombocytes.
rermoved from the tibiotarsus while malking sure that nega-
Other cells that occasionally are found include lymphocytes.
plasma cells, osteoblasts, and osteoclasts. The presence of
is removed from the syringe, and the syringe is filled with
abnormal cells also should be noted.
air to force the marrow from the lumen onto a glass micro-
The normal M:E ratio varies with species; however the
scope slide. A second glass microscope slide is placed atop of
the marrow sample, and the marrow is allowed to spread
the M:E ratio is 1.23± 0.17 in blackheaded gulls (Larus
between the two slides as they are pulled apart. Bone
ridibundus) where the mean percentage of erythroid cells is
marrow samples also can be obtained from the keel (sternum)
39.91 ± 3.26%: of myeloid cells is 49.37 ± 4.86%: of throm-
of some birds, such as galliformes; the biopsy needle is intro-
bocyte precursors is 5.95 ±0.79%: and all other cells is
duced into the widest part of the sternal ridge in the manner
4.77 ± 0.53%.136
as described for the proximal tibiotarsus.
An accurate interpretation of the bone marrow response
Marrow core biopsies for histologic evaluation can be
can be made only in conjunction with knowledge regarding
obtained from birds using a technique similar to that of
the current peripheral blood cellular response. Therefore, a
marrow aspiration. Once the biopsy needle is introduced
hemogram made from a blood sample collected at the same
into the bone marrow space, the stylet is removed, and the
time as the bone marrow sample should be evaluated.
needle is advanced deeper into the marrow cavity, toward
the opposite cortex. Once the opposite cortex has been
Erythropoiesis
reached, the needle is twisted and redirected slightly to
Avian erythropoiesis occurs within the lumen of the vascul-
 detach the marrow plug within the lumen of the needle.
lar sinusoids in the bone marrow.48 These sinuses are lined
Gentle vacuum may be applied to the syringe to aid in
by elongated endothelial cells that are associated with the
holding the marrow plug in the needle as the needle is
most immature cells of the erythroid series. The more
withdrawn from the marrow cavity. The marrow core
mature cells are located in the lumen of the sinuses. The
sample is removed by reinsertion of the stylet (usually
vascular sinuses communicate with a central vein.
beginning at the tip of the needle) to push the sample out
Avian erythropoietin, which is a glycoprotein that
of the needle. Imprint films can be made from the core
differs structurally from mammalian erythropoietin, is nec-
sample for cytologic evaluation before the sample is placed
essary for the multiplication and differentiation of precur-
in 10% neutral-buffered formalin. A sample holder often is
required to maintain the marrow core while it is being fixed
Erythropoietin can be obtained from the blood of anemic
in the formalin solution.
birds, and the site of its production is considered to be
the kidney.
Examination of avian bone marrow
The stages of maturation in normal avian erythropoiesis
Bone marrow slides are stained with the same Romanowsky
appear to be similar to those of mammals. The terminology
stains used for blood films. Interpretation of avian bone
used for the different stages of erythrocyte maturation,
marrow begins with scanning of the marrow film using the
however, varies in the literature. In general, seven stages are
10x microscope objective to evaluate both the number and
recognizable in red blood cell development based on findings
the distribution of cells. Because an actual cell count of a
with Romanowsky stains.? These include rubriblasts (pro-
bone marrow sample cannot be obtained, the cellularity is
erythroblasts).
 prorubricytes (basophilic erythroblasts).
estimated by evaluating the ratio of fat and cells in marrow
basophilic rubricytes (early polychromatic erythroblasts).
particles and is compared with the cellularity of normal bone
marrow. The degree of cellularity is estimated as poor.
roblasts).  late  polychromatic rubricytes  (orthochromic
normal, or high.
erythroblasts). polychromatic erythrocytes, and mature
The distribution of cells can be estimated as well. Myeloid.
erythrocytes. As erythroid cells mature, the nuclear size
decreases, the chromatin becomes increasingly condensed,
the nuclear shape changes from round to ellipsoid, the
amount of cytoplasm increases, the hemoglobin concentra-
tial count based on looo cells or more, but this is more
tion increases (resulting in increasing eosinophilia), and the
time-consuming and may not provide more information.
cell shape changes from round to ellipsoid. Unlike mam
268
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
EPR
PR
EPR
BR
PR
Figure 19.62 A rubriblast (R). prorubricyte (PR), ba5ophilic rubricyte
Figure 19.63 A rubriblast (R), basophilic rubricyte (BR), early
(BR), early polychrommatic rubricytes (EPR), late polychromatic rubricyte
polychromatic rubricyte (EPR), and late polychromatic rubricyte (LPR) in
(LPR), mmyeloblast (M), and progranulocyte (PR) in the bone mmarrow
the bone marrow aspirate of a conure (Aratinga soistitiafis). Wright-
aspirate of a conure (Aratinga solstitialis). Wright-Giemsa stain
Giemsa stain
malian erythrocytes, avian erythrocytes normally retain
their nulcleus.
Rubriblasts
Rubriblasts are large, round, deeply basophilic cells with a
large, round, central nucleus that results in a high N:C ratio
(Figs. 19.62 through 19.64 and 19.66). The nuclear chroma-
tin typically is coarsely granular, and large. prominent
nucleoli or nucleolar rings are present. The cytoplasm is
deeply basophilic, with clear spaces most likely representing
mitochondria.
Prorubricyte
The prorubricyte resembles the rubriblast, but it lacks the
prominent nucleoli (Figs. 19.62 and 19.65). The N:C ratio
is high, and the large nucleus usually is surrounded by a
narrow rim of blue cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is predomi-
Figure 19.64 A rubriblast (R), basophilic rubricyte (BR), early
polychromatic rubricytes (EPR), late polychromatic rubricyte (LPR), and 
nantly basophilic but may contain spots of reddish material,
myeloblast (M) in the bone marrow aspirate of a conure (Aratinga
suggesting the beginning of hemoglobin development. The
sorstitialis). Wright-Giernsa stain.
cytoplasm lacks the mitochondrial spaces of the rubriblast.
Rubricyte
Rubricytes are round cells that are smaller than rubriblasts
 and prorubricytes. They can be divided into three stages.
19.65). The nucleus of early polychromatophilic rubricytes
based primarily on the appearance of the cytoplasm. The
contains clumped chromatin and is small in relation to the
basophilic rubricyte is the earliest rubricyte stage and is
amount of cytoplasm. The final rubricyte stage, the late
characterized by a homogenous, basophilic cytoplasm and a
polychromatophilic rubricyte, is ellipsoid and has more
round nucleus with clumped chromatin (Figs. 19.62 through
eosinophilic (eosinophilic gray to weakly eosinophilic) cyto-
19.65). The next stage, the early polychromatophilic rubri-
plasm than earlier stages (Figs. 19.62 through 19.65). The
cyte, is smaller than the basophilic rubricyte and has a gray
nucleus of late polychromatophilic rubricytes varies from
(basophilic to slightly eosinophilic) cytoplasm because of
round to slightly ellipsoid. with irregularly clumped
increased hemoglobin production (Figs. 19.62 through
chromatin.
269
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
BR
EPR
LPR
10.0μm
Figure 19.65 A prorubricyte (PR), basophilic rubricytes (BR), early
Figure 19.67 A myeloblast (M) and myelocytes (My) in the bone
polychromatic rubricyte (EPR), late polychrommatic rubricyte (LPR), and 
marrow aspirate of a conure (Aratinga sofstitialis). Wright-Giemmsa stain.
metarmyelocyte (Me) in the bone marrow aspirate of a conure (Aratinga
sofstitialis). Wright-Giemsa 5tain
described based on their morphologic appearance, primarily
in chicken bone marrow. Thus, the study of avian hemato-
 poiesis lags behind research in mammalian hematopoiesis.
in which morphologic criteria are only part of the overall
evaluation. Avian granulocytes show a progressive decrease
in size and cytoplasmic basophilia as they mature, which is
similar to the granulocytes of mammals. Specific cytoplasmic
granules appear during the later stages of development
and then progressively increase in number, until a full com-
plement is reached in the cytoplasm of the mature granulo-
cyte. The nuclei of granulocytes initially are round and
progress toward segmentation, except for basophils, which
do not segment, and the nuclear chromatin becomes increas-
ingly condensed with maturity. The developmental stages
of avian granulocytes include, in order of maturation,
myeloblasts (granuloblasts). progranulocytes (promyelo-
 cytes), myelocytes, metamyelocytes, band cells, and mature
Figure 19.66 A rubriblast (R), myeloblast (M), progranulocytes (PR), and 
 granulocytes.
myelocytes (My) in the bone marrow aspirate of a conure (Aratinga
soistitialis). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Myeloblasts
Avian myeloblasts are large. round cells with a high N:C
ratio (Figs. 19.62, 19.64, 19.66, and 19.67). The cytoplasm
Polychromatophilic erythrocytes and mature
stains a lighter blue than that of rubriblasts. Myeloblast
erythrocytes
nuclei typically are round, with delicate reticular (fine)
Cells in the final stages of erythropoiesis are the polychro-
chromatin and prominent nucleoli. Myeloblasts do not
matophilic erythrocyte and the mature erythrocyte. These
contain specific cytoplasmic granules and, possibly, repre-
cells are found in the peripheral blood of normal birds and
sent a stage that is common to all granulocytes. Myeloblasts
were described earlier. The mature erythrocyte has a flat-
frequently are associated with other developing granulo-
tened, ellipsoid shape. The nuclear chromatin is condensed
       s
and transcriptionally inactive.
specimens.
Granulopoiesis
Progranulocytes
Avian progranulocytes are large cells with light blue cyto-
to those of mammals. The maturation stages have been
plasm and slightly eccentric nuclei (Figs. 19.62 and 19.66).
270
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
The N:C ratio is smaller than that of myeloblasts because of
locytic cell line in the bone marrow of normal birds and
an increase in cytoplasm. The nuclear chromatin often has
were described earlier.
a delicate reticular pattern. Nucleoli are absent, and nuclear
margins may be indistinct. Progranulocytes contain primary
Thrombocytes
a  d  a r sa (
Avian thrombocytes appear to derive from a distinct line of
types of granulocytes. Heterophil progranulocytes contain
mononuclear cells in the bone marrow, unlike mammalian
 primary granules that vary in color and shape. They often
platelets, which are cytoplasmic fragments of large, multi-
appear as orange spheres (primary granules) and rings or as
nucleated megakaryocytes. The thrombocyte series consists
deeply basophilic spheres and rings. Eosinophil progranulo-
of thromboblasts, immature thrombocytes, and mature
cytes contain only brightly staining. orange. primary gran-
thrombocytes. Thromboblasts resemble rubriblasts, but they
ules, and they appear to lack the dark magenta granules and
tend to be smaller, with round nuclei having fine to punctate
rings found in heterophil progranulocytes. Basophil pro-
nuclear chromatin and one or more nucleoli. The cytoplasm
granulocytes contain basophilic granules that appear to be
is scant, stains deeply basophilic, and may contain clear
smaller than the specific basophilic granules and the imma-
spaces. They tend to be round to oval, with cytoplasmic
ture granules of the heterophil series. Fewer ring forms are
blebs.
seen in basophil progranulocytes.
 Immature thrombocytes are divided into three groups
early, mid, and late immature thrombocytesbased on their
Myelocytes
degree of maturity (Fig. 19.46). Early immature thrombo-
cytes are intermediate in size between thromboblasts and
cytes, and they contain the secondary or specific granules of
more mature stages. They tend to be round to oval and have
 the mature granulocytes, thereby malking identification of
more abundant cytoplasm than thromboblasts. The cyto-
this cell somewhat simple (Figs. 19.66 and 19.67). The round
plasm is basophilic and may contain vacuoles. The nuclear
to oval nucleus of the myelocyte appears to be more con-
chromatin is aggregated into irregular clumps. Mid imma-
densed than the nuclei of myeloblasts and progranulocytes.
ture thrombocytes are slightly elongate or irregular, with
Heterophil myelocytes typically are round cells, with a light
pale blue cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic specific granules and vacul-
blue cytoplasm that contains a mixture of rod-shaped spe-
oles occasionally are seen at this stage of development. The
cifc granules and primary granules and rings. The eosino-
nucleus contains heavy chromatin clumping. Late immature
philic, rod-shaped specific granules occupy less than half the
        
cytoplasmic volume. Eosinophil myelocytes lack the deeply
immature stage. The cytoplasm stains pale blue, with vaguely
basophilic granules and rings that occasionally are found in
defined, clear areas. Specifc granules frequently are seen at
early heterophil myelocytes. Basophil myelocytes contain
one pole of the cell. The nucleus is oval and has densely
basophilic specific granules that occupy less than half the
packed chromatin. The mature thrombocyte is the definitive
cytoplasmic volume. The specific basophil granules have a
cell in the thrombocyte series and was described earlier.
slightly eosinophilic tinge, compared with the deep violet of
the smaller primary granules that also may be present.
Other cells in avian bone marrow
Metamyelocytes
Monocytes and macrophages
Monocytopoiesis is poorly defined in birds. Granulocytic
precursor cells may be similar toor even the same as
  sssd    
topoietic tissues become the monocytes and macrophages
volume (Fig. 19.65). Heterophil and basophil metamyelo-
found in blood and body tissues, respectively. A variety of
       
tissues, notably bone marrow, embryonic yolk sac, and
progranulocytes.
spleen, can produce macrophage colonies. Mature mono-
 Band cells and mature granulocytes
cytes are described in the discussion of leukocytes. Macro-
Band cells resemble mature granulocytes, except that the
phages within the bone marrow usually contain iron pigment
nucleus appears as a curved or coiled band rather than seg-
within the cytoplasm, because they are involved with iron
mented. Identifying band cells often is difficult, because the
metabolism during hemoglobin synthesis and catabolism.
'uaplo se 1o uonuis xoelq oi Aena se 1eadde Aeu uo1l
exact shape of the nucleus is obscured by specific cytoplas-
crystalline material.
mic granules. A specific nuclear stain such as hematoxylin
usually is required to determine the concentration of band
cells. Because mature basophils lack a segmented nucleus.
Lymphocytes
the band stage of basophils is not apparent. Mature granu-
Aggregates of lymphocytes are found within the bone
locytes generally are the most abundant cell of each granu-
marrow of birds, although major sites of lymphopoiesis in
271
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
adult birds are located in the spleen, liver, intestines, and
cecal tonsils. Avian lymphocytes can be classified as B lym-
Hematopoietic tissues other than bone
phocytes (providing humoral immunity) or T lymphocytes
marrow
(responsible for cell mediated immunity),. but these two cell
types usually cannot be differentiated based on morphology
Bursa of Fabricius
alone. B lymphocytes differentiate in the bursa of Fabricius.
Based on research using domestic chicken and quail embryos.
and T-lymphocytes differentiate in the thymus.
lymphoid cells first appear in the developing bursa of the
 Immature avian lymphocytes are larger than mature lym-
13-15 day embryo.? Granulopoiesis also occurs in the
 phocytes, and they are classified as either lymphoblasts or 
developing bursa of the 12-13 day chicken embryo, but it
prolymphocytes based on morphology. Lymphoblasts have
disappears either at or just before hatching. The bursa
large nuclei, with fine chromatin, and they contain one or
reaches its maximum growth around 4 weeks after hatching
more prominent nucleoli. The cytoplasm is relatively abun-
then gradually undergoes involution during a 2-3 month
dant and deeply basophilic. Prolymphocytes resemble lym-
period.
phoblasts, but their nuclear chromatin is coarser and nucleoli
During development, the bursa contains numerous deeply
are not present. Mature lymphocytes have coarse chromatin
basophilic, lymphoid precursor cells. Lymphoid precursors
that typically is clumped. Cytoplasm is scant and stains light
reach a maximum number in the 13-25 day embryo and
blue.
then decline as lymphoid differentiation progresses. Lym-
phoid precursors may originate from an external source.
Osteoblasfs
such as the yolk sac or bone marrow. Seeding of the bursa
Avian osteoblasts are large cells found in the bone marrow
with lymphoid precursor cells appears to occur in the 7-14
that resemble those of mammals. They have abundant,
day embryo, depending on the species. Thus, the sole source
foamy. basophilic cytoplasm, with a distinct, clear Golgi
of B lymphocytes in the adult bird is the self-regenerating
apparatus. The nucleus is round to oval and eccentrically
aggregates of B lymphocytes that originated in the bursa and
located in the cell, contains reticular to coarsely granular
then spread to the spleen, liver, intestines, and cecal tonsils.
chromatin, and possesses one or more distinct nucleoli.
 a n  ' on od a sisi
Thymus
indistinct cytoplasmic margins.
The thymus is organized into a cortex consisting of densely
packed lymphoid cells and a medulla. Lymphoid precursors
Osfeoclasts
originating from the yolk sac or bone marrow begin to colo-
Osteoclasts are large, multinucleated, giant cells with an
nize the thymus during the first 4-8 days of development.
ameboid shape (Fig. 19.68). The cytoplasm is weakly baso-
depending on the species. The influx of lymphoid precursors
philic and vacuolated, and red cytoplasmic granules may be
appears to last from 24 to 36 hours and then ends abruptly.
present. Nuclei are round to oval and often contain promi-
The invasion of the thymus by precursors is followed by a
nent nucleoli.
4-5 day refractory period before another influx occurs. This
cyclic colonization of the thymus by lymphoid stem cells
consists of two to three colonization periods, which may
species.3l This contrasts with colonization of the bursa,
which occurs during a distinct, single episode in the embryo
before hatching. T lymphocytes acquire their T antigen
during a 24-hour period of development around the time of
the second wave of colonization, between days 12-l5 of
embryonic life. T lymphocytes originating in the thymus
spread to the spleen, liver, intestines, and cecal tonsils, and
they are the predominate lymphoid cell of the spleen and
peripheral blood of hatched birds.
Spleen
white pulp of the spleen.3l The central arteries of the white
  r e    d
which is comprised of densely packed T lymphocytes. Capil-
Figure 19.68 An osteoclast (arrow) in the bone marrow aspirate of a
laries branching at right angles from the central arteries are
conure (Aratinga solstitialis). Wright-Giemsa stain
surrounded by periellipsoid lymphoid tissue consisting of B
272
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
lymphocytes. B lymphocytes also are found at the germinal
18. Pierson FW (20o0) Laboratory techniques for avian hemato]-
centers located within the periarteriolar lymphoid sheath.
Ogy. In: Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.), Schalm's Vereri-
During embryonic development, the spleen participates in
nary Hemarology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams S
erythropoiesis  and  
gran ulocytopoiesis.
Granulopoiesis
Wilkins, pp. 1145-6.
19. Rodkey FL, Robertson RF, Kim CK (1979) Molar absorbance
becomes more predominant as the embryo matures. At
hatching. however, the granulocytes begin to disappear, and
of cyanmethemoglobin from blood of different animals. Am J
Ver Res 40: 887-8.
by 3 days, they are replaced by lymphocytes.
20. Natt MP Herrick CA (1952) A new blood diluent for counting
erythrocytes and leucocytes of the chicken. Poult Sci 31: 735-8.
21. DeGroote LW, Rodewald PG (2008) An improved method for
References
quantifying hematozoa by digital microscopy. J Wiid Dis 44:
446-50.
1. Campbell, TW (20oo) Normal hematology of psittacines.
22. Harper, EJ and Lowe, B (1 998) Hematology values in a colony
Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.), Schalm's Vererinary Hemd
of budgerigars (Me/opsittacus undularus) and changes associated
d 'sum s suem noudd eudapea pa us rojo
with aging. Journal of Nutrition 128: 2639s-2640S.
1155-60.
23. Hauptmanova K, Maly M, Literak I (2006) Changes of haema-
2. Campbell TW, Ellis CK (2007) Avian and Exotic Animal Hematol-
tological parameters in common pheasant throughout the
ogy and Cyrology, 3rd ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
year. Vererinarni Medicina 5l: 29034.
3. Stevens RWC, Ridgeway GJ (1966) A technique for bleeding
24. Mulley RC (1979) Haematology and blood chemistry of the
chickens from the jugular vein. Poulr Sei 45: 204-5.
black duck (Anas supercilliosa). J Wildl Dis 15: 473-41.
4. Utter JM, LeFebure EA, Greenlaw JJ (l970) A technique for
25. Mulley RC (l980) Haematology of the Wood duck, Chenonelta
sampling blood from small passerines. Auk 88: 169-71.
jubata. J Wildl Dis 16: 271-3.
 5. Andrews FX (1950) Simplified heart puncture in poultry diag-
26. Rehder NB, Lague DM, Mackay C (1 982) Variation in selected
nosis. J Am Ver Med Assoc 16: 38-9.
 hematological parameters of captive Red-tailed hawks. J Wild
6. MacArthur FN (1 944) An improved method of obtaining blood
Dis 18: 105-9.
from the chicken heart. Poulr Sei 23: 542-4.
27. Schmidt EMDS, Paulillo AC, Dittrich RL, et al. (2007) The
7. Vullaume A (1983) A new technique for taking blood samples
effect of age on hematological and serum biochemical values
from ducks and geese. Avian Parho! 12: 389-91.
in juvenile ring-necked pheasants (Phasianus co/chicus). Inrernα-
8. Hawkey CM, Dennett TB (1989) Color Atlas of Comparative Ver-
tional J Poulrry Sei 6: 459-61.
erinary Hematology. London: Wolfe Medical Publications.
28. Shave HJ, Howard V (1976) A hematologic survey of captive
9. Guzman DS-M, enVet L Mitchell MA, Gaunt SD, Beaufrére
waterfowl. J Wildl Dis 12: 195-201.
H, Tully TN (2008) Comparison of hematologic values in blood
 29. Williams JI, Trainer DO (1 97l) A hematological study of Snow,
samples with lithium heparin or dipotassium ethylenediami-
Blue, and Canada geese. J Wiidl Dis 7: 258-64.
netetraacetic acid anticoagulants in Hispaniolan amazon
30. Kocan RM, Pitts SM (1976) Blood values of the canvasback
parrots (Amazona ventralis). JAvian Med Surg 22: 108-13.
duck by age, sex, and season. J Wildl Dis 12: 341-6.
10. Ihedioha JI, Idika IK, Ogamba GN, Akam CJA (2008) Changes
31. Dieterien-Lievre F {1988) Birds. In: Rawley AF, Ratcliffe NA
in the haematological values of avian blood samples stored at
(eds.), Verrebrare Blood Cells. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
varying temperatures for a period of up to 72 hours. Comp Clin
versity Press, pp. 257-336.
Pathof 17: 73-9.
32. Fairbrother A, O'Loughlin D (1990) Differential white blood
11. Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC (eds.) (2000) Schalm's Vererinary
cell values in Mallard (Anas plaryrhynchos) across different ages
Hemarology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
and reproductive states. J Wild Dis 26: 78-82.
1147-55.
33. Gaskin JM (1 989) Psittacine viral diseases: a perspective. J Zoo!
12. Sturkie PD, Griminger P (1986) Body fluids: blood. In: Sturkie
Wildl Med 20: 249-64.
PD (ed.), Avian Physiology. 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag.
34. Jacobson ER, Hines SA, Quesenberry K, er al. (1984) Epormitic
pp. 102-29.
of papova-like virus-associated disease in a psittacine nursery.
13. Tadjalli M, Nazif S, Eemanparvar A (2003) Normal cellular
J Am Ver Med Assoc 185: 1337-41,
morphology of the blood of Japanese quail (Corurnix corurnix
35. Wainright PO, Pritchard NG, Fletcher OJ, Davis RB, Clubb S
japonica). Comp Clin Path 12: 102-5.
(1987) Identification of viruses from Amazon parrots with a
14. Lucas AJ, Jamroz C (196l) Arlas of Avian Hemarology. USDA
hemorrhagic symdrome and a chronic respiratory disease. First
monograph 25. Washington, DC: US Department of
International Conference on Zoological and Avian Medicine. 15-19.
Agriculture.
36. Christie G (1979) Hematological and biochemical fndings in
15. Romagnano A, et al. (1 994) Binucleate erythrocytes and eryth-
an experimentally produced hemolytic amemia in eight-week-
rocytic dysplasia in a cockatiel. Proc Assoc Avian Ver 83-6.
old brown leg horn cockerels. Br Ver J 135: 279-85.
16. Chad N, Eyre P (1978) Immunological release of histamine
37. Herbert R, Nanney J. Spano JS, Pedersoli WM, Krista LM
and SRS in domestic fowl. Can J Comp Med 42: 519-24.
{1989) Erythrocyte distribution in ducks. Am J Ver Res 50:
17. Maxwell MH (l98l) The production of a "Heinz body"
958-60.
anaemia in the domestic fowl after oral ingestion of dimethyl
38. Assoku R, Pehale W, Buxton A (1970) An immunological basis
disulphate: a haematological and ultrastructural study. Res Vet
for the anemia of acute Salmonella gallinarium infection of
Sri 30: 233-8.
chickens. Clin Exp Immunol 7: 865-74.
273
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
39. Chou S-J, Shieh Y-C, Yu C-Y (2008) Hematologic and bio-
56. Pattee OH, Carpenter JW, Fritts SH, et al. (2006) Lead poison-
chemistry values for Black-faced spoonbills (Plaralea minor)
ing in captive Andean condors (Vuirur gryphus). J Wild Dis 42:
with and recovering from botulism. J Wild Dis 44: 781-4.
77 2-9.
40. Chowdhurry SR, Smith TK, Boermans HJ, Sefton AE, Downey
57. Maxwell MH, Robertson GW, Anderson IA, Dick LA, Lymch M
R, Woodward B (2005) Effects of feeding blends of grains
(1991) Haematology and histology of seven-week-old broilers
naturally contaminated with Fusarium mycotoxins on perfor-
after early food restriction. Res Ver Sri 50: 290-7.
mance, metabolism, hematology. and immunocompetence.
 58. Taylor M (1987) Polycythemia in the Blue and Gold macaw—a
Poultry Sei 84: 1179-85.
case report of three cases. Proceedings of the First International
41. Fulton RM, Reed WM, Thacker HL, DeNicola DB (1996)
Conference on Zoological and Avian Medicine, 95-104.
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan)-induced  hematologic  altera-
59. Wolf T, Luepke NP (1997) Formation of micronuclei in incu-
 tions in specific-pathogen-free chickens. Avian Dis 40: 1-12.
bated hen's eggs as a measure of genotoxicity. Mutation Researrh
42. Gomez-Meda BC, Zamora-Perez A, Luna-Aquirre J, er al.
394: 163-75.
(2006) Nuclear abnormalities in erythrocytes of parrots (Arar-
60. Wolf T, Niehaus-Rolf C, Luepke NP (2002) Some new meth-
inga canicularis) related to genotoxic damage. Avian Path 35:
odological aspects of the hen's egg test for micronucleus induc-
206-10.
tion (HET-MN). Murarion Researrh 514: 59-76.
43. Khan A, Hussain SM, Khan MZ (2006) Effects of formalin
61. Andreasen CB, Latimer KS (1990) Cytochemical staining char-
feeding or administering into the crops or White leghom cock-
acteristics of chicken heterophils and eosinophils. Ver Clin
Pathol 19: 51-4.
85: 1513-19.
62. Brune K, Spitznagel JK (1973) Peroxidaseless chicken leuko-
44. Fry DM, Addiego L (1987) Hemolytic anemia complicates the
cytes: isolation and characterization of anti-bacterial granules.
clearing of oiled seabirds. Wild! J 10: 3-6.
J Infeer Dis 127: 84-94.
45. Leighton FA, Peakall DB, Butler RG (1983) Heinz body hemo-
63. Daimon T, Caxton-Martins A (1 977) Electron microscopic and
lytic anemia from ingestion of crude oil: primary toxic effect
enzyme cytochemical studies on granules of mature chicken
in marine birds. Srience 220: 871-3.
granular leucocytes. J Anat 123: 553-62.
46. White J {1990) Protocol for the rehabilitation of oil-affected
64. Howard LL, Papendick R, Stalis IH, et al. (2002) Fenbendazole
waterbirds. Proc Assor Avian Ver 153-63.
 and albendazole toxicity in pigeons and doves. J Avian Med Surg
47. Yamato O, Goto I, Meade Y (1996) Hemolytic anemia in wild
16: 203-10.
seaducks caused by marine oil pollution. J Wiidl Dis 32:
65. Pinneall R, Spitznagel JK (1975) Chicken neutrophils: oxida-
381-4.
tive metabolism in phagocytic cells devoid of myeloperoxidase.
48. Sturkie PD (1976) Blood: physical characteristics, formed ele-
Proc Natl Arad Sri USA 72: 5012-15.
ments, hemoglobin, and coagulation. In: Sturkie PD (ed.).
66. Topp RC, Carlson HC (1972) Studies on avian heterophils. II:
Avian Physiology. New York: Springer-Verlag, pp. 53-75.
histochemistry. Avian Dis 16: 369-73.
49. Lothrop C, er al. (1988) Miscellaneous diseases. In: Harrison
67. Topp RC, Carlson HC (1972) Studies on avian heterophils. III:
GJ, Harrison LR (eds.), Clinica! Avian Medicine and Surgery. Phil-
phagocytic properties. Avian Dis 16: 374-80.
adelphia: WB Saunders, p. 525-36.
68. Dri P, Bisiacchi B, Cramer R, Bellavite P de Nicola G, Patriama
50. Burgos-Rodriguez AG, Garner M, Ritzman TK, Orcutt CJ
 P (1978) Oxidative metabolism of chicken polymorphonuclear
(2007) Cutaneous lymphosarcoma in a double yellow-headed
leucocytes during phagocytosis. Mol Cell Biochem 22: 159-66.
Amazon parrot (Amazona ochrocephala oratrix). J Avian Med Surg
69. Genovese KJ, He H, Lowry VK, Swaggerty CL, Kogut MH
21: 283-9.
{2006) Comparison of heterophil functions of modem com-
51. Newell SM, McMillan MC, Moore FM (1991) Diagnosis and
   s     
treatment of lymphocytic leu kemia and malignant lymphoma
217-23.
in a Pekin duck (Anas plaryrhynchas domesticus). JAAV 5: 83-6.
70. Hodges RD (1977) Normal avian (poultry) haematology. In:
52. Souza MJ, Newman SJ, Greenacre CB, et al. (2008) Diffuse
Archer RK, Jefott LB (eds.), Comparative Clinical Haematology.
intestinal T-cell lymphosarcoma in a yellow-naped Amazon
London: Blackwell Scientific Publications, pp. 483-517.
parrot (Amazona ochrocephala auropalliata). J Vet Dian Invest 20:
71. Lind PJ, et al. (1990) Morphology of the eosinophil in raptors.
656-60.
JAAV 4: 33-8
53. Katavolos P, Staempfli. S, Sears W, Gancz AY, Smith DA,
72. Fox AJ, Solomon JB (198l) Chicken non-lymphoid leuko-
Bienzle D (2007) The effect of lead poisoning on hematologic
cytes. In: Rose LN, Payme LN, Freeman MB (eds.), Avian Immu-
and biochemical values in trumpeter swans and Canada geese.
nology. Edinburgh, Poultry Science, pp. 135-66.
Ver Clin Pathol 36: 341-7.
73. Glick B (200o) Immunophysiology. In: Whittow GC (ed.).
54. Levenwood JM, Sanderson GC, Anderson WL, Foley GL,
Srurkie's Avian Physiology. 5th ed. San Diego. Academic Press.
Brown PW, Seets JW (20o0) Influence of diet on the hemato]-
pp. 657-70.
ogy and serum biochemistry of zinc-intoxicated mallards. J
74. Swayme DE, Stockman SL, Johnson GS (1986) Cytochemical
Wild Dis 36: 111-23.
properties of chicken blood cells resembling both thrombo-
55. Mitchell RR, Fitzgerald SD, Aulerich RJ, er al. (200l) Hemato-
cytes and lymphocytes. Vet Clin Pathol 15: 17-24.
logical effects and metal residue concentrations following
75. Latimer KS, Tang K-N, Goodwin MA (1988) Leukocyte
chronic dosing with tungsten-iron and tungsten-polymer shot
changes associated with acute inflammation in chickens. Avian
in adult game-farm mallards. J Wild Dis 37: 459-67.
Dis 1988; 32: 760-72.
274
CHAPTER 19 Hematology of Birds
76. Harmon BG, Blisson JR (1993) Disassociation of bacterial and
95. Moreno J, Merino S, Martinez J, Sanz JJ, Arriero E (2002)
fungistatic activities from the oxidative burst of avian macro-
Heterophil/lymphocyte ratios and heat-shock protein levels
phages. Am J Vet Res 51: 71-5.
are related to growth in nestling birds. Eroscience 9: 4349.
77. Liliehook, I Wall H, Tauson R, Tvedten H (2004) Differential
96. Heidenreich M (1 997) Infectious diseases. In: Heidenreich M,
leukocyte counts determined in chicken blood using the Cell-
Birds of Prey: Medicine and Management. Osney Mead, Oxford:
Dymn 3500. Ver Clin Pathol 33: 133-8.
Blackwell Science, pp. 103-29.
78. Dein FJ, Wilson BA, Fischer MT (l994) Avian leucocyte count-
97. Redig PT (1 993) Avian aspergillosis. In Fowler M (ed.), Zoo and
ing using the hemocytometer. J Zool Wild! Med 25: 432-7.
Wild Anima! Medicine, Current Therapy 3. Philadelphia: Saunders.
79. Costello RT (1970) A Unopette for eosinophil counts. Am J Clin
98. Redig PT (1997) Raptors. In Altman RB, Clubb SL, Dorrestein
Parhol 54: 249-50.
GM, Quesenberry K (eds.), Avian Medicine and Surgery. Phila-
aq aun (6s61] 1 eed  nos 'a 1aum  ydasor 08
delphia: Saunders.
stain for avian WBC count. JAAV 3: 19l-229.
99. Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW, Howard EB, Holshus HJ (1981)
81. Weiss DJ (l984) Uniform evaluation and semiquantitative
Chronic endocrine disorder associated with inclusion body
reporting of hematologic data in veterinary laboratories. Vet
hepatitis in a Sulfur-crested Cockatoo. J Am Ver Med Assor 179:
Clin Parhol 13: 27-31.
1 273-6.
 82. Lane R (1 991) Basic techniques in pet avian clinical pathology.
100. Bienzle D, Pare JA, Smith DA (1997) Leukocyte changes in
Ver Clin North Am Smalf Anim Pract 21:1157-79.
diseased non-domestic birds. Ver Clin Patho! 26: 76-84.
83. Foldenauer U, Borjal RJ, Deb A, er al. (2007) Hematologic and
101. Bonar CJ, Lewandowski AH, Schaul J (2003) Suspected fen-
plasma biochemical values of Spix's macaws (Cyanopsita spixi)
bendazole toxicosis in 2 vulture species (Gyps africanus, Torgos
JAvian Med Surg 2l: 275-82.
[racheliorus) and Marabou storks (Leproptilos crumeniferus).
84. Driver EA (198l) Haematological and blood chemical values
J Avian Med Surg 17: 16-19.
of mallard, Anas plaryrhynchos plaryrhynchos, drakes before.
102. Purchase GH, Burmester BD (1978) Leukosis/sarcoma group.
during, and after remige molt. J Wildl Dis 17: 413-21.
In: Hofstad MS (ed.). Diseases of Poulry. Ames, IA: Iowa State
85. Clark P, Raidal SR (2008) Haematological indicators of inflam-
University Press, pp. 418-68.
mation exhibited by Australian Falconiformes. Comp Clin Patho!
103. Kelly TR, Vennen KM, Duncan R, Sleeman JM (2004) Lym-
Online First: 24.
phoproliferative disorder in a Great horned owl (Bubo virgin-
86. D'Agostino JU, Isaza R (2004) Clinical signs and results of
ianusj. J Avian Med Surg 18: 263-8.
specific diagnostic testing among captive birds housed at zoo-
        
logical institutions and infected with West Nile virus. J Am Ver.
parrot—a case report. Proc Assoc Avian Vet 229-34.
Med Assorc 224: 1640-3.
105. Wight PA, er al. (1980) Monocytosis in experimental zinc defi-
87. Jaensch S, Clark P (2004) Haematological characteristics of
ciency of domestic birds. Avian Pathol 9: 61-6.
106. Maldonado N, Larson K (2004) What is your diagnosis?
of black cockatoos: Calyptorhynchus magnjficus and C. funereus.
J Avian Med Surg 18: 112-15.
Comp Clin Pathol 13: 9-13.
107. Maxwell MH, Bums RB (1986) Experimental stimulation of
88. Mulcahy MD, Burek KA, Ester D (2007) Inflammatory
eosinophil stimulation and of eosinophil production in the
reaction to fabric collars from percutaneous antennas
domestic fowl. Res Ver Sci 41: 11423.
attached to intracoelomic radio transmitters implanted in Har-
108. Maxwell MH (1980) Attempted induction of an avian eosino-
lequin ducks (Hisrrionicus histrionicus). J Avian Med Surg 21:
4- 67   s uae s u ed
13-21.
109. Montali RJ (1988) Comparative pathology of inflammation in
89. Hawkey C, Kock R, Henderson G, et al. (1990) Haematological
the higher vertebrates (reptiles, birds, and mammals). J Comp
changes in domestic fowl (Gallus gallus) and cranes (Gru-
Pathof99:1-26
iformes) with Mycobacterium avium infection. Avian Pathol 19:
110. Maxwell MH, Robertson GW, Spence S, McCorquodale CC
233-4.
{1990) Comparison of haematological values in restricted and
90. Heatley JU, Mitchell MM, Cho DY, Williams DL, Tulley TN
ad libitum-fed domestic fowls. I1. White blood cells and throm-
(2007) Disseminated mycobacteriosis in a Bald eagle (Haliaee-
bocytes. Br Poult Sei 31: 399-405.
us Ieucocephalus). J Avian Med Surg 2l: 201-9.
1ll. Grecchi R, Saliba AM, Mariano M (198O) Morphological
91. Tell L, Ferrell ST, Gibbons PM (2004) Avian mycobacteriosis in
free-living raptors in Califormia: 6 cases (1997-2001). J Avian
Med Surg 18: 30-40.
vitro. J Parho! 130: 23-31.
92. Bhattacharyya TK, Sarkar AK (1968) Avian leucocytic
112. Tahira N, Dube B, Agrawal GP (1977) Blood coagulation
studies in some wild Indian birds: effect of different tissue
Biol 6: 26-8.
thromboplastins. J Comp Path 87: 451-7.
93. Davidson TF Flack IH (1 981) Changes in the peripheral blood
113. Campbell TW, Coles EH (1986) Avian clinical pathology. In:
Coles EH (ed.). Vererinary Clinical Pathology. 4th ed. Philade]-
in the immature chicken. Res Ver Sri 30: 79-82.
phia: WB Saunders Co.
94. Gross WB, Siegel HS {1983) Evaluation of the heterophil/
114. Ferrell, ST, Snowden K, Marlar AB, Garner M, Lung NP (2007)
lymphocyte ratio as a measure of stress in chickens. Avian Dis
Fatal hemoprotozoal infections in multiple avian species in a
27: 972-9.
zoological park. J Zoo and Wild Med 38: 309-16.
275
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
115. Hartup BK, Oberc A, Stott-Messick B, Davis AK, Swarthout
127. Siccardi FJ, Rutherford HO, Derieux WT (1971) Pathology and
CH (2008) Blood parasites of House finches (Carpodacus mexi-
prevention of Leucocyrozoon smithi infetion of turkeys. J Am Vet
canus) from Georgia and New York. J Wild Dis 44: 469-74.
Med Assor 158: 1902.
1 16. Leppert LL, Duffy AM, Stock S, Oleyar MD, Kaltennecker GS
(2008) Survey of blood parasites in two forest ow]s, Northerm
jes.Proceedings of the First International Conference ofZoological and
saw-whet owls and Flammulated owls, of Western North
Avian Medicine,1987: 33-5.
America. J Wild Dis 44: 475-9.
129. Campbell F (1967) Fine structure of the bone marrow of the
117. Levine ND (1982) The genus Atoxoplasma (Protozoa, Apicom-
chicken and pigeon. J Morpho! 123: 405-40.
plexa). J Parasitol 68: 719-23.
130. Bienzle D, Smith DA {1999) Heterophilic leukocytosis and
118. Martinsen ES, Blumberg BJ, Elsen RJ, Schall JI (2008) Avian
granulocytic hyperplasia associated with infection in a cocka-
hemosporidian parasites from northern California oak wood-
too. Comp Haemat Inter 9: 193-7.
  sa p s  ue p
131. Del Cacho E, Gallego M, Bascuas JA (1991) Granulopoiesis in
119. Valkiunas GA (2005) Avian Malaria Parasites and Other Haemo-
the pineal gland of chickens. Am J Ver Res 52: 449-52.
sporidia. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press.
132. Jones AW (1973) Granulopoiesis in the embryonic chick lung:
120. Greiner EC, Ritchie B (1994) Parasites. In: Ritchie B, Harrison
a histologic study. Pouft Sei 52: 1600-3.
G, Harrison L (eds.), Avian Medicine: Principles and Application.
133. Glick B, Rose C {1976) Cellular composition of the bone
Lake Worth, Florida, Wingers, pp. 1007-29.
marrow in the chicken. I. Identification of cells. Anar Rec 185:
121. Soulsby EJL {l982) Helminrhs, Arthropods, and Protozoa of
235-46.
Domesricated Animals. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger.
134. Nazif S, Tadjalli M, Mohaghgheghzadeh M (1999) Normal
122. Cardona CJ, Ihejirika A, McClellan L (2002) Haemoproreus
haematopoiesis cellular components and M/E ratio in the bone
Iophorryx infection in bobwhite quail. Avian Dis 46: 249-55.
marrow of Japanese quail [Corurnix corurnixjaponica]. Com Hae-
123. Donovan TA, Schrenzel M, Tucker TA, Pessier AP, Stalis IH
matol Int 9: 188-92.
(2008) Hepatic hemorrhage, hemocoelom, and sudden death
135. Tadjalli M, Nazifi S, Saeedi SM (1997) Morphological study
due to Haemoproteus infection in passerine birds: eleven cases.
and determination of M/E ratio of the haematopoietic cells of
J Ver Dian Invest 20: 304-13.
the duck. Comp Haematol Inr 1: 117-21.
124. Garvin MC, Homer BL, Greiner EC (2003) Pathogenicity of
136. Tadjalli M, Nazif S, Hadipoor MM (2002) Normal haemato-
Haemoproteus danilewskyi, Kruse, l890, in Blue jays (Cyanocitta
 poiesis, cellular components and M/E ratio in the bone marrow
cristata). J Wild Dis 39: 161-9.
of the Black-headed gull (Larus ridibundus). Comp Clin Path 1l:
125. Dresser SS (1967) Schizogony and gametogony of Leucocyro-
217-22.
Zoon simondi and associated reactions in the avian host. J Pro-
137. Rosse WF, Waldmann TA (196l) Factors controlling erythro-
toz00/ 14: 224-54.
poiesis in birds. Blood 27: 654-61.
126. Miller RE, Trampel DW, Desser SL, Boever WJ (1983) Leuco-
rytozoon simondi infection in European and American eiders.
J Am Ver Med Assoc 183: 1241-4.
276
20
Hematology of Reptiles
Terry W. Campbell
Colorado State University
Evaluation of the hemogram and blood film is part of the
puncture of the peripheral vessels.3.s-ip The mixing of lym-
laboratory evaluation of reptilian patients. Hematology is
phatic fluid with the blood sample is variable, and it dilutes
used to detect conditions such as anemia, inflammatory
the cellular components of the blood, thereby resulting in a
diseases, parasitemias, hematopoietic disorders, and hemo-
lower packed cell volume (PCV), hemoglobin concentration
sta tic alterations. Hematologic evaluation involves examina-
(Hb). total erythrocyte count (TRBC),. and leukocyte count
tion of the erythrocytes, leukocytes, and thrombocytes in
(WBC). Therefore, the collection site chosen for a blood
the peripheral blood.
sample influences the hematologic values.
When evaluating the hematologic responses of reptiles
Jugular venipuncture can be used to collect blood from
external factors such as environmental conditions that may
reptiles, especially lizards and chelonians (turtles and tor-
 enhance or inhibit the animal's response to disease should
toises) (Fig. 20.l). An advantage of jugular venipuncture is
not be overlooked. The cellular responses in the blood of
that it minimizes the chances for the hemodilution of the
reptiles are less predictable than those in the blood of endo-
sample with lymphatic fluid; however, jugular venipuncture
thermic mammals and birds whose cellular microenviron-
may require chemical restraint. Blood collection via jugular
ments are more stable. A number of intrinsic factors, such as
venipuncture is recommended in sorme species of reptiles.
age and gender, also affect the hematologic data from reptiles
such as chameleons, to minimize unwanted effects, such as
In addition, a number of sample-handling factors, such as the
skin darkening. which occurs with blood collection from
site of blood collection, type of anticoagulant used, method
other sites. With the head and neck extended, the jugular
Aea aui oi ppe pasn uiis jo adi pue suuon lan jo
vein is approached as it lies just under the skin in a line
between the angle of the mandible and the thoracic inlet. The
the establishment of normal reference values in reptiles.
right jugular vein may be larger than the left in some species.
Therefore, total and differential leukocyte counts must differ
The dorsal postoccipital vein or venous plexus (sinus) is a
greatly (i.e., twofold or greater increase or decrease) from
common location for obtaining blood samples in reptiles.
normal reference values to be considered significant
especially tortoises, turtles, and crocodilians, but samples
from this location commonly are diluted with a variable
amount of lymphatic fluid, which can be seen as a clear
Blood collection and handling
liquid entering the syringe. The dorsal postoccipital venous
plexus is reached by inserting the hypodermic needle along
Blood samples for hematologic and blood biochemical
the dorsal aspect of the neck behind the occipital protuber-
studies can be collected from reptiles using a variety of
ance, just off the midline and lateral to the cervical verte-
methods, with the choice depending on the peculiarities of
brae. In some species, this venous plexus is located just off
the species, volume of blood needed, size of the reptile.
midline and lateral to the cervical vertebrae. To collect blood
physical condition of the patient, and preference of the
from sea turtles using this technique, a 20-G, l.0- to 1.5-
collector.'-7 A few venipuncture sites are available for blood
inch needle is inserted in an area located one-third of the
 a   isn aos  s
distance from the dorsal midline to the lateral aspect of
phatic vessels often accompany blood vessels in reptiles. a
the neck and one-third of the distance from the head to the
mixture of blood and lymph frequently occurs with veni-
 carapace (Fig. 20.2).2 Blood is collected either into a syringe
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
277
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 20.1 Blood collection by jugular venipuncture in a turtle
Figure 20.3 Blood collection by cardiocentesis of a snake.
(Chelonia mydas)
needle attached to a 3-6 mL syringe) is inserted under the
scute—not through the scale—and then advanced into the
heart. Usually, the attached syringe fills slowly as the heart
pulsates (Fig. 20.3). The heart of small lizards can be located
by transillumination of the thoracic cavity. Cardiocentesis
may be harmful in lizards, however, and it is not commonly
used for blood collection in this group of reptiles. Cardiocen-
tesis of chelonians is performed by passing a needle through
the plastron along the midline at the junction of the humeral
and pectoral scutes. In small chelonians, a hole is drilled
through the plastron using an 18-20G needle, whereas a
sterile drill bit may be required for larger chelonians. After
the procedure, the hole drilled through the plastron should
 be sealed with an epoxy. If multiple sarmples are required, a
larger hole can be drilled into the plastron over the heart
3172
and then plugged with a rubber stopper from a blood col-
Figure 20.2 Blood collection from the dorsal postoccipital vein of a
provides an access port to the heart for blood collection.
turtle (Chelonia mydas).
The ventral coccygeal vein (ventral caudal or tail vein)
also is a common site for blood collection in reptiles, espe-
or an evacuated tube. This method also may be used for
cially lizards, snakes, and crocodilians. This vein lies just
other chelonians, such as tortoises and semiaquatic freshwa-
ventral to the caudal vertebrae. To collect blood from the
ter turtles. The supravertebral vessel is located in the area
ventral coccygeal vein, a 22-23G, 1 inch needle is inserted
similar to the dorsal postoccipital venous sinus and is
under a ventral scale or the ventral midline and then is
approached just behind the nuchal crest or occiput along the 
directed toward the vertebrae (Fig. 20.4). Slight negative
dorsal midline and just dorsal to the spinal cord in crocodil-
pressure should be applied to the syringe as the needle is
ians for blood collection.
being advanced. Often, a vertebra is encountered before
Cardiocentesis commonly is performed for blood collec-
 blood enters the needle, and in such cases, the needle is
tion from reptiles, especially snakes. The heart of a snake is
withdrawn slowly until blood flows into the syringe. Lizards
located by observing the heartbeats, which move the ventral
and crocodilians can be bled from the tail in this manner by
scutes overlying the heart, or by palpation. Beca use the heart
extending the tail over the edge of a table and approaching
will move caudally and cranially. it should be stabilized at
the site from underneath. This method of restraint is better
the apex and base using a thumb and forefinger during
tolerated by most reptiles compared with holding them in
sample collection. A needle (i.e., a thin-wall, 22 or 23G
dorsal recumbency. Lizards also can be restrained in a verti-
278
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
Figure 20.4 Blood collection by venipuncture of the ventral coccygeal
Figure 20.6 Blood collection from the ventral coccygeal vein of an
vein in the tail of a lizard (guana iguana) using the ventral approach.
alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) using the lateral approach.
the palatine-pterygoid veins in the oral cavity of medium
and large snalkes, but this method requires either a coopera-
tive patient or general anesthesia. In addition, these veins are
fragile and easily lacerated. Blood can be collected by aspira-
tion into a syringe or by allowing the blood to flow from the
needle hub into a microcollection tube. Lizards have large
ventral abdominal veins that lie just under the skin on the
ventral midline, and although this vein is easily located, it
also is easily lacerated. Thus, hemostasis after venipuncture
can be a problem. To minimize bleeding. the vein can be
cannulated with a needle and blood collected from the
needle hub into a microcollection tube. Lastly, although
blood from a capillary bed provides a poor sample for hema-
tologic studies, blood from a clipped toenail may be the only
collection procedure available in very small reptiles (i.e.
<30 g). After cleaning of the toenail, the nail is clipped using
nail trimmers, and blood is collected into a microcollection
Figure 20.5 Blood collection by venipuncture of the ventral coccygeal
tube. A styptic powder or solution is used to aid clotting.
vein in the tail of a lizard (iguana iguana) using the lateral approach.
The blood volume of reptiles is estimated to range between
5% and 8% of the body weight, and most species tolerate
cal position by allowing them to cling to a cage door, thereby
withdrawal of as much as 10% of the blood volume (or 1%
permitting access to the ventral tail In addition, a lateral
of body weight) without detrimental effects." A smaller
approach can be used in lizards and crocodilians by inserting
volume representing 0.5% of the body weight has been
the needle along the lateral aspect of the tail in an area
recommended for smaller animals.? Only 0.2-0.3mL of
where a natural groove or line occurs (Figs. 20.5 and 20.6).
 blood is required for routine hematologic studies; most rep-
The needle tip should be placed just beneath the caudal
tiles tolerate this loss.
vertebra and into the vein.
 Blood should be collected into an anticoagulant for hema-
Other, less commonly used procedures for collecting blood
tologic evaluations. Although ethylenediaminetetraacetic
from reptiles include sampling from the brachial vein or
acid (EDTA) generally is the anticoagulant of choice for
artery. palatine-pterygoid vein, ventral abdominal vein, and
hematologic studies, blood from many species of reptiles.
toenails. Blood collection from the brachial vein or artery is
especially chelonians, often undergoes hemolysis in its pres-
a blind approach, but it may be attempted in chelonians or
ence. Therefore, use of an alternative anticoagulant, such as
lizards. Samples obtained using this method, however, fre-
lithium heparin, is necessary. Heparin creates a blue tinge
quently are diluted with lymph. Blood can be collected from
to blood films and may cause clumping of leukocytes and
279
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
thrombocytes, thereby creating difficulties in obtaining
like avian reticulocytes, have a distinct ring of aggregated
accurate cell counts. To minimize these effects of heparin,
reticulum that encircles the red-cell nucleus. These cells best
the blood sample should be processed soon after collection,
correspond to the polychromatophilic erythrocytes found in
and slides should be made as soon as possible. A blood film
Romanowslky-stained blood films, and they probably are the
made from a drop of blood that contains no anticoagulant
cells that were recently released from erythropoietic tissues
and is taken from the needle immediately after collection
(Fig. 20.1l). Basophilic stippling commonly occurs in reticul-
can be used to avoid interference with anticoagulants during
locytes with Romanowsky stains.
staining.
Intraerythrocytic inclusions of unknown etiology are fre-
quently found in the blood films of reptiles. Round to irregu-
lar basophilic inclusions frequently are seen in the cytoplasm
Erythrocytes
 of erythrocytes in the peripheral blood flms from many
Morphology
      s 
those in birds and mammals. Reptilian erythrocytes are
ellipsoidal cells with centrally positioned, oval to round
nuclei, dense purple chromatin, and often, irregular margins
(Fig. 20.7). The cytoplasm generally stains uniformly orange-
pink with Romanowsky stains such as Wright stain. Poly-
chromatophilic erythrocytes have nuclear chromatin that is
less dense and cytoplasm that is more basophilic than in
mature erythrocytes. Immature erythrocytes occasionally
are seen in the peripheral blood of reptiles, especially very
young animals or those undergoing ecdysis. Immature
erythrocytes are round to irregular cells with large, round
15
nuclei and basophilic cytoplasm (Figs. 20.8 and 20.9). The
nucleus lacks the dense chromatin clumping of the mature
 cell. Immature erythrocytes often appear to be smaller than
mature erythrocytes, probably for the same reasons as those
 described for avian hematology (see Chapter 19). Mitotic
Figure 20.8 Immature erythrocytes in the blood filrm of a lizard (iguana
activity associated with erythrocytes is common in the
iguana). A basophilic rubricyte (large arrow) and a midpolychromatic
peripheral blood of reptiles (Fig. 20.10).
rubricyte (arrowhead) are shown. Wright-Giemmsa 5tain.
Reticulocytes are detected by staining cells with a vital
stain such as new methylene blue. Reptilian reticulocytes.
Figure 20.9 Immature erythrocytes in the blood filrm of a lizard (iguana
iguana). A basophilic rubricyte (large arrow), a midpolychromatic rubricyte
Figure 20.7 Normal erythrocytes in the blood film of a snake (Lichanura
(arrowhead), and a late polychromatic rubricyte are shown.Wright-Giemsa 
trivirgata) Wright-Giernsa stain
 stain.
280
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
Figure 20.10 An erythrocyte exhibiting mmitotic activity in the peripheral 
Figure 20.12 Basophilic inclusions (arrow) in the blood film of a turtle
blood of a snake (Boa constrictor).Wright-Giermsa stain.
(Trachemys scripta elegans). Wright-Giemsa stain.
microscopic images suggest that these inclusions are degen-
erate organelles: therefore, it is possible they represent
senescent changes in erythrocytes.1415 This is supported by
the finding that these inclusions were associated with mature
cells that tend to be longer and narrower with smaller areas
compared to less mature cells and the inclusions become
large as the erythrocyte ages. Other artifacts found in the
erythrocyte cytoplasm include vacuoles and refractile clear
 areas.? These can be minimized with careful preparation of
blood films.
Laboratory evaluation
Laboratory evaluation of the reptilian erythron involves
determina tion of the PCV, TRBC, and Hb of blood. The PCV is
obtained by microhematocrit centrifugation. A PCV also can 
be calculated by electronic cell counters that are accurately
adjusted for each species according to differences in erythro-
Figure 20.11 Polychromatic erythrocytes (arrows) in the blood film of a
cyte sizes. Microhematocrit centrifugation, however, is the
 snake (Lampropeftis afterna).Wright-Giermsa stain.
 most practical method for obtaining PCVs of reptilian blood.
A TRBC (cell/μL) can be determined by a manual hemo-
species of reptiles (Fig. 20.12). These inclusions appear to
cytometer counting method or by an automated cell counter.
represent an artifact of slide preparation; beca use blood films 
Two manual methods that commonly are used to obtain a
made repeatedly from the same sample often reveal varying
TRBC in reptilian blood involve either an erythrocyte
degrees of these inclusions. Blue-staining (Romanowsky
Unopette system (Becton-Dickinson, Rutherford, NJ) or
stains). approximately round, inclusions bodies have been
       l
studied in turtles where they measure 0.6-l.3μm in diam-
ogy). The erythrocyte Unopette system is the easier method.
eter in painted turtles (Chrysemys picta picta) and 0.5-2.0μm
because the l:200 dilution of the whole, anticoagulated
in diameter in loggerhead turtles (Caretta caretta).'3 In the 
blood is made using the diluent, pipette, and mixing vial
painted turtles the inclusions appeared singly in 6-34% of
provided with the kit. In contrast, the Natt and Herrick
the erythrocytes in blood films and generally adjacent to the
method requires preparation of the diluent/stain solution
cell nucleus. The inclusions were not associated with vacu-
and use of a red blood cell-diluting pipette. Blood is drawn
oles, granules, or crystalline structures as would be expected
to the 0.5 mark on the red blood cell-diluting pipette, and
with viral agents (see Responses in Disease). Electron-
Natt-Herrick solution then is drawn to the 10l mark to
281
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
ment (TRBC values are highest before and lowest immedi-
ately after hibernation), nutritional status; and gender (males
tend to have higher TRBCs than females).16-21
 The normal PCV of most reptiles generally ranges between
20% and 40%.17.22.23 Therefore, a PCV of less than 20% sug-
 gests anemia, a PCV of greater than 40% suggests either
hemoconcentration or erythrocytosis (polycythemia) (Table
20.1). The hemoglobin concentration of reptiles generally
ranges between 5.5 and 12 g/dL.21
The causes of anemia in reptiles are similar to those
described for birds and mammals. Anemia can be classified
as hemorrhagic (i.e., blood loss), hemolytic (i.e., increased
red-cell destruction), or depression anemia (i.e., decreased
red-cell production). Hemorrhagic anemias usually result
from traumatic injuries or bloodsucking parasites; however.
other causes, such as a coagulopathy or an ulcerative lesion,
should be considered as well. Hemolytic anemia can result
Figure 20.13 Appearance of erythrocytes and dark-staining leukocytes
from septicemia, parasitemia, or toxemia. Depression anemia
(arrow heads) in the Neubauer-ruled hemocytometer using Natt-Herrick 
usually is associated with chronic inflammatory diseases.
solution,1 00x
especially those associated with an infectious agent. Other
causes that should be considered for depression anemia in
reptiles include chronic renal or hepatic disease, neoplasia.
prepare the 1:200 dilution. With both methods, the diluted
chemicals, and possibly, hypothyroidism.
blood is discharged onto the hemocytometer counting
The degree of polychromasia or reticulocytosis in the
chamber and allowed to settle for a minimum of 5 minutes
blood films of normal reptiles generally is low, and it rep-
before counting. The total number of erythrocytes in the
resents less than 1% of the erythrocyte population. This
four corner and central squares of the central, large square
may be associated with the long erythrocyte life span
of the Neubauer-ruled counting chamber is obtained using
(600-800 days in some species) and, therefore, with the
X40 (i.e., high-dry) magnification (Fig. 20.13). The TRBC is
slow turnover rate of reptilian erythrocytes compared with
calculated by multiplying the number of erythrocytes that
those of birds and mammals.1721.24 The relatively low meta-
are counted by 10,000. Alternately, a l:l00 dilution of the
bolic rate of reptiles also may be a factor. Young reptiles
blood sample is made with the Natt-Herrick solution, which
tend to have a greater degree of polychromasia than adults.
is then, diluted l:l00 with saline to produce a 1:l000 dilu-
tion for charging the hemocytometer. The TRBC is obtained
 normal for most reptilian erythrocytes. Moderate to marked
by multiplying the number of cells counted on both sides of
anisocytosis and poilkilocytosis are associated with erythro-
the hemocytometer by 1000.15
cytic regenerative responses and, less commonly. with
The Hb is determined by the same technique as that
erythrocyte disorders. An increased polychromasia and
described for avian hematology (see Chapter 19). The cyan-
methemoglobin method or automated procedures, such as
ing to anemic conditions. Young reptiles or those undergo-
use of the hemoglobinometer (Coulter Electronics, Hialeah,
ing ecdysis also may exhibit an increased polychromasia and
FL). can determine the Hb of reptilian blood. The cyanmet-
immature erythrocyte concentration. Erythrocytes exhibit-
hemoglobin reagent-blood mixture requires centrifugation
ing binucleation, abnormal nuclear shapes (anisokaryosis),
to remove the free nuclei from the lysed erythrocytes before
or mitotic activity can be associated with marked regenera-
measuring the optical density to obtain an accurate Hb
tive responses (Fig. 20.14). These nuclear findings. however.
value.
 also may occur in reptiles awakening from hibernation or in
association with severe inflammatory disease, malnutrition,
Responses in disease
and starvation. Basophilic stippling usually suggests a regen-
Reptiles have lower TRBCs compared with those of mammals
erative response, but it may also be seen in patients with
and birds, and the TRBC appears to have an inverse relation-
lead toxicosis. Hypochromatic erythrocytes are associated
ship with the size of the erythrocytes. Lizards tend to have
with iron deficiency or chronic inflammatory disease (pre-
smaller erythrocytes than other reptiles; therefore, they have
sumably in association with iron sequestrationy.
higher TRBCs. Snakes have lower TRBC values than lizards
 Erythrocytic intracytoplasmic inclusions in reptilian blood
but greater values than chelonians. The TRBC, Hb, and PCV
films can be caused by viruses or blood parasites (see section
values vary with a number of factors, including the environ-
on blood parasites). Viral inclusions caused by an iridovirus
282
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
Table 20.1 Erythrocyte pararmeters for selected reptiles.
PCV [%]
RBC [x10%/μL]
Hb [g/dL] 
Mcv [fl]
MCHC [g/dL]
Lizards
Argentine lizard winter
24-28
0.8-1.1
10-14
252-300
36-48
Argentine lizard? summer
18-26
0.8-1.1
7-13
198-262
41-49
 Adult male iguanasb
29-39
1.0-1.7
6.7-10.2
228-303
22.7-28.0
Adult femmale iguanasb
33-44
1.2-1.8
9.1-12.2
235-331
24.9-31.0
Juvenile iguanasb
30-47
1.3-1.6
9.2-10.1
 Prehensile-tailed skink
24-60
0.8-1.4
7.4-11.6
152-600
17-56
Snakes
Boa constrictorle
24-40
1.0-2.5
3.3-15.3
159-625
21-42
Ball pythonst
16-21
E'l-E'O
5.5-7.9
211-540
25-40
Yellow rat snake? 
9-46
0.2-1.6
2.8-15.2
179-961
26-54
Jungle carpet pythonh
23-37
0.5-1.3
4.0-15.5
178-414
23.5-53.2
Chelonians
Aldabra tortoise'
11-17
0.3-0.7
3.2-8.0
375-537
28-40
 Desert tortoisel
23-37
1.2-3.0
6.9-7.7
377-607
19-34
aTroiano JC, Gould EG, Gould I (2008) Hematological reference intervals in argentine lizard Tupinambis merianae [Sauria-Teidae]. Comp Clin Pathol 
17: 93-7
bHarr KE, Alleman AR, Dennis PM, et al. (2001 Morphologic and cytochemmical characteristics of blood cells and hematologic and plasma biochemical
reference intervals in green iguanas. JAVMA 218[6]: 915-21
cWright KM, Skeba S (1992) Hematology and plasma chemistries of captive prehensile-tailed skinks [Corcucia zebrata]. J Zoo Wildf Med 23: 429-32.
dChiodini RJ, Sundberg JP (1982) Blood chermical values of the common boa constrictor [Constrictor constrictor]. Am J Vet Res 43: 1701-2.
Wu hews pa ian suoud pue shotrursuon eog ioy saniea Aunsiuau pooa pue wenhouay leuon (zah h ys houey Md ladiao 'rm jdoassoa
Clin May: 822-3
Johnson JH, Benson PA (1996) Laboratory reference values for a group of captive ball pythons [Aython regius]. Am J Vet Res 57: 1304-7.
9Ramsey EC, Dotson TK (1995) Tissue and serum enzyme activities in the yellow rat snake [Elaphe obsolete quadrivitatta]. Am J Vet Res 56: 423-8.
hCentini R, Klaphake E (2002) Hematologic values and cytology in a population of captive jungle carpet pythons, Morelia spilota cheynei. Proc Assoc
Rept Amph Vet, pp. 107-11.
'Carpenter JW (2001) Exotic Animal Formulary. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, p. 107.
Gottdenker NL, Jacobson ER (1995) Effect of venipuncture sites on hematologic and clinical biochemical values in desert tortoises [Gopherus
agassizil. Am J Vet Res 56: 19-21
are represented by snake erythrocyte viruses and lizard
further divided into heterophils and eosinophils. Reptilian
erythrocytic viruses (formerly known as Pirhemocyton) and
heterophils generally are round cells with eosinophilic
 are identified as small round (punctate to oval) red-staining
(bright orange), fusiform cytoplasmic granules (Figs. 20.15
(Giemsa stain) inclusions that may be associated with rect-
angular or hexagonal translucent, crystalline, or albuminoid
orless. The mature heterophil nucleus typically is round to
oval and is eccentrically positioned in the cell, with densely
 of leukocytes.26,28,31
heterophils with lobed nuclei. Heterophils range between 10
and 23 μm in size but vary between species and individual
blood samples.20
Leukocytes
 The cytoplasmic granules of reptilian heterophils usually
are peroxidase negative. except in a few species of
Morphology
 The granulocytes of reptiles can be classified into two groups.
generally do not stain positive for alkaline phospha-
acidophils and basophils, based on their appearance in blood
films prepared with Romanowsky stains. The acidophils are
ally equivalent to mammalian neutrophils, but they most
283
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 20.14 Binucleated erythrocytes (arrows) in the peripheral blood
Figure 20.16 A heterophil with a lobed nucleus (arrow) in the blood
of a lizard (guana iguana). Also shown are a lymphocyte (smmall arrow)
film of a lizard (Tupinambis merianae). Wright-Giemsa stain.
 and a thrormbocyte (arrowhead). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Figure 20.15 A heterophil (arrow) in the blood film of a snake
Figure 20.17 A heterophil (arrow) in the blood filr of a tortoise
(Lichanura trivirgata) Wright-Giemsa stain .
(Testudo graeca). Wright-Giemsa stain
likely behave like avian heterophils, in that they rely more
its cellular position and is variable in shape, ranging from
heavily on oxygen-independent mechanisms to destroy
 slightly elongated to lobed.
 Reptilian eosinophils contain glycogen, myeloperoxidase,
 Eosinophils in most reptilian blood flms are large, round
 and basic proteins.?1 The latter are known potent toxins for
cells with spherical, eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules (Figs.
parasites (especially helminthes), inactivating leukotrienes.
20.18 and 20.19). The granules of some species of reptiles.
and causing histamine release from mast cells.
such as iguanas, stain blue with Romanowsky stains. The
Basophils usually are small, round cells that contain baso-
cytoplasmic granules of eosinophils also stain positive for
philic, metachromatic cytoplasmic granules, which often 
peroxidase in some species of reptiles, thereby allowing easy
obscure the nucleus (Figs. 20.20 and 20.21). When visible,
differentiation between eosinophils and heterophils.4i1 Like
the cell nucleus is slightly eccentric in position and non-
heterophils, eosinophils vary in size with the species. For
 lobed. Basophil granules frequently are affected by water-
example, snakes have the largest eosinophils, whereas
based stains, which cause them to partially dissolve.
lizards have the smallest. The nucleus typically is central in
Therefore, alcohol fixation and use of Romanowslky stains
284
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
Figure 20.18 An eosinophil (arrow) in the blood film of a turtle 
Figure 20.20 Basophils (arrows) in the blood filr of a lizard (guana
(Trachemys scripta elegans). Wright-Giemsa stain.
iguana). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Figure 20.19 An eosinophil with blue cytoplasrnic granules (arrow) in 
Figure 20.21 A basophil (arrow) and a lymphocyte (arrowhead) in the
the blood filn of a lizard (iguana iguana). Wright-Giemsa stain.
blood film of a lizard (Tupinambis merianae). Wright-Giemsa stain.
provide the best staining results for reptilian basophils. Like
lymphocytes. Typically. lymphocytes have a large nucleus:
acidophils, basophils vary in size according to the species.
cytoplasm (N:C) ratio. The typical small, mature lympho-
but they generally range between 7 and 20 μm." Lizards
cyte has scant slightly basophilic (pale blue) cytoplasm.
tend to have small basophils, whereas turtles and crocodiles
Large lymphocytes have more cytoplasmic volume com-
have large basophils.
pared with small lymphocytes, and the nucleus often is pale
Reptilian lymphocytes resemble those of birds and
staining. The cytoplasm of a normal lymphocyte appears to
mammals. They vary in size from small (5-10 μm) to large
be homogenous and lacks both vacuoles and granules.
(15 μm)." Lymphocytes are round cells that exhibit irregu-
Monocytes generally are the largest leukocytes in the
larity when they mold around adjacent cells in the blood
peripheral blood of reptiles, and they resemble those of
film or fold at their cytoplasmic margin (Figs. 20.14, 20.21,
birds and mammals (Figs. 20.24 and 20.25). They vary in
20.22, 20.23). They have a round or slightly indented
shape from round to ameboid. The nucleus also is variable
nucleus that is centrally or slightly eccentrically positioned
in shape, ranging between round to oval to lobed. The
in the cell; nuclear chromatin is heavily clumped in mature
nuclear chromatin of monocytes is less condensed and stains
285
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 20.22 A smmallymphocyte (arrow) in the blood film of a snake 
Figure 20.24 A monocyte (arrow) in the blood film of a lizard (guana 
(Lichanura trivirgata). Wright-Giemsa stain.
iguana). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Figure 20.23 Medium lymphocytes (arrows) in the blood filr of a lizard 
Figure 20.25 A monocyte (arrow) in the blood film of a lizard (Aogona
(guana iguana). Wright-Giemsa stain.
vitticeps). Wright-Giermnsa stain.
relatively pale compared with the nuclei of lymphocytes.
Laboratory evaluation
The abundant cytoplasm of monocytes stains blue-gray, may
Evaluation of the reptilian leukogram involves determina-
appear to be slightly opaque, and may contain vacuoles or
tion of a total and a differential leukocyte count and exami-
fine, dustlike eosinophilic or azurophilic granules. Some
nation of the leukocyte morphology on a stained blood film.
authors refer to monocytes that have an azurophilic appear-
Manual counting methods are used to obtain total leukocyte
ance to the cytoplasm as a separate cell line referred to as
concentrations in reptiles for the same reasons they are used
an azurophil.'s These cells have cytochemical and ultrastruc-
 in avian hermatology: the presence of nucleated erythrocytes 
tural characteristics similar to those of monocytes and there-
and thrombocytes in the blood of reptiles precludes the use
fore, could be reported as monocytes rather than as a
of electronic cell-counting procedures. Two manual methods
commonly used to obtain a total leukocyte count in reptilian
be little clinical advantage to refer to these cells as a cell
blood are the Natt and Herrick method and the phloxine B
other than a monocyte; therefore, the term azurophilic
method (see Chapter 19 on avian hematology) (Fig. 20.13).
monocyte can be used for these cells.
In species of reptiles that normally have higher numbers of
286
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
circulating lymphocytes than of heterophils, the Natt and
cytosis. significant increases in the heterophil count of
Herrick method is preferred, because the accuracy of the
reptiles usually are associated with inflammatory disease.
phloxine B method relies on large numbers of heterophils
especially microbial and parasitic infections or tissue injury.
and eosinophils.
Noninflammatory conditions that may result in heterophilia
include stress (i.e., glucocorticosteroid excess), neoplasia,
Responses in disease
and heterophilic leukemia.
The percentage of heterophils in the leukocyte differential
 Heterophils may appear to be abnormal in reptiles suffer-
of normal reptiles varies with the species. Tables 20.2a and
ing from a variety of diseases. For example, heterophils may
20.2b Heterophils can represent as much as 40% of the
exhibit varying degrees of toxicity with inflammatory dis-
leukocytes in some normal reptilian species. The heterophil
eases, especially those involving infectious agents such as
concentration in reptiles also is influenced by seasonal
bacteria. Toxic heterophils exhibit increased cytoplasmic
factors. For example, the heterophil concentration is highest
basophilia, abnormal granulation (i.e., dark blue to purple
during the summer months and is lowest during hiberna-
granules or granules with abnormal shapes and staining).
tion.' Because the primary function of heterophils is phago
and cytoplasmic vacuolation (Figs. 20.27 through 20.31).
Degranulated heterophils may be associated with artifacts of
blood-film preparation or represent toxic changes. Nuclear
lobation in species that normally do not lobate their hetero-
phil nuclei also is an abnormal finding and suggests severe
inflammation.
The number of circulating eosinophils in normal reptiles
is variable. In general, lizards tend to have low numbers of
eosinophils compared with some species of turtles, which
can have as much as 20% eosinophils.162-2,4n43 Like het-
erophils, the number of eosinophils present in the peripheral
blood is influenced by environmental factors, such as sea
sonal changes. The number of eosinophils generally is lower
during the summer months and highest during hibernation
in some species. Eosinophilia may be associated with para-
sitic infections and stimulation of the immune system.
The percentage of basophils in the differential leukocyte count
of normal reptiles can range from 0% to 40% 16.21,2.4D.4-45
Seasonal variation in the basophil concentration is minimal,
Figure 20.26 An azurophilic monocyte (large arrow), monocyte (small 
unlike that in the acidophil concentration, which varies with
arrow), and lymphocyte (arrowhead) in the blood film of a snake
the season. Some species of reptiles normally have high
(Lampropeltis afterna).The other nonerythrocytic cells are thrombocytes.
numbers of circulating basophils. For example, some
Wright-Giernsa stain.
species of turtles typically have circulating basophil numbers 
Table 20.2a Leukocyte parameters for selected reptiles.
WBC x 10*/μL
Heterophils x
Lymphocytes x
Monocytes x
 Eosinophils x
 Basophils x
10²/μL
10²/μL
10²/μL
10²/μL
10²/μL
Lizards
Argentine lizard winter
13.1-18.1
1.5-2.2
6.7-7.7
1.8-3.0
3.4-4.4
0.2-0.4
Argentine lizard summer 
16.0-20.8
1.9-2.9
7.8-8.5
1.6-2.6
3.8-5.0
0.3-0.5
Adult male iguanasb
11.1-24.6
1.0-5.4
5.0-16.5
0.2-2.7
E'0-0'0
0.1-1.0
Adult femmale iguanasb
8.2-25.2
0.6-6.4
5.2-14.4
0.4-2.3
0.0-0.4
0.2-1.2
Juvenile iguanasb
8.0-22.0
1.0-3.8
6.2-17.2
9'0-E'0
0.0-0.4
0.1-0.7
aTroiano JC, Gould EG, Gould I. Hematological reference intervals in argentine lizard Tupinambis merianae [Sauria-Teidae]. Comp Clin Pathol 
2008:17:93-97
bHarr KE, Allemman AR, Dennis PM, Maxwell LK, Lock BA, Bennett RA, Jacobson ER: Morphologic and cytochermical characteristics of blood cells and 
287
Table 20.2b Leukocyte pararmeters for selected reptiles.
WBC × 10*/μL
Heterophils %
 Lymphocytes %
Monocytes %
Eosinophils %
Basophils %
Lizards
 Prehensil-tailed skinkc 
3.9-22.4
16-58
2-40
9-0
0-18
4-26
Snakes
Boa constrictorde
4-10
20-65
10-60
9-0
E-0
0-20
 Ball pythonst
7.9-16.4
56-67
7-21
12-22
一
0-2
Yellow rat snake?
0.4-32.0
 Jungle carpet pythont
Chelonians
 Aldabra tortoise'
1.0-8.3
32-79
2-40
018
0-7
014
Desert tortoisel
6'8-9'9
35-60
25-50
-0
014
2-15
cWright KM, Skeba S: Hematology and plasma chemistries of captive prehensile-tailed skinks [Corcucia zebrata] J Zoo Wildl Med 23: 429-432. 1992
dChiodini RJ, Sundberg JP: Blood chemmical values of the common boa constrictor [Constrictor constrictor]. Am J Vet Res 43: 1701-1702, 1982.
eRosskopf Wl, Woerpel RW, Yanoff SR: Normal hemogram and blood chernistry values for boa constrictors and pythons. Vet Med Small Anim Clin,
May:822-823. 1982
tJohnson JH, Benson PA: Laboratory reference values for a group of captive ball pythons [Aython regius]. Am J Vet Res 57: 1304-1307, 1996.
9Ramsey EC, Dotson TK: Tissue and serum enzyme activities in the yellow rat snake [Elaphe obsolete quadrivitatta]. Am J Vet Res 56: 423-428, 1995.
hCentini R. Klaphake E: Hematologic values and cytology in a population of captive jungle carpet pythons, Morelia spilota cheynei. Proc Assoc Rept
Amph Vet 107-111. 2002.
'Carpenter JW. Exotic Animal Formulary 3' ed. St. Louis, Elsevier Saunders 2001 : 107.
IGottdenker NL, Jacobson ER. Effect of venipuncture sites on hematologic and clinical biochermical values in desert tortoises [Gopherus agassizi]. Am
J Vet Res 1995;56:19-21.
Figure 20.28 Moderately toxic (2 + to 3+) toxic heterophils (arrows), a
a lizard (Pogona vitticeps). Wright-Giemsa stain .
basophil (arrowhead), and a lymphocyte (small arrow) in the blood film of
a lizard (guana iguana). Wright-Giemsa stain.
288
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
l (oe) lydoaiay ixot (+e ol + h) nixot Alateapo  hz'oz ani
Figure 20.31 A mnoderately toxic (2 +) toxic heterophil (arrow) and a
the blood film of a lizard (iguana iguana). Wright-Giemsa stain.
reactive monocyte (arrowhead) in the blood film of a lizard (guana
iguana). Wright-Giemsa stain.
cytes also are influenced by seasonal change: lymphocyte
counts tend to be lowest during the winter months and
have decreased numbers—or even absent—lymphocytes
during hibernation, after which the lymphocyte concen-
decreased numbers of circulating lymphocytes during the
winter months despite their lack of hibernation.?’ Lympho-
cyte numbers also are affected by gender with the female
members of some species having significantly higher lym-
Reptilian lymphocytes function in a manner similar to
those of birds and mammals. They have the same major
classes of lymphocytes. B and T lymphocytes. that are
 involved with a variety of immunologic functions. 52.5 Unlike
those in birds and mammals, however, the immunologic
Figure 20.30 A moderately to marked toxic (3 + to 4+) toxic
responses of ectothermic reptiles are influenced greatly by
heterophils (arrows) in the blood filrm of a lizard (guana iguana).
the environment. For example, low termperatures may sup-
Wright-Giemsa stain.
press or even inhibit the immune response in reptiles.
Lymphopenia often is associated with malnutrition or is
that represent as much as 40% of the leukocyte differential,
p sss r siaq ssas ro raq e o aruo
although the reason for this is unknown.
immunosuppression. Lymphocytosis occurs during wound
Based on the results of cytochemical and ultrastructural
healing. inflammatory disease, parasitic infection (e.g., ana-
studies, reptilian basophils most likely function in a manner
salkiasis and spirorchidiasis), and viral infections. Lymphocy-
 similar to that of mammalian basophils.474s They appear to
tosis also occurs during ecdysis.?3 The presence of reactive
process surface immunoglobulins and to release histamine
lymphocytes and, less commonly. of plasma cells suggests 
on degranulation. Basophilias have been associated with
stimulation of the immune system (Fig. 20.32). These cells
parasitic and viral infections.
 resemble those of birds and mammals. Reactive lymphocytes
The lymphocyte concentration in reptilian blood also
have more abundant, deeply basophilic cytoplasm compared
varies and can represent more than 80% of the normal
with normal lymphocytes, and their nuclear chromatin may
leukocyte differential in some species.?' Lymphocyte
appear to be less condensed. Plasma cells have abundant,
numbers are influenced by several environmental and phys-
intensely basophilic cytoplasm that contains a distinct Golgi
iologic factors. Like heterophils and eosinophils, lympho-
zone and an eccentrically positioned nucleus.
289
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 20.32 A plasma cell (arrow) in the blood filr of a snake
Figure 20.33 Thrombocytes (arrow) in the blood filr of a tortoise
(Lampropeftis afterna). Wright-Giemnsa stain.
(Testudo graeca). Wright-Giemnsa stain.
Monocytes generally occur in low numbers in the blood
from the blood film indicates improvement and a favorable
films of normal reptiles, ranging between 0% and 10% of
response to therapy. Anemic reptiles exhibiting an erythro-
cytic regenerative response have a better prognosis com-
have monocytes with an azurophilic appearance to the cyto-
pared with those exhibiting little or no response. Similarly.
a normal thrombocyte concentration after a thrombocyto-
literature (Figs. 20.24 through 20.26). The monocyte con-
penia indicates a favorable response. Therefore, hematology
centration changes little with seasonal variation. Monocyto-
can be a valuable tool in the assessment of reptilian patients.
sis suggests inflammatory diseases, especially granulomatous
inflamma tion. A progressive increase in monocyte numbers
 along with the total leukocyte count and heterophil numbers
Thrombocytes and hemostasis
have been associated with an increase in the tumor score of
green turtles (Chelonia mydas) with fibropapillomastosis.56
Morphology
Thrombocytes of reptiles appear as eliptical to fusiform.
occasionally found in the blood film of normal reptiles as
nucleated cells (Figs. 20.14, 20.26, 20.33, and 20.34). The
well as those undergoing a hemolytic disorder.s7 Unlike
centrally positioned nucleus has dense nuclear chromatin
mammals, reptiles do not have lymph nodes that filter out
that stains purple, whereas the cytoplasm typically is color
macrophages involved in erythrophagocytosis occurring in
less and may contain a few azurophilic granules. Activated
various parts of the body. such as the coelomic cavity.
thrombocytes are common and appear as clusters of cells
Instead, macrophages undergoing erythrophagocytosis and
with irregular cytoplasmic margins and vacuoles. Thrombo-
cytes appear to be devoid of cytoplasm when aggregated.
sites such as the spleen for filtering.
Although considered to be rare, several cases of leukemia
Laboratory evaluation
have been reported in reptiles.5s-63 The myeloproliferative
The actual thrombocyte concentration may be difficult to
diseases of reptiles can be classified in the same manner as
determine, because thrombocytes tend to clump both in
those in mammals. Special cytochemical studies may be
vitro and when exposed to heparin, which is a commonly
required to identify the abnormal cells.
used anticoagulant in reptilian hematology. The thrombo-
Hematology is most valuable as a tool for assessing the
cyte concentration can be measured using the Natt and
response of reptilian patients to disease or therapy. A favor-
Herrick method for obtained erythrocyte and leukocyte
able response in the leukogram is a shift from a leukocytosis
counts. After preparing the l: 200 dilution of the blood with
or leukopenia to a normal leukocyte concentration. A
Natt-Herrick solution and charging a Neubauer-ruled hemo-
normal heterophil, eosinophil, or monocyte count after a
cytometer, the number of thrombocytes in the entire central
heterophilia, eosinophilia, or monocytosis, respectively.
ruled area (i.e., the central, large square) are counted on
usually indicates improved patient status. Disappearance of
both sides of the hemocytometer. The number of thrombo-
toxic heterophils, reactive lymphocytes, and plasma cells
cytes per microliter of blood is obtained by multiplying that
290
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
Figure 20.34 A thrombocyte (arrow) and a lymphocyte (arrowhead) in
Figure 20.35 A hemogregarine, most likely Hepatozoon, in the blood 
the bloodl film of a turtle (Trachemys scripta efegans). Wright-Giemsa stain.
filn of a snake (Coralus canina). Wright-Giermsa stain.
number by looo. A subjective thrombocyte concentration
some have the potential of causing disease, such as hemo-
can be determined based on the number of thrombocytes
lytic anemia
that appear in a stained blood film and it can be reported as
 Common hemoprotozoa include the hemogregarines, try-
either reduced, normal, or increased. Thrombocytes typi-
panosomes, and Plasmodium." Less commonly encountered
cally occur in numbers that range between 25 and 350
hemoprotozoans include Leishmania, Saurocytozoon, Haemo-
thrombocytes per lo0 leukocytes in the blood film of normal
proteus, and Schellackia, and the piroplasmids. Microfilaria
reptiles.
are commonly found in the peripheral blood films of some
reptiles.
Responses to disease
Reptilian thrombocyte numbers vary with species and
Hemogregarines
seasons. For example, the mean absolute thrombocyte count
Hemogregarines are the most common group of sporozoan
of the argentine lizard (Tupinambis merianae) is 7.2 × 10”/μL
hemoparasites affecting reptils, especially snalkes,6-69 The
during the winter months but 9.l x lo'/μL during the
three genera of hemogregarines that are common in reptiles 
summer.64
are Hemogregarina, Hepatozoon, and Karyolysus. The hemo-
Reptilian thrombocytes have a significant role in throm-
gregarines are not easily differentiated based on the appear-
bus formation, and they function similarly to avian throm-
ance of their gametocytes within the cytopla sm oferythrocytes
bocytes and mammalian platelets. The ultrastructural
 or tisue schizonts.70.71 The hemogregarines found in snakes 
features of activated reptilian thrombocytes include pseudo-
usually belong to the genus Hepatozoon and those of semi-
podia with fine, granular material and many fibrin-like fila-
aquatic freshwater turtles usually to the genus Hemogrega-
ments radiating both between and around the cells.21
rina. Karyolysus typically occurs in Old World lizards and.
Immature thrombocytes of reptiles resemble the immature
possibly, tree snakes. No cases of hemogregariniasis have
thrombocytes of birds and, when present in blood films.
been reported in sea turtles, and the parasites are rare in
represent a regenerative response. Thrombocytopenias of
tortoises. Accurate classification of the hemogregarines into
reptiles most lilkely result from excessive peripheral utiliza-
their appropriate genus cannot be accomplished based on
tion of thrombocytes or decreased thrombocyte production.
their appearance in the blood flm alone. Therefore, the
Thrombocytes with polymorphic nuclei are considered to be
general term hemogregarine is used when reporting their
abnormal, and may be associated with severe inflammatory
presence in blood films during hematologic examinations.
disease.
 Hemogregarines are identified by the presence of intracy-
      
20.36). The sausage-shaped gametocytes have a colorless to
Blood parasites
pale purple cytoplasm that lacks the refractile pigment gran-
 ules found in the gametocytes of Plasmodium and Haemopro-
Blood parasites are common in reptiles. Their presence
teus, and they distort the host cell by creating a bulge in the
iad puo si aoiaua auo Aluo eida zzs sedo
291
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 20.36 An erythrocytic inclusion resemmbling that of a
Figure 20.37 A trypanosome in the blood filrm of a snake (Corallus
hemogregarine in the blood film of a tortoise (Geochefone emys).
canina). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Wright-Giermsa stain.
snakes.7173 Plasmodium in reptiles resemble those found in
erythrocyte; however, in heavy infections, two gametocytes
birds (see Chapter 19 on avian hematology). The gameto-
may be found in one cell.
Cytes have refractile pigment granules that aid in differentia-
Hemogregarines have a lifecycle that involves sexual
tion between Plasmodium and hemogregarines. Also, unlike
reproduction (sporogony) in an invertebrate host and
hemogregarines, Plasmodium schizogony (packets of mero-
asexual multiplication (merogony) in a reptilian host. The
zoites) can occur in blood cells. The trophozoites are small.
parasite infects the reptilian host when the sporozoites are
signet-ring structures in the cytoplasm of erythrocytes. The
transmitted from the invertebrate host as it feeds on the
lifecycle of Plasmodium involves a sporogony stage in an
blood of the reptile or is ingested by the reptile. Several
insect host (e.g., mosquito) and schizogony and gametogony
biting, invertebrate hosts (i.e., mites, ticks, mosquitoes, flies.
in a reptile host. Infections with Plasmodium can result in a
and bugs) can transmit the parasite to terrestrial reptiles.
severe hemolytic anemia.
whereas leeches appear to be the primary intermediate host
for the hemogregarines of aquatic reptiles. Reptilian hemo-
Sauroleishmania
gregarines are well adapted to their natural host and do not
 Sauroleishmania rarely are seen in blood films of reptiles. The
cause clinical disease; however, because they are relatively
 organism is related to trypanosomes, and it primarily infects
not host-specific, they can cause significant clinical disease
lizards.7 when present, the organism (i.e., amastigote or
in unnatural or aberrant host species.6 Such infections
leishmanial stage) appears as a round to oval inclusion of
result in severe inflammatory lesions associated with schiz-
2-4 μm with blue cytoplasm and an oval, red nucleus in the
onts in a variety of organs.
cytoplasm of thrombocytes or mononuclear leukocytes.
Trypanosomes
Saurocytozoon
The trypanosomes found in reptiles resemble those found in
Saurocytozoon produce large. round gametocytes that lack
mammals and birds. They are large, extracellular, flagellate
pigment granules in the cytoplasm of leukocytes in periph-
protozoa with a bladelilke shape, a single flagellum, and a
eral blood films. Only the gametocyte stage is found in the
prominent, undulating membrane (Fig. 20.37). For trans-
peripheral blood, and schizogony occurs in the tissues. The
mission, they require a bloodsucking invertebrate host, such
organism resembles Leukocytozoon of birds, because it grossly
as biting flies for terrestrial reptiles or leeches for aquatic
distorts the host cell that it parasitizes (see Chapter 19). As
reptiles. Trypanosomes have been found in all orders of
indicated by its name, this is a parasite of lizards and, most
reptiles, have a worldwide distribution, rarely cause clinical
likely, is transmitted by mosquitoes.7b
disease, and often are associated with lifelong infections.71
Lainsonia and Schellackia
Plasmodium
Lainsonia and Schellackia are coccidian parasites of lizards and
More than 60 species of Plasmodium have been described in
snakes. They produce schizonts that can be found in the
reptiles; most have been identified in lizards and a few in
intestinal epithelium and sporozoites that can be found in
292
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
Figure 20.38 An erythrocytic cytoplasmic Serpentoplasma inclusion
Figure 20.39 A rectangular, vacuole or clear cytoplasmic inclusion in
(arrow) in the blood filn of a snake (Corallus canina). A small lymphocyte 
the cytoplasm of an erythrocyte in the blood film of a lizard (guana
 is also present (arrowhead). Wright-Giemmsa stain.
iguana). Wright-Giemsa stain
the peripheral blood.7 The sporozoites are intracytoplasmic
ence of a virus consistent with members of the Iridoviridae.
  sa n s   s
leukocytes, primarily lymphocytes that resemble those of
an oncornavirus based on the results of ultrastructural
Afoxoplasma in birds (see Chapter 19). The parasite is identi-
fied by the round to oval, pale-staining, nonpigmented
size, measuring between 0.5 and 1.5 μm.* A single inclusion
inclusions that deform the host-cell nucleus into a crescent
per erythrocyte is typical; however, two inclusions per cell
shape. Schellackia and Lainsonia are transmitted by mites or.
may occur on occasion. Natural infections with the lizard
possibly. by ingestion of oocysts from feces.
        
viremias (i.e., >85% of the erythrocytes are infected) that
Piroplasmids
result in the appearance of spindle-shaped or thin, elongate 
The piroplasmids of reptiles include Babesia, Aegyptianella
erythrocytes.30
(Tunetella). and Sauroplasma or Serpentoplasma. They have
The square to rectangular (occasionally hexagonal trans-
been reported in chelonians, lizards, and snakes and appear
as small, nonpigmented inclusions in the cytoplasm of
rocytes of reptiles, especially iguanas may be associated with
       
hemoglobin crystals.'s These are often referred to as Pirhemo-
nonpigmented, and signet ring-like vacuoles measuring
cyfon inclusions and are frequently found in healthy reptiles
from 1 to 2 pμm in diameter (Fig. 20.38).'" Piroplasmids com-
(Fig. 20.39). They appear to have no clinical significance.
monly found in the peripheral blood erythrocytes of lizards
are referred to as Sauroplasma, whereas the same organisms
Haemoproteus
in the blood of snakes are called Serpentoplasma. The piro-
Haemoproteus (Haemocystidium) has been reported in lizards.
plasmids are transmitted by biting insects or arthropods.
turtles, and snakes.70. They resemble the Haemoproteus
They reproduce by either schizogony or binary fission.
found in birds; only the gametocytes with refractile pigment 
granules are found in the peripheral blood films (see Chapter
Pirohemocyton
19). The parasite can cause dehemoglobinization of the
Pirhemocytonoisis is characterized by the presence of
infected erythrocyte.'3
intraerythrocytic inclusions in lizards. The inclusions appear
as red, punctate to oval bodies that may be associated with
Microfilaria
vacuoles (albuminoid vacuoles) and irregular, pale-staining
 Microflaremia in reptiles typically is not associated with
  s o    
clinical signs of illness or changes in the hemogram or blood
blood films. Similar inclusions have been reported in snakes
biochermical profile.747s The reptile typically survives for
and turtles.25.27 These intraerythrocytic inclusions of reptiles
years with these parasites, and microfilaria are detected as
an incidental findingon examination ofrou tine Romanowsky-
Pirhemocyfon, until ultrastructural studies revealed the pres-
stained blood films. Microfilaria are produced by adult
293
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
female filarid nematodes, which can live in various locations
in the body of a reptile. Microflaria are ingested by a suit-
able bloodsucking arthropod (i.e., tick or mite) or insect (i.e.
mosquito), in which they develop into the infective, third-
stage larval form. The lifecycle is complete when the infec-
tive form enters a new reptilian host during intermediate-host
feeding.
Hematopoiesis
 The bone marrow appears to be the primary site for eryth-
ropoiesis, granulopoiesis, and thrombopoiesis in adult rep-
tiles. The bone marrow of some reptiles, especially turtles
and tortoises, is not gelatinous, and hematopoietic cells may
be difficult to sample for study. A saline-soak technique can
be used for turtles in which a 2mm thickness of bone is
allowed to soak for 18 to 24 hours at 4°℃, and then agitated
Figure 20.40 A progranulocyte (arrow) and a mature heterophil
(arrowhead) in the blood film of a lizard (guana iguana). Wright-Giemsa
for 30 minutes, and the solution centrifuged to obtain the
hematopoietic cells.?6
 stain.
Erythropoiesis in the bone marrow occurs within the vas-
tion. The nuclear chromatin becomes increasingly con-
cular space of the reticular stroma.1476 Foci of extra medul-
densed with maturity, and in those species that lobate their
lary erythropoiesis, in the liver and spleen, are common. The
nuclei, the nucleus changes from round to segmented.
maturation stages of reptilian erythrocytes appear to be
Mature and immature heterophils from some species stain
similar to those of birds and mammals. In general, seven
positive with chloroacetate esterase, c-naphthyl butyrate
recognizable stages are involved in erythrocyte develop-
esterase, 0-naphthyl acetate esterase, and leukocyte allkaline
ment: rubriblasts, prorubricytes, basophilic rubricytes, early
polychromatic rubricytes, late polychromatic rubricytes,
ules of the eosinophils of some reptiles typically are large.
polychromatic erythrocytes, and mature erythrocytes. The
round, and pink with Romanowsky stains and golden brown
morphologic features of these cells are similar to those
with benzedrine peroxidase, which helps in the differentia-
described in birds (see Chapter 19).
tion of eosinophil precursors from heterophil precursors.
As the reptilian erythrocyte matures, the cell becomes
Thrombopoiesis in reptiles is similar to that in birds (see
larger and the cytoplasm increasingly eosinophilic because
Chapter 19 on avian hematology). The elliptical, mature
of increased hemoglobin synthesis. A clear, size-related pro-
thrombocytes are derived from round precursor cells. As
gression in erythrocyte development may not be evident in
thrombocytes develop. they become smaller and the cyto-
some species, but the shape of the cell changes from spheri-
plasm becomes less basophilic. The shape of the cell nucleus
cal to a flattened ellipsoid with maturation. The erythrocyte
changes from round to oval with maturity. During the later
nucleus also decreases in size, with its shape changing from
stages of development, the nuclear chromatin becomes
round to ellipsoid, and the nuclear chromatin becomes
densely packed, and specific cytoplasmic granules may
increasingly condensed as the cell matures. Sudan black B
appear. It often is difficult to differentiate thrombocytes from
stain can be used as an erythrocyte marker that stains the
lymphocytes in hematopoietic specimens. Special chemical
    a  
stains may be used to differentiate the two in some species
cytes dark gray to black.
in which thrombocytes stain positive with periodic acid-
Developing granulocytes are morphologically similar to
Schiff, acid phosphatase, and c-naphthyl butyrate esterase
mammalian granulocytes and are associated with the extra
and lymphocytes do not.2,37.76
vascular spaces of the bone marrow reticular stroma.14 The
The thymus is the first lymphoid organ to develop in
maturing granulocytes migrate through the endothelial cells
reptiles. The lymphocytes derive from bloodborne stem cells.
of the sinusoids to enter the bloodstream. The maturation
 a 's  a  a aal  
stages of the granulocytes of reptiles also resemble those of
 of the immunoglobulin-producing cells (i.e., B lymphocytes)
birds (see Chapter 19, Avian Hematology) (Fig. 20.40). As
is unknown, because a reptilian equivalent to the avian
the granulocyte matures, the cell decreases in size, and the
bursa of Fabricius has not been found. During the early
cytoplasm becomes less basophilic. Specific, characteristic
stages of splenic development, large numbers of granulo-
of development, and these increase in number with matura-
development, however, they disappear, and the spleen
294
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
becomes primarily involved with lymphopoiesis. Lympho-
17. Frye FL (199l) Hematology as applied to clinical reptile medi-
poiesis of reptiles resembles that of mammals and birds.
cine. In: Frye FL, Biomedical and Surgical Aspects of Captive Reprile
Reptilian lymphoblasts, prolymphocytes, and mature lym-
Husbandry. 2nd ed. Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing.
1:
pue spq ui puon asoun on leuapi aq oi readde saiou
209-77.
mammals, and they can be found in lymphopoietic tissues
18. Harr KE, Alleman AR, Dennis PM, et al. (200l) Morphologic
and cytochemical characteristics of blood cells and hematologic
such as the spleen.
and plasma biochemical reference intervals in green iguanas.
JAVMA 218: 915-21,
19. Mussachia XJ, Sievers ML (1956) Effects of induced cold torpor
References
on blood of Chrysemys picta. Am J Physiol 187: 99-102.
 20. Saint Girons MC (1970) Morphology of the cireulating blood
1. Brown C (2007) Blood sample collection in lizards. Lab Anim
cell. In: Gans C, Parsons TC (eds.). Biology of the Reprilia. New
36: 23-4.
York: Academic Press, 3: 73-91.
2. Campbell TW (1996) Sea turtle rehabilitation. In: Mader DR
21. Sypik J, Borysenko M (1988) Reptiles. In: Rowley AF, Ratcliffe
(ed.), Reprile Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
NA (eds.), Verrebrate Blood Cels. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
pp. 427-36.
versity Press, pp. 211-56.
3. Campbell TW, Ellis CK (2007) Avian and Exoric Animal Hematol-
22. Marks SK, Citino SB (1990) Hematology and serum chemistry
ogy and Cyrology. 3rd ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
of the radiated tortoise {Tesrudo radiare). J Zool Wildl Med 21:
4. Jacobson ER (1993) Blood collection techniques in reptiles:
342-4.
laboratory investigations. In: Fowler ME (ed.), Zoo and Wild
23. Wallach JD, Boever WJ (1983) Diseases of Exoric Animals, Medica!
Animal Medicine: Currenr Therapy 3. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
and Surgical Management. Philadelphia: WB Saunders. pp.
pp. 144-52.
983-7.
 5. Jenkins JR (1 996) Diagnostic and clinical techniques. In: Mader
24. Altland PD, Brace KC (1962) Red cell life span in the turtle and
DR (ed.), Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saun-
toad. Am J Physio! 203: 1188-90.
ders, p. 264-76.
25.Acholonu AD (1974) Haemogregarina pseudemydis n. sp. (Apicom-
6. Owens DW, Ruiz GJ (l980) New methods of obtaining blood
plexa: Haemogregarinidae} and Pirhemocyton chelonarum n.sp.in
and cerebrospinal fluid from marine turtles. Herperologica 36:
turtles from Louisiana. J Prorozoo! 2l: 659-64.
17-20.
26. Allender MC, Fry MM, Irizarry AR, Craig L, Johnson AJ, Jones
7. Samour HJ, Risley D, March T, et al. (1984) Blood sampling
M (2006) Intracytoplasmic inclusions in circulating leukocytes
techniques in reptiles. Ver Rer 114: 472-6.
from an Easterm box turtle (Terrapene carolina Carolina) with
8. Crawshaw GJ (1996) Comparison of plasma biochemical values
iridoviral infection. J Wild Dis 42: 677-84.
in blood and blood-lymph mixtures from red-eared sliders.
27. Daly JU, Mayhue M, Menna JH, Calhoun CH (1980) Viruslike
Trachemys scripta elegans. Bull Assoc Rept Amphib Ver 6: 7-9.
 particles associated with Pirhemocyton inclusion bodies in the
9. Cuadrado M, Molina-Prescott I, Fiores L (2003) Comparison
erythrocytes of a water snake, Nerodia eryrhrogaster flavigaster.
between tail and jugular venipuncture techniques for blood
J Parasitol 66: 82-7.
sample collection in common chameleons (Chamaeleo chamae-
28. Johnsrude JD, Raskin RE, Hoge AYA, Erdos GW (1997)
[eon). Ver J 166: 93-7.
Intraerythrocytic inclusions associated with iridoviral infection
10. Gottdenker NL, Jacobson ER (1 995) Effect of venipuncture sites
in a fer de lance (Borhrops mooheni) snake. Ver Patho! 34: 235-8.
on hematologic and clinical biochemical values in desert tor-
29. Smith TG, Desser SS, Hong H (1994) Morphology. ultrastruc-
toises (Gopherus agassizij). Am J Ver Res 56: 19-21.
ture and taxonomic status of Toddia sp in northern water snakes
1l. Smeller JM, Bush M, Seal US (1978) Blood volume measure-
(Nerodia sipedon sipedon) from Ontario, Canada. J Wildl Dis 30:
ments in gopher snakes, using autologous ' Cr-labeled red blood
169-75.
cells. Am J Ver Res 39: 355-6.
30. Telford SR, Jacobson ER (1993) Lizard erythrocytic virus in East
12. Nevarez J (2009) Lizards. In Mitchell MA, Tully TN (eds).
African chameleons. J Wildl Dis 29: 57-63.
Manual of Exotic Per Practice. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
31. Weinmann N, Papp T, deMatos, APA, Teifke JP, Marschang RE
164206.
[2007) Experimental infection of crickets (Gryllus bimacularus)
13. Davis AK, Holcomb KL (2008) Intraerythrocytic inclusion
with an invertebrate iridovirus isolated from a high-casqued
bodies in painted turtles (Chrysemys picta picta) with measure-
chameleon (Chamaeleo hoehneli). J Ver Dian Invesr 19: 674-9.
ments of affected cells. Comp Clin Pathol 17: 51-4.
32. Carvalho RL, Antoniazzi MM, Jared C, Silva AMJ, Santos AA,
14. Alleman AR, Jacobson ER, Raskin RE (1992) Morphologic and
Egami Ml (2006) Morphological, cytochemical, and ultrastruc-
cytochemical characteristics of blood cells from the desert tor-
tural observations on the blood cells of the reptile Tupinambis
toise (Gopherus agassizii). Am J Ver Res 53: 1645-51.
merianae (Squamata). Comp Clin Pathol 15: 169-74.
15. Strik NI, Alleman AR, Harr KE (2007) Circulating inflammatory
33. Caxton-Martins AE, Nganwuchu AM (1978) A cytochemical
cells. In Jacobson ER (ed.). Infectious Diseases and Pathology
study of the blood of the rainbow lizard (Agama agama). J Anat
of Reptiles, Color Atlas and Text. Boca Raton: CRC Press, pp.
125: 477-80.
167-218.
34. Salakij C. Salkij J. Apibal S, Narkkong NA, Chanhome L,
 16. Duguy R (1970) Numbers of blood clls and their variations.
Rochanapat N (2002) Hematology, morphology. cytochemical
In: Gans C, Parsons TC (eds.), Biology of the Reprilia. New York:
staining and ultrastru ctural characteristics of blood cells in king
Academic Press, 3: 93-109.
cobras (Ophiophagus Hannah). Ver Clin Pathol 3l: 1l6-26.
295
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
35. Montali RK (1988) Comparative pathology of inflammation in
54. Cuadrado M, Diaz-Paniagua C, Quevedo MA, Aquilar JM,
higher vertebrates [reptiles, birds, and mammals]. J Comp Patho!
-   [ e o   m
99: 1-26.
tocic and healthy post-reproductive female chameleons. J Wild
36. Desser SS, Weller I {1979) Ultrastructural observations on the
Dis 38: 395-401.
 granular leucocytes of the tuatara, Sphenodon punctarus (Gray).
 55. Otis VS (1973) Hemocytological and serum chemistry param-
Tissue Cell 1l: 703-15.
eters of the African puff adder, Bitis arietans. Herperologica 29:
37. Bounous DI, Dotson TK, Brooks RL, et al. (1996) Cytochemical
110-16.
staining and ultrastructural characteristics of peripheral blood
56. Work TM, Balazs GH (1999) Relating tumor score to hemato]-
leukocytes from the yellow rat snake (Elaphe obsolera quadrivi-
ogy in green turtles with fibropapillomastosis in Hawaii. J Wild
tatta). Comp Haematol Int 6: 86-91.
Dis 35: 8047.
38. Hawkey CM, Dennett TB (1989) Color Arlas of Comparative Ver-
57. George JW, Holmberg TA, Riggs SM, Hawkins MG (2008) Cir-
erinary Hematology. London: Wolfe Medical Publications. pp.
culating siderophagocytes and erythophagocytes in a com
6-147.
snake (Elaphe guttata) after coelomic surgery. 37: 308-11.
39. Mateo MR, Roberts ED, Enright FM (1984) Morphological,
58. Frye FL, Carney J (1973) Acute lymphocytic leukemia in a boa
cytochemical, and functional studies of peripheral blood cells in
constrictor. J Am Ver Med Assorc 163: 6534.
young healthy American alligators (Alligator mississippiensis). Am
59. Frye FL, Carney J (1972) Myeloproliferative disease in a turtle.
J Ver Res 45: 1046-53
JAm Ver Med Assoc 16l: 595-9.
40. Jacobson ER, Gaskin JM, Brown MB, et al. (1990) Chronic
60. Goldberg SR, Holshuh HJ (199l) A case of leukemia in the
upper respiratory tract disease of free-ranging desert tortoises.
desert spiny lizard (Sceloporus magister). J Wild! Dis 27: 521-5.
Xerobates agassizii. J Wildl Dis 27: 296-316.
61. Griner LA (1983) Pathology of Zoo Animais. San Diego: Zoological
41. Taylor K, Kaplan HM (1 961) Light microscopy of the blood cells 
 Society of San Diego.
of Pseudemyd turtles. Herperologica 17: 186-92.
62. Langenberg JA, et a. (1983) Hematopoietic and lymphoreticu-
42. Wood FE, Ebanks GK (1984) Blood cytology and hematology
lar tumors in zoo animals. Lab Invesr 48: 48A.
of the green sea turtle, Chelonia mydas. Herperologica 40: 331-6.
63. Tocidlowski ME, McNamara PL, Wojcieszyn JW (2001) Myelog-
43. Wright KM, Skeba S (1992) Hematology and plasma chemis-
enous leukemia in a bearded dragon (Aranthodraco viicep). J Zoo
tries of captive prehensile-tailed skinks (Corucia zebrara). J Zoo!
Widl Med 32: 90-5.
Wiid! Med 23: 429-32.
64. Troiano JC, Gould EG, Gould I (2008) Hematological reference
44. Perpinan D, Hemandez-Divers SM, Latimer KS, e al. (2008)
Hematology of the Pascaqoula map turtle (Graptemys gibbonsi)
Teiidae). Comp Clin Patho! 17: 93-7.
and the Southeast Asian box turtle (Cuora amboinensis). J Zoo
65. Frye FL (1991) Hemoparasites. In: Frye FL (ed.), Biomedical and
Wild Med 39: 460-3.
Surgical Aspers of Captive Reptile Husbandry. 2nd ed. Melboume.
45. Taylor KW, Kaplan HM, Hirano T (1963) Electron microscope
FL: Krieger Publishing. 1: 209-77.
study of turtle blood cells. Cyrofogia 28: 248-56.
66. Lowichik A, Yeager RG (l987) Ecological aspects of snake
46. Mead KF, Borysenko M, Findlay SR (1983) Naturally abundant
hemogregarine infections from two habitats in southerm Loui-
basophils in the snapping turtle, Chelydra serpentina, possess
siana. J Parasitol 73: 1l09-15.
cytophilic surface antibodies with reaginic function. J Immuno!
67. Wozniak EJ, Telford SR (199l) The fate of possibly two Hepato-
130: 384390.
zoon species naturally infecting Florida black racers and water-
47. Mead KF, Borysenko M (l984) Surface immunoglobulins on
snakes in potential mosquito and soft tick vectors: histological
granular and agranular leukocytes in the thymus and spleen of
evidence of pathogenicity in unnatural host species. Int J Parα-
the snapping turtle, Chelydra serpentina. Dev Comp Immunol 8:
sitof 21: 511-16.
109-20.
68. Wozniak EJ, McLaughlin GL, Telford SR (1 994) Description of
48. Sypek JP, Borysenka M, Findlay SR (1984) Anti-immunoglobulin
the vertebrate stages of a hemogregarine species naturally
induced histamine release from naturally abundant basophils in
infecting Mojave Desert sidewinder rattlesnakes (Croralus cerasres
the snapping turtle, Chelydra serpentina. Dev Comp Immunol 8:
cerastes). J Zool Widl Med 25: 103-10.
358-66.
69. Wozniak EJ, Telford SR, McLaughlin GL (1994) Employment of
49. Hussein MF, et al. {l979) Effect of seasonal variation on the
the polymerase chain reaction in the molecular differentiation
immune system of the lizard, Scinus scinus. J Exp Zool 209:
 of reptilian hemogregarines and its application to preventative
91-96.
zoological medicine. J Zool Wild! Med 25: 538-49.
50. Hussein MF, Badir N, El Ridi R, Akef M (1978) Differential effect
70. Keymer IF (198l) Protozoa. In: Cooper JE, Jackson OF (eds.).
of seasonal variation on lymphoid tissue of the lizard, Chalecides
Diseases of Repriia. San Diego: Academic Press, l: 233-90.
ocellatus. Dev Comp Immunol 2: 297-310.
 71. Telford SR (1984) Haemoparasites of reptiles. In: Hoff GL, Frye
51. Wright RK, Cooper EL (198l) Temperature effects on ectother-
FL, Jacobson ER (eds.), Diseases of Amphibians and Repriles. New
mic immune responses. Dev Comp Immunol 5(Suppl 1): 117-22.
York: Plenum, 385-517.
 52. Hussein MF, et al. (l979) Lymphoid tissue of the snake, Spaler-
72. Campbell TW (1996) Hemoparasites. In: Mader DR (ed.),
osophis diadema, in the different seasons. Dev Comp Immunol 3:
Reprile Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp.
77-88.
379-81.
 a   i a ()  o 
73. Jacobson E (1986) Parasitic diseases of reptiles. In: Fowler ME
Infecrious Diseases and Pathology of Reptiles. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
(ed.). Zoo and Wiid Animal Medicine. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB
Press, pp. 131-57.
Saunders, pp. 162-81.
296
CHAPTER 20 Hematology of Reptiles
74. Bartlett CM (1 986) The reptilian filarioid genus Foleyella Seurat,
76. Garner MM, Homer BL, Jacobson ER, er al. Staining and mor-
1917 (Onchocerridae: Diroflarinae) and its relationship to other
phologic features of bone marrow hematopoietic cells in desert 
diroflarine genera. Syst Parasitol 9: 43-56.
tortoise (Gopherus agassizi). Am J Ver Res 57: 1608-15.
75. Irizarry-Rovira AR, Wolf A, Bolek M, Christian JA, DeNicola
77. Cannon MS (1992) The morphology and cytochemistry of
 DB (2002) Blood smear from a wild-caught panther chameleon
the blood leukocytes of Kemp's ridley sea turtles (Lepidochelys
(Furcifer pardalis). Ver Clin Patho! 31: 129-32.
kempi). Can J Zoo! 70: 1336-40.
297
Hematology of Fish
Terry W. Campbell
 Colorado State University
Hematologic evaluation of fish is not routinely used in estab-
near the base of the caudal peduncle (Fig. 2l.l). The needle
lishing the diagnosis of fish diseases, but it can be useful in
is then directed toward the vertebral bodies. After reaching
the detection of diseases affecting the cellular components
the vertebral bodies, the needle is withdrawn slightly. both
of blood. Certain diseases of fish result in anemia, leukope-
ventrally and laterally, while negative pressure is applied to
nia, leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and other abnormal
the syringe. Once the vessels have been entered, blood will
changes of the blood cells. Evaluation of the hemogram also
begin to enter the syringe. The needle may need to be
may be useful in following the progress of the disease or the
rotated slightly to properly position the needle hub in the
response to therapy.
vessel to facilitate collection of the blood.
A lateral approach to the caudal vertebral vessels is per-
formed by inserting the needle a few millimeters below the
Blood collection and handling
lateral line near the base of the caudal peduncle (Fig. 21.2).
The needle is then directed toward the midline and under
Blood for diagnostic sampling can be collected safely from
the vertebral bodies, and blood is aspirated into the syringe
au t'yiaal u (ug) sausui e ueui iaiea ae ieun ysy
as described for the ventral approach.
collection procedure itself should be accomplished in less
Blood can be collected from the heart or bulbous arterio-
than 30 seconds, however, because fish that are held out of
sus using a ventral approach. The needle is inserted slightly
water for longer periods suffer from respiratory distress and
caudal to the apex of the V-shaped notch formed by the gill
electrolyte imbalance. Blood for hematologic evaluation
covers (opercula) and isthmus, and it is then advanced
should be collected in either heparin or ethylenediaminetet-
toward the heart while a slight vacuum is applied to the
raacetic acid (EDTA) as an anticoagulant. Disadvantages of
syringe. Blood will enter the syringe once the heart is pen-
heparin include the tendency for leukocytes and thrombo-
etrated. An anterolateral approach through an opened gill
cytes to clump and the creation of a blue tinge to blood films
opercular cover also can be used to reach the heart. In this
with Romanowsky stains. In addition, if the blood sample
approach, the needle is directed caudally, from a point one-
contains a small clot, heparin may not prevent coagulation
third of the distance between the ventral limit of the cavity
(gill chamber) and medial to the bony support of the caudal
hemolysis of erythrocytes in some fish species. Hermolysis
wall of the opercular cavity. The needle is then advanced
also can occur with the use of tricaine sedation or anesthe-
toward the heart using a slight vacuum. Cardiocentesis
sia, but cooling the blood sample to 25°℃ and rapidly prepar-
carries a greater risk of damage to the fish than use of the
ing the film can minimize the hemolysis associated with
caudal vertebral vessels for blood collection.
tricaine.34
Blood can be collected from large sharks using the vein
Blood can be collected from fish via the caudal vertebral
that courses caudal and slightly ventral to the dorsal fins.?
vein or artery.?31 Venipuncture of these vessels can be
With the shark restrained in ventral recumbency orin a sling
accomplished with or without sedation or anesthesia, and
with its back exposed, a needle is inserted through the soft
the caudal vertebral vein or artery can be approached either
skin just under the caudal aspect of a dorsal fin as it is lifted
ventrally or laterally.? The ventral approach involves inser-
dorsally (Fig. 2l.3). The needle is then directed under the
tion of the needle under a scale along the ventral midline
dorsal fin but is kept to the back and slightly off the midline.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
298
CHAPTER 21 Hematology of Fish
Figure 21.1 Venipuncture of the caudal vein in an eel (Gymnothorax
Figure 21.3 Blood collection from a shark (Negaprion brevirostris) using
funebria) using the ventral approach.
the blood vessel under the dorsal fin.
Figure 21.2 Venipuncture of the caudal vein in a grouper (Epinephellus 
Figure 21.4 Normal mature erythrocytes in the blood film of a bony
sp.) using the lateral approach.
fish (Barborymus schwanenfeldi). Wright-Giemsa stain .
Use of a needle with an extension tube is often helpful for
stained blood films (Figs. 21.4 through 2l.6). The long axis
keeping the needle in position should the shark move during
of the nucleus is parallel to that of the cell, except in a few
the procedure. Advantages of this method compared with
species with round erythrocyte nuclei. The nuclei of fish
venipuncture of the caudal vertebral vessels in large sharks
erythrocytes can be large, occupying as much as one-fourth
include ease of access to the vessel and restraint of large
(or more) of the cell volume. The nuclear chromatin is
 sharks when using the dorsal fin approach.
densely clumped and stains dark purple. The cytoplasm typi-
cally is homogeneous, but it may contain variable amounts 
of rarefied or pale-staining areas or vacuoles associated with
Erythrocytes
the degeneration of organelles.
Both the size and number of erythrocytes vary between
Morphology
species of fish and, depending on the physiologic conditions.
Normal, mature erythrocytes of fish are oval to ellipsoidal.
even within a single species. For example, the erythrocytes 
have abundant pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, and include a
of fish belonging to the class Chondrichthyes (sharks and
centrally positioned, oval toellipsoidal nucleusin Romanowsky-
 rays) generally are larger than those of the class Osteichthyes
299
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 21.5 Normal mature erythrocytes and a polychromatic
Figure 21.7 An irmmature erythrocyte (arrow) in the blood film of a
erythrocyte (arrow) in the blood of a bony fish (Gymnothorax funebria).
cartilaginous fish (Pristis pectinatai). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Wright-Giermsa stain .
densed nuclei and less cytoplasm than mature erythrocytes
(Fig. 21.7). Immature erythrocytes (i.e., rubriblasts, proru-
bricytes, and rubricytes) are round cells with centrally posi-
tioned, round nuclei. Depending on the stage of development,
the cytoplasmic volume varies in both the amount and
intensity of basophilic staining with Romanowsky stains.
Erythroid cells in mitosis also may be present in the periph-
eral blood films from normal fish.
Ultrastructurally, mature fish erythrocytes have a finely
granular cytoplasm with no inclusions, whereas immature
erythrocytes have a cytoplasm with mitochondria, Golgi
complex, and small vacuoles. 23.39
Laboratory evaluation
Determination of packed cell volume (PCV) is the most com-
monly used method for evaluating the red cell mass of fish.
The microhematocrit method is used for obtaining a PCV of
fish blood.
Figure 21.6 Normal mature erythrocytes and thrombocytes
Although a variety of methods have been used to deter-
(arrowheads) in the blood filrm of a cartilaginous fish (Prstis pectinatai).
mine the hemoglobin concentration in fish blood, the cyan-
Wright-Giernsa stain.
methemoglobin method provides the most consistent
results.? As with avian and reptilian hemoglobin determina-
(bony fish) (Fig. 2l.6).3" Mature erythrocytes of some fish
tions, this procedure requires centrifugation of the blood-
are biconvex, with a central swelling that corresponds to the
cyanmethemoglobin reagent mixture to remove the free
position of the nucleus, whereas those of other species are
erythrocyte nuclei before measurement of optical density.
flattened and biconcave.22
A total erythrocyte count (TRBC) in fish can be deter-
Slight to moderate anisocytosis and polychromasia are
mined by a manual counting method using a hemocytom-
eter or by an electronic cell counter. Three manual methods
have a pale blue cytoplasm compared with that of mature
that can be used to obtain TRBCs in fish blood use the eryth-
  n   o     5
rocyte Unopette system (Becton-Dickinson, Rutherford, NJ),
rounded and to have a less condensed nuclear chromatin.
Natt-Herrick solution (see Chapter 19 on avian hematology).
 Because erythropoiesis occurs in the peripheral blood of
or modified Dacie's solution (Table 19.1). The erythrocyte
normal fish, immature erythrocytes may be found in blood
Unopette method is the easiest of the three, because the
1:200 dilution of whole anticoagulated blood is made using
300
CHAPTER 21 Hematology of Fish
Table 21.1 Erythrocyte pararmeters for selected teleost fish.
PCV [%]
RBC [x10°/μL]
Hb [g/dL]
Mcv [f]
MCHC [g/dL]
 Bass. hybrida
23-47
3.66-4.96
8-12
81-106
22-30
Channel catfishb
40
2.44
一
一
一
 Flounders
17-26
1.7-2.6
4.2-6.0
90-126
Goldfishd
38-40
1.6-1.8
9.7-10.6
241-245
26
Red pacue
25
1.68
Tilapiat
27-37
1.91-2.83
7.0-9.8
115-183
22-29
6n01
21-44
0.77-1.67
1.5-7.7
192-420
14.4-70.0
Hrubec TC. Smith SA, Robertson JL, et al. (1996) Comparison of hematologic reference intervals between cultured system and type of hybrid striped
bass. Amm I Vet Res 57: 618-23
bGrizzle JM, Rogers WA (1 976) Anatomy and Histology of the Channel Catish. Opelika, AL: Craftrmaster Printers, 18.
pos ysy wy suel snueyyawe saiauosnaldopnasd lapuno yatum ui sabueup jesiboloteuay leuosas (9ial) Na oupad sr rr yan 'Ma sabpas
105: 596-600.
dBurton CB, Murray SA (1979) Effects of density on goldfish blood: I, hematology. Comp Biochem Physiol 62A: 555-8.
eTocidlowski ME, Lewbart GA, Stoskopf MK (1997) Hematologic study of the red pacu [Colossoma brachypornum]. Vet Clin Pathof 26: 119-25.
+Hrubec TC, Cardlinale JL, Smith SA (20oo) Hermatology and plasrna chenistry reference intervals for cultured Tilapia [Oreochromis hybrid]. Vet Clin 
Pathol 29: 7-12
9Miller WR, Hendricks AC, Cairns J (1983) Normal ranges for diagnosticaly irmportant hematological and blood chemistry characteristics of rainbow
trout [Saimo gairdnen] . Can J Fish Aquat Sci 40: 420-5.
the diluent, pipette, and mixing vial provided with the kit.
applied to fish. Emersion and handling of fish for venipunc
The Natt-Herrick and modified Dacie's staining methods
ture or cardiocentesis can have a marked effect on the
require preparation of the diluent/stain solution and use of
hemogram, significantly increasing the hematocrit by as
the red blood cell-diluting pipette.10,32 Blood is drawn to the
much as 25%.3 The magnitude of this effect relates directly
0.5 mark on the pipette, and either Natt-Herrick or modified
to the handling and analytic time. Handling of fish for as
Dacie's stain is drawn to the 10l mark to prepare the 1:200
little as 20 seconds results in the release of catecholamines.
dilution. The diluted blood is then discharged onto the
hemocytometer counting chamber and is allowed to setle
erythrocytes. Therefore, the hematocrit increases, but the
for a minimum of 5 minutes before counting. With these
hemoglobin concentra tion remains the same, thereby result-
stains, the oval erythrocytes show a small, dark blue nucleus
ing in a decreased MCHC. The increase in blood catechol-
that is surrounded by a colorless to faint pink cytoplasm. The
amines causes ion exchanges (Na*/H+ and Cl/ HCO-) across
total number of erythrocytes in the four corner and central
the erythrocyte membrane; thus, as Na* and Cl- enter the
squares in the central, large square of a Neubauer-ruled
cell, water follows osmotically, causing the cell to swell.
hemocytometer chamber is obtained using x40 (high dry)
Cannulation methods have been developed for use in
magnification. The TRBC is calculated by multiplying the
research fish to minimize these effects; however, these
numbers of erythrocytes by 10,000.
 methods are irmpractical for use in clinical studies.21
The red blood cell indices (i.e., mean erythrocyte volume
 In general, the PCV of fish is lower than that of mammals 
(MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC).
and birds. Hematocrits vary both between and within fish
and mean cell hemoglobin (MCH)) can be calculated using
species, and they appear to correlate with the normal activ-
 Standard formulas. However, the direct, electronic measure-
ity of the fish, with less active fish having lower hematocrits
ment of MCV appears to be more sensitive for detecting
than active, fast-swirmming fish. Hematocrits also vary
changes in the erythrocyte size in fish and is more reproduc-
during the life-cycle of fish. For example, during prespawn-
ible than the calculated MCv.1^ Table 21.1 offers erythrocyte
ing conditions, Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) have high
reference values for selected teleost fish.
hematocrits compared with those during spawning. Age.
sex, water temperature, photoperiod, and seasonal variation
Responses in disease
The standard practices for collecting. handling. and analyz-
in some species of male fish are large enough to require two
ing blood from mammals and birds can be misleading when
reference intervals.
301
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Cartilaginous fish (sharks and rays) and bony fish appear to
gradually changes the blood from red to brown in color. A
have different gas transport systems, which affect their eryth-
hemolytic anemia results as splenic macrophages rermove the
rocyte parameters. Bony fish exhibit a high cardiac workload
affected erythrocytes from the circulation.
and blood pressure, which are associated with a higher PCV
Several nutritional deficiencies have been produced
and smaller erythrocytes."' sharks and rays, however, exhibit
experimentally in fish. For example, folic acid deficiencies
relatively modest cardiac work load, higher cardiac output.
result in normochromic macrocytic anemias, and vitamin
higher blood volumes, and increased flow rates, which are
B,, deficiencies result in hypochromic anemias.' Folate defi-
associated with lower concentrations of larger cells.
 a n a e  e s a  
 In general, fish with PCVs of greater than 45% usually are
hemolytic anemia that occurs in channel catfish (Ictalurus
considered to be dehydrated, particularly when this finding
punctatus).36
is supported by increased serum osmolality or total protein.
Anemic fish have low PCVs (<20%): however, for some
species, such as the Port Jackson shark (Heterodontus portus-
Leukocytes
jacksoni), normal PcVs may be as low as 20%.6
Fish with regenerative anemia often have an increased
Leukocytes (especially the granulocytes) exhibit a wide vari-
concentration of polychromatic and immature erythrocytes
ation in appearance among fish species. This has led to
in their blood films. Anemic fish that exhibit little or no
controversy and confusion when applying the nomenclature
polychromasia have nonresponsive anemia. A microcytic
and classification of piscine leukocytes on the basis of such
normochromic anemia has been associated with environ-
descriptions from avian and mammalian Romanowsky-
 mental stresses, such as increased population densities.5.20.30
stained blood films. Evaluation of the cellular ultrastructure.
A microcytic hypochromic anemia with marked poikilocy-
differential cytochemical staining, immunofluorescence, and
function testing of fish leukocytes, however, has helped to
fed diets containing yeast, thereby resulting in oxidative
damage to erythrocytes.* Anemias associated with erythro-
cytes having pyknotic nuclei, erythroplastids (i.e., erythro-
Leukocytes of commonly studied bony fish
cytes without nuclei), and red-blood-cell fragmentation
have been associated with conditions that interfere with the
Channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus)
splenic removal of senescent red blood cells from the periph-
Ultrastructural and cytochemical studies have identified het-
eral circulation." Abnormal erythrocyte nuclei (i.e., amito
erophils, basophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes in the
sis, segmentation, and fragmentation) as well as formation
peripheral blood of channel catfish. These results support
of erythroplastids may relate to nutritional disorders, such
the classification of these cells in Romanowsky-stained
as deficiency of folic acid or vitamin E and toxicosis from
blood fl1ms. 3,8 15,39:48,52
 Beca use the immature erythrocytes of fish are smaller than
Goldfish (Carassius auratus)
the mature erythrocytes, microcytosis often is associated
On the basis of electron microscopy. leukocytes found in the
with marked hemorrhagic or hemolytic anemias, in which
peripheral blood of goldfish can be classified as lymphocytes.
the regenerating. immature erythrocytes represent the
monocytes, heterophils, eosinophils, and rarely, basophils.33
majority of the peripheral blood erythrocytes. 17 Hemorrhagic
On the basis of cytochemical reaction, goldfish leukocytes
anemias of fish are associated with trauma, bloodsucking
can be classified as lymphocytes, heterophils, monocytes.
parasites, vitamin K deficiency, and septicemia (bacteria or
and an atypical, segmented granulocyte.145,5
viral). For example, enteric red mouth disease (yersiniosis)
of fish produces a hemorrhagic septicemia and a hemogram
 Salmonids (trout and salmon, Salmo spp.)
that is characterized by leukocytosis, low PCV, and reticulo-
On the basis of cytochemical staining. salmonids appear to
cytosis.*5 Hemolytic anemias of fish may be associated with
have three types of leukocytes: lymphocytes, neutrophils.
toxins (bacterial or environmental), viral infections (eryth-
and monocytes.?
rocytic necrosis virus), certain nutritional defciencies, and
hemoparasites.17.34 Cadmium is a calcium channel blocker
Striped bass (Morone saxatulis)
that impedes normal membrane function in erythrocytes
resulting in hemolytic anemia in freshwater teleost fish
trophils, and monocytes.?
poisoning (brown blood disease or new tank syndrome) of
White sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus)
fish also results in severe hemolytic anemia.' Nitrite is readily
absorbed from the gills and enters into the blood, where it
phils, and
1 eosinophils—have been described in white
then oxidizes hemoglobin to methemoglobin, which in turn
sturgeon.53
302
CHAPTER 21 Hematology of Fish
Summary
 Cytochemical studies of piscine leukocytes appear to support
the use of mammalian leukocyte terminology as a classifica-
tion scheme because they are considered to be analogous to
mammalian leukocytes based upon cytochemical and ultra-
structural studies. In general, neutrophils or heterophils.
lymphocytes, and monocytes commonly are reported in the
peripheral blood films of fish belonging to the class Osteich-
thyes (teleost or bony fish). Myeloperoxidase stain is used
to differentiate neutrophils from true heterophils, because
neutrophils stain positive and heterophils stain negative. In
general, fish heterophils are neutrophils, based on myelo-
peroxidase staining. but are called heterophils because of the
presence of prominent eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules
with Romanowsky stains.24.2 Eosinophils and basophils are
rare in the peripheral blood of bony fish.14.42
 Leukocytes of sharks and rays
Figure 21.8 Three neutrophils (arrow) in the blood film of a bony fish
(Artromotus ocellatus). Wright-Giemmsa stain.
The peripheral blood of fish belonging to the class Chon-
drichthyes (cartilaginous fish, such as sharks and rays)
contain leukocytes that can be classified as granulocytes.
lymphocytes,(
or monocytes. The granulocytes exhibit
marked variation in both numbers and types between
species, and the granulocyte classification scheme is based
on the results of ultrastructural and cytochemical studies
performed in blood samples from the lesser spotted dogfish
(Scliorrhinus canicula), which has been used as a model for
cartilaginous fish. The granulocytes are classified as either
G (type I). Gz (type I), or G, (type I1).3 To simplify the
identification of these cells using familiar terminology. the
G, granulocytes resemble the avian or reptilian heterophil.
the Gz granulocyte resembles the mammalian neutrophil.
and the G; granulocyte resembles the eosinophil based upon
the cell's appearance on Romanowsky-stained blood films.'
Basophils also can be found in the peripheral blood of car-
tila ginous fish.
Morphology
Neutrophils of bony fish
Figure 21.9 Three heterophils (arrows) in the blood film of a bony fish
(Scleropages legendrei). Wright-Giernsa stain.
The neutrophils of bony fish tend to be round to slightly
oval cells with eccentric nuclei (Fig. 2l.8). The nucleus of
mature neutrophils vary in shape, being round, oval.
indented (metamyelocyte type), elongated (band cell type).
reactions of bony fish neutrophils are observed; however, in
or segmented, and usually with two to three lobes. Nonseg-
 general, they resemble the neutrophils of mammals.14.17.35
mented nuclei are the most common in the granulocytes of
Piscine neutrophils that exhibit distinct, rod-shaped cyto-
bony fish. The nuclear chromatin is coarsely clumped, and
plasmic granules on Romanowsky stains often are classified
it stains deeply basophilic in Romanowsky-stained blood
in the literature as heterophils (Fig. 2l.9). Some species.
films. The neutrophils of bony fish have abundant colorless.
such as goldfish and carp (Cyprinus carpio). have granulo-
grayish, or slightly acidophilic-staining (light pink) cyto-
cytes with distinct and slightly acidophilic cytoplasmic gran-
plasm; small cytoplasmic granules and vacuoles also may be
ules, colorless cytoplasm, and eccentric. partially lobed
present. The staining of the granules varies, however, and
nuclei on Romanowsky stains. These cells often are classified
depends on the species or the maturity of the cell. The small.
as heterophils rather than neutrophils, although they do
cytoplasmic granules of the neutrophils vary from gray to
have cytochemical properties similar to those of neutrophils
pale blue or red. Interspecies differences in the cytochemical
in other fish. They measure approximately 9-l0 in diameter
303
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
(some as large as 20 μm). These heterophils are peroxidase
tinctorial quality that differs from those of heterophils with
and Sudan black B positive when the granules are imma-
distinct eosinophilic granules.
ture, but they are peroxidase negative in mature granules.39
Fish eosinophils generally measure 9-14μm in diameter,
Neutrophils from channel catfish and certain species of eel
for example eosinophils of carp are approximately 7.5 in
also contain prominent eosinophilic, rod-shaped cytoplas-
diameter and have an eccentric nucleus that is indented.
mic granules resembling those of avian heterophils on the
sausage-shaped, or bilobate as well as eosinophilic, cytoplas-
basis of Romanowsky stains.3 The granules of these cells are
mic granules that are larger than those of the heterophils
strongly peroxidase positive. Similar cells have been found
(neutrophils).3*
in a number of other bony fish as well.? In salmonids, such
as rainbow trout (Onchorhynchus mykiss) and coho salmon
Basophils of bony fish
(Onchorhynchus kisutch), these neutrophils are the predomi-
Basophils are rare in the peripheral blood of bony fish and
nant granulocyte, as in most bony fish. Piscine neutrophils 
have been reported only in a few species.14.az Basophils are
often reveal artifacts of blood film preparation, causing the
identified as round cells that have round, basophilic cyto-
cells to appear large and with swollen, pale nuclear chroma-
plasmic granules that often obscure the cell nucleus (Fig.
tin (ka ryolysis).
21.1l). The nucleus is large, eccentric, and round. The
nuclear chromatin is homogeneous. The basophils of carp
Eosinophils of bony fish
measure between 10 and 20μm. When present, basophils
Eosinophils rarely are reported in the blood films from bony
occur in low numbers.39
fish, and some investigators doubt whether they exist at all
in some species. When present, however, they appear as
Granulocytes of sharks and rays
intermediate to large granulocytes, with distinct eosinophilic
 In cartilaginous fish, G, (type I) granulocytes typically have
granules and pale blue cytoplasm. The nucleus varies
an eccentric, irregular, nonlobed nucleus; colorless cyto-
from round (more common) to segmented. They can be
plasm; and round to oval, eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules
distinguished from heterophils on the basis of cytochemistry
(Figs. 21.12 and 21.15). The nucleus may be lobed in some
and ultrastructural findings. although the absence of crystal-
species. These cells resemble avian heterophils, and they
loids (used as a fingerprint for mammalian eosinophils)
   n    a  n
often is the rule with piscine eosinophils.′ Eosinophils have
Gz (type Il) granulocytes have a lobed nucleus and a color-
been reported in goldfish, white sturgeon, and channel
less cytoplasm that lacks distinct granules (Fig. 21.13). These
cells resemble mammalian neutrophils. The G, (type III)
granulocytes are characterized by a lobed nucleus (in some
ules with Romanowsky stain (Fig. 21.10). The granules of
species). pale blue cytoplasm, and strongly eosinophilic.
piscine eosinophils often are less distinct compared with
round to rod-shaped cytoplasmic granules (Fig. 21.12). The
those of birds and mammals. These granules also have a
Figure 21.11 A basophil (arrow). lymphocyte (thin arrow), and 
Figure 21.10 wo eosinophils (arrow) with distinct cytoplasmic granules
thrombocyte (arrowhead) in the blood film of a cartilaginous fish (Pristis
in the blood of a bony fish (Gymnothorax funebria). Wright-Giemsa stain.
 pectinatai). Wright-Giemnsa stain
304
CHAPTER 21 Hematology of Fish
Figure 21.12 A G, granulocyte (heterophil; arrow), lynphocyte (thin 
Figure 21.14 A G; granulocyte (eosinophil; arrow) and srmall
arrow), and thrombocyte (arrowhead) in the blood film of a cartilaginou5 
lymnphocytes (arrowheads) in the blood film of a cartilaginous fish (Pristis
fish (Pristis pectinatai). Wright-Giernsa stain.
pectinatai). Wright-Giernsa stain.
Figure 21.13 A G2 granulocyte (neutrophil arrow) in the blood film of 
Figure 21.15 A G, granulocyte (heterophil; arrow), a G: granulocyte
a cartilaginous fish (Pristis pectinatai). Wright-Giemnsa stain.
(eosinophil; arrowhead), and a lymphocyte (thin arrow) in the blood of a
cytoplasmic granules in the G, granulocytes have tinctorial
qualities that differ from those of the G, granulocytes in the
intermediate stages of one cell type. Not all species of carti-
same blood film (Figs. 21.14 and 21.15). The G, granulocytes
laginous fish exhibit all the granulocytes described for the
of cartilaginous fish resemble avian eosinophils.
lesser spotted dogfish (Scyliorhinus canicula). For example.
The granulocytes of sharks and rays tend to stain nega-
only G, and G; granulocytes have been found in the rays
tively for peroxidase, β-glucuronidase, and Sudan black B
Raja clavata and Raja microce llata." Basophils occasionally are
 but positive for acid phosphatase, arylsulfatase, and acid
found in peripheral blood films of some species of cartilagi-
naphthyl AS-D chloroacetate esterase.3 The eosinophilic
nous fish.
 granulocytes (G, and G,) of the elasmobranchs share few
morphologic and cytochemical characteristics with mam-
Lymphocytes of fish (bony and cartilaginous)
malian eosinophils. The function and interrelationships of 
Lymphocytes frequently are the most abundant leukocyte
the granulocytes in cartilaginous fish are not known;
in peripheral blood films of fish, and they resemble their
counterparts in avian and mammalian blood films (Figs.
305
SECTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 21.16 A lynphocyte (arrow) in the blood of a cartilaginous fish
Figure 21.18 A reactive monocyte (large arrow), a heterophil
(Negaprion brevirostris). Wright-Giemnsa stain.
(arrowhead), and an eosinophil (small arrow) in the blood film of a bony
fish (Scleropages legendre). Wright-Giemsa stain
Monocytes of fish (bony and cartilaginous)
Monocytes occasionally are reported in the blood films of
most species of fish, and they resemble monocytes of birds
and mammals. They are large, mononuclear leukocytes,
with abundant blue-gray to blue agranular cytoplasm, which
may contain vacuoles. Fish monocytes generally measure
10-20 μm in diameter.3^ The cytoplasmic margins may be
indistinct or ragged because of the presence of pseudopodia.
The nucleus varies in shape (round to kidney-shaped to
bilobate) and generally occupies less than 50% of the cyto-
plasmic volume. The nuclear chromatin of monocytes gen-
erally is more granular and less clumped compared with that
of lymphocyte nuclei. Results of ultrastructural studies indi-
cate that monocytes in all species of fish are similar to those
 in other vertebrates.3 The terrm monocyte/macrophage fre-
Figure 21.17 A reactive lymphocyte (arrow) in the blood of a bony fish
quently is used to classify piscine monocytes, because cells
(Gymnothorax funebria). Wright-Giemsa stain.
resembling transformational forms between monocytes and
macrophages often are found in peripheral blood films (Fig.
21.18). The term monocyte, however, is reserved for those
21.11, 21.12, and 21.14 through 21.16).' They typically
found in peripheral blood, and the term macrophage is
measure between 5 and 10 μm in diameter." Lymphocytes
reserved for those found elsewhere. Fish monocytes can be
tend to be round, but they may mold around adjacent cells
differentiated from immature granulocytes and lymphocytes
in the blood film. They have a high nucleus:cytoplasm
by the positive, nonspecific esterase reaction in monocytes.
(N:C) ratio, with coarsely clumped, deeply basophilic
nuclear chromatin. The scant cytoplasm of small mature
Laboratory evaluation
lymphocytes stains a homogenous pale blue. An occasional
 The same problerms associated with obtaining total leukocyte
lymphocyte possesses azurophilic cytoplasmic granules.
counts in birds and reptiles also apply in fish. Because fish
Reactive lymphocytes in blood films from fish resemble
have nucleated erythrocytes and thrombocytes, manual
those of birds and mammals, with abundant, deeply baso-
counting methods are used. Direct leukocyte counting
philic cytoplasm and an occasional, distinct Golgi complex
 methods using a Neubauer-ruled hemocytometer and a
(Fig. 2l.17). Plasma cells also may be seen in small numbers
variety of staining and diluting solutions have been
on the peripheral blood films of many species of fish.
306
CHAPTER 21 Hematology of Fish
and the procedure is the same as that described for obtaining
methods of intracellular killing and digestion of phagocy-
total leukocyte counts in avian and reptilian blood (see
tized organisms. Because the function of fish granulocytes
Chapters 19, on avian hematology. and 20, on reptilian
is not known, viewing them as being homologous to the
hematology). The leukocytes appear blue and stain darker
granulocytes of higher vertebrates may be inappropriate.
than erythrocytes stained with Natt-Herrick. It may be dif-
Therefore, interpretation of the changes in granulocyte con-
ficult to distinguish small, mature lymphocytes from throm-
centrations of peripheral blood can be difficult. Broad gen-
bocytes if the counts are made using a xlo objective; cells
eralizations can be made, however, until the results of
are more accurately identified at higher magnifications.
further studies indicate the specific functions and responses 
 Staining for 60 minutes in Natt-Herrick's solution also may
of these cells to disease. For example, an increased concen-
improve the differentiation between small lymphocytes and
tration of fish neutrophils or heterophils often is associated
thrombocytes. Advantages of the Natt and Herrick proce-
with inflammatory diseases, especially those involving infec-
dure include the ability to obtain a total erythrocyte, leuko-
cyte. and thrombocyte count using the same charged
often is associated with lymphopenias, which can be inter-
hemocytometer. In addition, the technique can be applied
 preted as a stress response in fish.28.50
to blood samples obtained from all lower vertebrates.
In response to severe systemic illness, piscine neutrophils
 A leukocyte differential is obtained from a Romanowsky-
and heterophils exhibit toxic changes similar to those in
stained blood film. Applying a drop of albumin to the slide
mammalian neutrophils and avian and reptilian heterophils.
during preparation of the blood film often is advantageous
Toxic neutrophils and heterophils of fish have increased
to minimize smudging of the cells. Quickly drying the blood
cytoplasmic basophilia, vacuolization, abnormal granulation
film using a hair dryer also may help to alleviate cellular
(degranulation of heterophils, granules that appear deeply
artifacts associated with blood film preparation.
basophilic, and heterophils granules that appear to coalesce
Table 2l.2 offers leukocyte reference values for selected
into large, round granules). and degeneration of the cell
teleost fish.
nucleus (Fig. 2l.19). Toxic neutrophils and heterophilsin fish
are associated with severe, systemicillness such as septicemia,
Responses in disease
mycotic infections, and severe tissue necrosis. The degree of
Piscine neutrophils and heterophils participate in inflamma-
toxicity usually indicates the severity of the fish's condition,
tory responses. They are not always phagocytic, however.
and a marked number of neutrophils or heterophils exhibit-
and little is known regarding their function, including their
ing marked (4+) toxicity indicates a grave prognosis.
Table 21.2 Leukocyte parammeters for selected teleost fish,
WBC x 10*/μL
Neut/
Lymphocytes x
Monocytes x
Eosinophils ×
Basophils x
Heterophils x 103/μL
10²/μL
10²/μuL
10²/μL
10²/μL
Bass, hybrida
32.6-115.1
0.4-3.5
22.5-115.1
1.5-7.5
0-0.4
0
 Channel catishb
8.9-124.0
4.5-86.8
1.4-23.6
0.7-14.7
0-7.1
 Flounderc
88.0-282.0
2.5-26.6
38.7-154.5
Goldfishd 
10.1-14.7
9.5-13.7
Red pacue
33.5
3.2
21.0
1.2
0.2
0
Tilapiat
21.6-154.7
0.6-9.9
6.8-136.4
0.4-4.3
0-1.6 
21.0
1.6
18.8
0.6
0
0
padus pugay jo ad pue wass paunna uaamag sieatui auaajau yiooieay jo uosuedu (gaa) je ja 'ir uostagoy 'vs yhs l nagnne
bass. Amm J Vet Res 57: 618-23
bTavares-Dias M, de Moraes FR (2007) Leukocyte and thrormbocyte reference values for channel catfish [/rctalurus punctatus Rafl, with an assessrnent
 of morphologic, cytochemmical, and ultrastructural features. Vet Clin Pathor 36: 49-54
"Bridges DW, Cech JJ Jr, Pedro DN (1976) Seasonal hematological changes in winter flounder. Pseudopleuronectes americanus. Trans Am Fish Soc
105: 596-600.
eTocidlowski ME, Lewbart GA, Stoskopf MK (1997) Hematologic study of the red pacu [Colossoma brachypornum]. Vet Clin Pathof 26: 119-25.
+Hrubec TC, Cardinale JL, Smith SA (200o) Hematology and plasma chemistry reference intervals for cultured Tilapia [Oreochromis hybrid] . Vet Clin
Pathol 2000,29: 7-12.
9Hunn JB, Wiedmeyer RH, Greer IE, Grady AW (1992) Blood chemistry of laboratory-reared golden trout. J Aquat Anim Heaith 4: 218-21
307
sEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
differential) in the peripheral blood of normal fish. There-
fore, a monocytosis is suggestive of an inflammatory response
Lymphocytes are the most commonly observed leukocytes
 in the peripheral blood of most normal fish, in which they
typically represent greater than 60% (and as much as 85%
in some species} of the leukocyte differential. Lymphocytes
play a major role in the humoral and cell-mediated immu-
nity of fish. B lymphocytes in teleost fish function in the
same manner as mammalian B-l cells and produce immu-
noglobulin M (IgM). Therefore, lymphocytosis is suggestive
 of immunogenic stimulation, whereas lymphopenia is sug-
gestive of immunosuppressive conditions, such as stress or
excess exogenous glucocorticosteroids. Interestingly, B lym-
phocytes from teleost fish also demonstrate phagocytic and
microbicidal activity.2 Bacterial septicemias commonly
affect fish and result in marked leukopenias and lymphope-
ul (peamoe) aouo e pue (mome) lydonnau yixol bh'iz aunai
the blood filrn of a bony fish (Barborymus schwanenfeldi) with
nias. Environmental conditions, such as prolonged photope-
septicemia. Wright-Giemmsa stain
riod and elevated water temperature that cause a stress
response in fish will also result in a leukopenia associated
with a lymphopenia..50
Eosinophils are found in low concentrations (0-3% of the
leukocyte differential) in the peripheral blood of normal fish.
Thrombocytes and hemostasis
Piscine eosinophils participate in inflammatory responses
along with neutrophils (heterophils) and macrophages, and
 saop ll se nun oi asuodsan un shoo ysy no pooq au
other vertebrates. The speed and effectiveness in fish.
eosinophils apparently are involved in the control of infec-
however, are variable. Clotting is much more rapid in bony
tions with metazoan parasites, and they participate in the
fish compared with sharks and rays. Sharks and rays appear
to rely primarily on the extrinsic pathways of coagulation;
increased eosinophil concentration in the peripheral blood
the addition of skin, high calcium solutions, sea water, or
of fish suggests an inflammatory response associated with
other extrinsic factors enhances clotting. Clot formation in
parasitic infections or antigenic stimulation.
 bony fish usually occurs within 5 minutes, whereas clotting
 The functions of the granulocytes of carilaginous fish are
in samples taken from sharks and rays can take 20 minutes
not known; however, they appear to participate in inflam-
or longer.39
matory responses. Because the granulocytes account for
20-30% of the leukocytes in sharks and rays, the normal
Morphology
granulocyte: lymphocyte ratio typically is low (<0.5).23 An
Fish thrombocytes are smaller than erythrocytes, vary in
increase in the granulocyte concentration is indicative of an
shape, and can be round, elongate, or spindle-shaped. In
inflammatory response. A decrease in the lymphocyte con-
addition, the shape may vary with the stage of maturity or
centration results from conditions that reduce the number
the degree of reactivity. The oval and elongated forms tend
of circulating lymphocytes, such as stress responses. Both
to be nonreactive, mature thrombocytes (Fig. 21.20). Imma-
increases in the granulocyte concentrations and decreases in
ture thrombocytes are round in some species, whereas
the lymphocyte concentrations of sharks can be associated
spindle-shaped thrombocytes appear to be reactive forms
with bacterial septicemias. The leukogram of cartilaginous
and often are found in clumps. The cytoplasm of the piscine
fish can be used to follow the progress of these fish during
thrombocyte is colorless to faint blue; the nucleus is con-
the course of the disease or in response to therapy. For
densed and follows the shape of the cell. Fish thrombocytes
example, an initial increase in the granulocyte concentration
also may contain a variable amount of eosinophilic cytoplas-
or decrease in the lymphocyte concentration that has
mic granules (Fig. 2l.21).
 returned to normal indicates a favorable response to therapy
Like those in birds and reptiles, thrombocytes in fish often
and prognosis
are confused with small, mature lymphocytes. Lymphocytes.
 Piscine monocytes are actively phagocytic cells, and they
however, have slightly more abundant, mildly basophilic
participate in acute inflammatory responses in fish.439
cytoplasm compared with thrombocytes (Figs. 21.22 and
Monocytes occur in low numbers (<5% of the leukocyte
21.23). The nucleus of the lymphocyte also usually is larger
308
CHAPTER 21 Hematology of Fish
snouieen e jo wilg poolq ay u! (moe) saoquol oz'lz auna
Figure 21.22 Thrommbocytes (long arrow), lymphocytes (arrowheads).
fish (Pristis pectinatai). Wright-Giemsa stain.
and a heterophil (short arrow) in the blood film of a bony fish 
(Scleropages legendrei). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Figure 21.21 Thrormbocytes (arrow) with eosinophilic cytoplasmic
granules in the blood of a cartilaginous fish (Negaprion brevirostris).
Figure 21.23 Thrombocytes (arrow) and a lymphocyte (arrowhead) in
Wright-Giernsa stain.
yim (piayuaueyns snoqieg) ysy Auog e jo u pooig auay
septicemnia. Wright-Giemsa 5tain.
and less condensed compared with that of the thrombocyte.
Fish thrombocytes usually stain weakly positive with peri-
large square of a Neubauer hemocytometer are counted on
 odic acid-Schiff and positive for acid phosphatase.53
both sides. The average number of thrombocytes in one
large hemocytometer square is calculated and then multi-
Laboratory evaluation
plied by 2000 to obtain the total thrombocyte count per
 The total thrombocyte count can be obtained via the same
microliter. Because thrombocytes tend to clump. however.
hemocytometer charged with diluting solutions (i.e., Natt-
accurate counts may be difficult to achieve.
Herrick solution) used to obtain a total erythrocyte and
leukocyte count. The thrombocytes resemble erythrocytes in
Responses in disease
the hemocytometer, but they are much smaller and appear
 During the clotting process in fish, fibrinopeptides are formed
to be round to oval, with a greater nucleus: cytoplasm (N: C)
after the cleavage of fibrinogen, which is under the control
ratio compared to erythrocytes. All squares in the central.
of thrombin. These fibrinopeptides differ from those produced
60
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
by mammals; however, the basic structure of fibrin in fish.
brane, nucleus, and kinetoplast. On wet-mount prepara-
though much larger than its mammalian counterpart, is the
tions, the trypanosomes exhibit rapid, wriggling movements
same as that in mammals. Fish thrombocyte aggregation
but have no forward motion.
differs from mammalian platelet aggregation. For example.
fish thrombocytes convert arachidonic acid to prostaglandins
Trypanoplasms
with little, if any, thromboxane formation, whereas throm-
Trypanoplasms are hemoparasites that resemble trypano-
boxane is a potent inducer of platelet aggregation in
somes morphologically, except that they are more pleomor-
 mammals.3 Thrombocyte aggregation in sharks is tempera-
phic (a slender, serpentine shape is most common). have
ture reversible, which is a feature not seen with mammalian
two flagella (one directed anteriorly and one posteriorly).
platelet aggregation. Shark thrombocyte aggregation also is
and kinetosomes. Their life-cycle is similar to that of the
independent of thrombin and adenosine diphosphate. There-
trypanosomes. A prepatent period occurs after infection fol-
fore, both the control and the outcome of thrombocyte
lowed by a parasitemia (i.e., cryptobiasis) resulting in either
aggregation in fish may not be the same as mammals.
 death of the fish or disappearance of the trypanoplasms from
Glucocorticoid excess in fish tends to decrease the throm-
the blood.3 Trypanoplasma borreli causes a severe anemia in
cyprinids (i.e. Koi, goldfish, and carp), and the disease is
ronmental stressors, such as a prolonged photoperiod and
referred to as sleeping sickness. Anemia, exophthalmia.
elevated water temperature will result in a thrombopenia.49
ascites, and splenomegaly occur in freshwater salmonids
Prolonged clotting times also occur with vitamin K defi-
(i.e. trout) with T salmosifica; T bullocki infects marine fish,
ciency: dietary requirements for vitamin K have been deter-
especially flatfish species along the western Atlantic and
mined for salmonids and channel catfish.
Gulf of Mexico. On wet-mount preparations, trypanoplasms
Thrombocytosis and hypercoagulability of whole blood
exhibit flowing. ameboid motility. which aids in their
has been associated with exposure to toxic levels of cadmium
identification.
(126mg/L) in freshwater teleosts.44
Piroplasmids
Babesiosoma,Haemohormidium,Haematractidium.and Mesn
Blood parasites
ilium are genera of piroplasmids that have been described in
fish. As with the hemogregarines, little is known regarding
Hemogregarina
their life-cycle, which most likely requires a bloodfeeding.
Hemogregarina sp. affecting fish resemble those described in
intermediate host. Piroplasmids are identified by their intra-
the blood films of reptiles, and they are identified by char-
vary from small, ringlike forms to anaplasma-like inclusions.
Chapter 20 on reptilian hematology). The gametocytes lack
Piroplasmids may cause hemolytic anemia in fish.
cytoplasmic membrane. Little is known regarding the life-
Microsporidians
cycle of fish hemogregarines, but they most likely require a
Enterocytozoon saimonis is an intranuclear microsporidium
bloodfeeding, intermediate host, such as leeches, copepods,
that primarily infects hematopoietic cells of salmonids. The
and isopods. Therefore, they more frequently are found in
infected cells exhibit intranuclear inclusions. This organism
wild-caught fish. Often, the Hemogregarina sp.gametocytes
was once considered to be the causative agent of plasmacy-
in the peripheral blood of fish are considered to be an inci-
toid leukemia of Chinook salmon (Onchorhynchustshawyts-
dental finding; however, some species can cause anemia,
cha). The presence of high reverse-transcriptase activity in
leukocytosis with a marked left shift, and large granulomas
the affected tissues from these fish, however, suggests that
in internal organs.18.45
an oncogenic retrovirus may be the causative agent for that
disease.33
Trypanosomes
Trypanosomes occasionally may be found in blood films of
fish, especially wild-caught, cold-water species. They can
Viral inclusions
occur in high concentration (1,000,000 organisms/mL) and
are especially prevalent in the imprints of kidney tissue.39
 Intracytoplasmic inclusions occur in the erythrocytes of fish
Infections with trypanosomes can result in fatal anemias.
with viral erythrocytic necrosis (i.e., piscine erythrocytic
Leeches act as the intermediate host for the trypanosomes.
necrosis), erythrocytic inclusion body syndrome, and coho
and the infective trypomastigotes develop and then enter
anemia. Viral erythrocytic necrosis occurs in a variety of
the fish host when the leech takes a blood meal. Trypano-
marine fish, including salmon, cod, and herring. The disease
somes are identified by their slender and serpentine shape.
is characterized by marked poikilocytosis, a single intracyto-
single anterior fagellum, prominent and undulating mem-
plasmic inclusion (0.3-4.0 μm) within the erythrocytes, and
310
CHAPTER 21 Hematology of Fish
karyolysis of the red-blood-cell nuclei. Erythrocytic inclu-
2. Beelen R, Boyd B, Garvavello JC, Pavanelli GC, Ainsworth AJ
sion body syndrome of young salmonids is characterized by
(2003) A cytochemical, light and electron microsopic study of
 progressive, severe anemia, which is caused by a viral agent
the peripheral blood leucocytes of hybrid surubim catfish (Pseu-
that creates 0.8-3.0μm intracytoplasmic inclusions within
doplarystoma corruscans × Pseudoplarystoma fasciatum). Comp Clin
the erythrocytes.734 A Leishman-Giemsa stain provides the
Path 12: 61-8.
best results for demonstrating the inclusions. An anemia
3. Breazile JE, Zinn LL, Yauk JC, Mass HJ, Wollscheid J (1982) A
study of haematological profiles of channel catfish, Yralurus
that occurs in seawater-reared coho salmon (Oncorhynchus
punctarus (Rafinesque). J Fish Biol 2l: 305-9.
kisutch) results from 0.1-2.0μm intracytoplasmic inclusions.
4. Brenden RA, Huizinga HW (l986) Pathophysiology of experi-
which often are rod-shaped within the erythrocytes.34
mental Aeromonas hydrophila infection in goldfish, Carassius
auratus (L.). JFish Dis 9: 163-7.
5. Burton CB, Murray SA (1979) Effects of density on goldfish
Hematopoiesis
blood—1. Hematology. Comp Biochem Physiol 62A: 555-8.
6. Campbell TW (1988) Tropical fish medicine. Fish cytology and
Cartilaginous fish (Chondrichthyes) lack bone marrow and
hematology. Ver Clin North Am Small Anim Pracr 18: 347-64
lymph nodes, but they do have a lymphoid thymus, spleen.
7. Campbell TW, Ellis CK (2007) Avian and Exoric Animal
Hematotogy and Cyrology. 3rd ed. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing
and other lymphomyeloid tissues.' Significant hematopoi-
Ltd.
etic activity occurs in the sinusoids of the red pulp area of
 8. Cannon MS, er al. An ultrastructural study of the leukocytes of
the spleen, where erythrocytes, thrombocytes, and lympho-
the channel catfish, Yrralurus punctarus. J Morphol l64: 1-23.
9. Catton WT (195l) Blood cell formation of certain teleost fishes.
lopoiesis occurs in the spleen of these fish. Development of
Blood 6: 39-60.
 an  o n    n 
10. Dacie JV, Lewis K (1968) Practical Hematology. 4th ed. London:
manner as that in mammals. The peripheral blood may be
Churchill Livingstone.
an important component of erythropoiesis, because several
11. Danilo WF, Eble GJ, Kassner G, Capriario FX, Dafre AL, Ohira
stages of erythrocyte development can be found in the
M (1992) Comparative hematology in marine fish. Comp Biochem
routine blood films from cartilaginous fish.*s The epigonal
Physio! 102A: 311-21.
12. Eiras JC (1983) Erythrocyte degeneration in the European eel,
organ, which is associated with the gonad, and Leydig's
Anguilla anguilla. Bull Eur Assoc Fish Pathol 3: 8-10.
organ, which is situated in the submucosa of the alimentary
13. Ellis AE (1984) Bizarre forms of erythrocytes in a specimen of
tract, are the major sites for granulopoiesis in cartilaginous
fish.?3 Myeloblasts, progranulocytes, myelocytes, metamy-
plaice, Pleuronecres platessa L. J Fish Dis 7: 4ll-14.
14. Ellis AE (1977) The leukocytes of fish: a review. J Fish Biol 1l:
elocytes, and mature granulocytes have been described in
453-91.
these unique lymphomyeloid tissues.
The principle lymphomyeloid tissues of bony fish (Ostei
 blood leukocytes by bright field microscopy and flow cytometry.
chthyes) are the thymus, spleen, and kidney.3 The thymus.
Trans Am Fish Soc 114: 279-85.
which is the first lymphoid organ to develop. seeds the
16. Fange R, Mattison A (l98l) The lymphoid (Hemopoietic)
spleen and kidney with lymphocytes. The kidney is a major
system of the Atlantic Nurse shark, Ginglymosroma cirrarum. Bio!
bloodforming organ in bony fish: the pronephric (anterior
Bull 160: 240-9.
17. Ferguson HW (1989) Systemic Pathology of Fish. Ames, IA: Iowa
or head) and opisthonephric (main or trunk) kidneys are
State University Press.
the sites of hematopoiesis in these fish. The opisthonephric
kidney also functions as an excretory organ. Therefore, the
18. Ferguson HW, Roberts RJ (1975) Myeloid leucosis associated
with sporozoan infection in cultured turbot (Scophrhalmus
kidney (primarily the pronephros) is the principal site for
maximus L.j. J Comp Pathol 85: 317-26.
the differentiation and development of erythrocytes, granu-
19. Haley PJ, Weiser MG (1985) Erythrocyte volume distribution
locytes, lymphocytes, monocytes, and possibly. thrombo-
in rainbow trout. Am J Ver Res 46: 2210-11.
cytes in most bony fish. The typical stages of granulocyte
20. Haws GT, Goodnight CI (1962) Some aspects of the hematology
development have been identified for each type of granulo-
of two species of catfish in relation to their habitats. Physiol Zoo!
cyte in the kidney of bony fish. The spleen of teleost fish is
35: 8017.
 similar to that of elasmobranchs, but it typically has a sec-
21. Heming TA (1989) Clinical studies of fish blood: importance of
ondary role in hematopoiesis, except in some species in
sample collection and measurement techniques. Am J Ver Res 50:
which it is the only hematopoietic organ.
93-7.
22. Hibiya T (ed.) (1985) An Alas of Fish Histology: Normal and Patho-
logica! Fearures. Tokyo: Kodansha.
 23. Hyder SL, Cayer ML, Pettey CL (1983) Cell types in peripheral
References
blood of the nurse shark: an approach to structure and function.
Tissue Celf 15: 437-55.
1. Blaxhall PC, Daisley KW (1973) Routine hematological methods
24. Jain NC (1986) Schalm's Vererinary Hematology. 4th ed. Philade]-
for use with fish blood. J Fish Biol 5: 771-81.
phia: Lea & Febiger pp. 275-81.
311
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
25. Kamra SK (1966) Effect of starvation and refeeding on some
39. Rowley AF, et al. (1 988) Fish. In: Rowley AF, Ratcliffe NA (eds.).
liver and blood constituents of Atlantic cod. J Fish Res Board Can
Verrebrare Blood Ce!ls. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
23: 975-82.
1988:19-127.
26. Larsen HN, Snieszko SF (196l) Comparison of various methods
40. Sanchez-Muiz FJ, de la Higuera M, Varela G (1982) Alterations
of determination of hemoglobin in trout blood. Prog Fish Cult
of erythrocytes of the rainbow trout Salmo gairdneri by the use
23: 817.
of Hansenula anomola yeast as sole protein source. Comp Biochem
27. Li J, Barreda DR, Zhang Y, er al. (2006) B lymphocytes from
Physiol 72A: 693-6.
early vertebrates have potent phagocytic and microbicidal abili-
 41. Sano T {l960) Haematological studies of the culture fishes in
ties. Narure Immunology 7: 1ll6-24.
Japan. J Tokyo Univ Fish 46: 68-87.
28. McLeay DJ (1973) Effects of cortisol and dexamethasone on the
 42. Saunders DC (1966) Differential blood cell counts of 12l species
pituitary-interrenal axis and abundance of white blood cell
of marine fishes of Puerto Rico. Trans Am Microsr Sor 85:
types in juvenile coho salmon, Oncorhynchus kisurch. Gen Comp
427-99.
Endocrino! 21: 441-50.
43. Shaw AE (l930) A direct method for counting the leukocytes,
higher vertebrates (reptiles, birds, and mammals). J Comp Patho!
32: 833-5.
99: 1-26.
44. Srivastava AK, Mishra S {1979) Blood dyscrasia in a teleost fish,
30. Murray SA, Burton CB (1979) Effects of density on goldfish
Colisafasciatus, asociated with cadmium poisoning. J Comp Path
blood—I1. Cell morphology. Comp Biochem Physiol 62A: 559-62.
89: 609-13.
31. Mylniczenko ND, Curtis EW, Wilborn RE, Young FA (2006)
45. Stokes EE, Firkin BG (1971) Studies of the peripheral blood of
Differences in hematocrit of blood samples obtained from two
the Port Jackson shark (Hererodonrus porrusjacksoni) with particu-
venipuncture sites in sharks. AJVR 67: 1861-4.
lar reference to the thrombocyte. Br J Haemarol 20: 427-35.
32. Natt MP, Herrick CA (1952) A new blood diluent for counting
46. Stoskopf MK (1993) Fish Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
the erythrocytes and leukocytes of the chicken. Poulr Sri 31:
47. Summerfelt RC (l967) Measurement of some hematological
735-8.
characteristics of goldfish. Prog Fish Cult 29(10y: 13-20.
33. Newbound GC (1993) Production of monoclonal antibodies
48. Tavares-Dias M, de Moraes FR (2007) Leukocyte and thrombo-
specific for antigens derived from tissue of chinook salmon
cyte reference values for channel catfish {Yrralurus punctarus
(Oncorhynchus rshawyrscha) affected with plasmacytoid leukemia.
Raf), with an assessment of morphologic, cytochemical, and
Am J Ver Res 54: 1426-31.
ultrastru ctural features. Ver Clin Pathol 36: 49-54.
34. Noga EJ (1996) Fish Disease, Diagnosis and Treatment. St. Louis:
49. Valenzuela AE, Silva VM, Klempau AE (2007) Effects of differ-
Mosby.
ent artificial photoperiods and temperatures on haematological
35. Palic D, Andreasen CB, Frank DE, Menzel BW, Roth JA (2005)
parameters of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). Fish Physio!
Gradient separation and cytochemical characterization of neu-
and Biochem 34: 158-67.
trophils from kidney of fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas
50. Wedemeyer GA, Barton BA, McLeay DI (1990) Stress and accli-
Rafinesque, 1820j. Fish Shelfsh Immunol 18: 263-7.
mation. In Schreck CB, Moyle PB (eds.), Merhods for Fish Biology.
36. Plumb JA, Liu PR, Butterworth CE (199l) Folate-degrading
Bethesda, MD: American Fisheries Society, pp. 451-89.
bacteria in channel catfish feeds. J App! Aguacuir l: 33-43.
 51. Weinreb EL (1 963) Studies on the fine structure of teleost blood
37. Pratap HB (2008) Effects of ambient and dietary cadmium on
cells in peripheral blood. Anat Rer 147: 219-38.
haematological parameters in Oreochromis mossambicus acclima-
52. Williams RW, Warren MC (1976) Some observations on the
tized to low- and high-calcium water. Comp Clin Pathof 17:
stained blood cellular elements of channel catfish, Yrralurus punr-
133-6.
tarus. J Fish Bio! 9: 491-6.
38. Railo E, Nikinmaa M, Soivio A (1985) Effects of sampling of
53. Zinkl JG, Cox WT, Kono CS (199l) Morphology and cytochem-
blood parameters in the rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri Richard-
 istry in leucocytes and thrombocytes of six species of fish. Comp
son. J Fish Biof 26: 725-32.
Haematol Int l: 187-95.
312
22
Hematology of Amphibians
Terry W. Campbell
Calorado State University
Compared with other vertebrates seen in veterinary prac-
Blood can be collected from frogs and toads by venipunc-
tices, amphibians are unique, because their normal life-cycle
ture of the ventral abdominal or lingual vein or by cardio-
includes a metamorphosis from a larval to an adult form
centesis. Adequate restraint for blood collection may require
Amphibians have adapted to aquatic, terrestrial, fossorial.
sedation or anesthesia, such as submersion of the amphibian
and alpine environments, and their normal hematologic
in a 0.o5% solution of tricaine methanesulphonate. Care
parameters vary accordingly. Amphibians are grouped into
must be taken to avoid breaking the fragile mandibular
three orders: Urodela (Caudata) that includes salamanders
bones while holding the mouth open to collect blood from
and newts; Anura (Salientia) that includes frogs and toads;
the lingual vein. Excess saliva is swabbed from below the
and Gymnophiona (Apoda) that includes the caecilians.
tongue, after which a large vein of the lingual venous plexus
 Amphibians, especially frogs of the Ranidae family, are often
on the ventral aspect of the tongue is punctured with a 25-G
used in research, but hematologic evaluation of amphibians
needle. Blood is then allowed to flow into a microcollection
is not routinely used in establishing the diagnosis of amphib-
or hematocrit tube. Venipuncture of the ventral abdominal
ian diseases. In fact, establishing reference values and the
vein of larger frogs and toads is accomplished by insertion
hematologic interpretation can be challenging because of the
of a 25-G needle through the ventral midline in a cranio-
various extrinsic and intrinsic factors that influence these
dorsal direction, midway between the sternum and the
results. Extrinsic factors, such as environmental tempera-
pelvis (Fig. 22.l). Blood is collected either by the drip
ture, photoperiod, season, water-quality parameters, diet,
method or by aspiration into a small syringe. Because lym-
and population density, should be noted whenever refer-
phatic vessels accompany blood vessels in amphibians. a
ence values are reported. Adaptation to a specific environ-
mixture of blood and lymph frequently occurs with veni-
ment also influences the hematologic parameters. Important
puncture of the ventral abdominal vein. This mixing of
intrinsic factors include gender and age; larval and adult
lymphatic fluid with the blood sample is variable, but it will
stages should be considered as separate entities, each with
dilute the cellular components of the blood, thereby result-
their own reference interval.
ing in lower packed cell volume (PcV), hemoglobin concen-
tration, and erythrocyte and leukocyte concentrations.
Collection and handling of blood
dorsal recumbency and locating the heart either by visual-
izing the pulsing heart or by use of a Doppler scan. Visualiza-
The general rule for sampling a safe volume of blood of no
tion of the heart can also be accomplished in some species
more than 1% of the body weight applies to all small exotic
via transillumination by use of the cool light from a rigid
animals, including amphibians although some species may
arthroscope inserted into the stomach.3 Once the heart is
have relatively large blood volumes for their size. For
located, a 25-G needle is inserted into the ventricle, and
 example, the aquatic species of amphibians tend to have a
blood is aspirated into a syringe.
blood volume between 13 and 25% of their body mass.30
Blood collection from salamanders and newts can be
This compares to terrestrial species of amphibians like most
accomplished by venipuncture of the  ventral abdominal
other terrestrial vertebrates have a blood volume represent-
vein or by cardiocentesis, in the same manner as that
ing 10% of their body weight.
described for frogs and toads. In addition, venipuncture of
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
313
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 22.1 Blood collection from a tree frog (Litoria caterulea) using
Figure 22.2 Erythrocytes in the blood of a salarmander (Ambystoma
the ventral abdominal vein.
tigrunum). Wright-Giemsa stain.
the ventral coccygeal vein can be performed by insertion of
There is considerable interspecies variation in the
a 25-G needle to a point just below the coccygeal vertebrae,
erythrocyte parameters of amphibians and they can be dra-
after which blood is aspirated into a syringe. This technique
matically different from other vertebrates, especially
should be avoided, however, in salamanders and newts with
mammals (Table 22.l). For example, the mean values
tail autotomy (i.e., a natural ability to lose their tail), because
for the fire-bellied toad (Bombina bombina) are reported as:
the tails may break off during the procedure. Collection of
red blood cell count = 0.34 x 10*μL for males and 0.29 x
blood after tail amputation has been used in research, but it
10°/μL for females: hemoglobin concentration = 7.1 g/dL;
should not be used in clinical practice.
hematocrit = 19.5%: MCV = 607fl; MCH = 218.5pg: and
Blood for hematologic studies in amphibians should be
MCHC = 36.8 g/dL.2s
 i  se    
Two forms of erythrocytes differentiated by size and mor-
enediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) usually causes hemolysis
ael e 'wog auo suqde u nno on ieadde ogoud
of amphibian blood and, therefore, should be avoided.
elongated form is considered to be the larval form, whereas
Syringes may be pretreated with lithium heparin, or blood
a smaller, rounded form is considered to be the adult
can be allowed to drip from the needle hub into a micro-
form.716.1 The transition from the larval form to the adult
collection tube containing lithium heparin.
form begins at the onset of metamorphosis and by day 12 a
complete transformation to all adult forms occurs.?
There is a positive relationship between body size and
Erythrocytes
erythrocyte width in salamanders.7 As salamanders grow.
their erythrocytes become more rounded. This morphologi-
Morphology
cal change does not affect the overall area, however.
Erythrocytes of amphibians are large nucleated, elliptic discs
 In some studies. males have higher erythrocyte counts
(Fig. 22.2). The cells usually have a distinct nuclear bulge.
than females. Also the presence of immature erythrocytes
and the nuclear margins often are irregular. Amphibian
(as early as rubriblasts) in the peripheral blood tends to be
erythrocytes are large compared with those of other verte-
greater in males than females where they can represent as
brates. The mean size of a variety of frog and toad erythro-
high as 2% of the erythrocyte population.
cytes is 22 x 14μm. The average erythrocyte size for
The peripheral erythrocyte count of amphibians is affected
salamanders is 37.9 × 23.9 μm for Ambystoma faipoideum and
by seasonal activity. An increase in bone marrow erythro-
34.5 × 19.0 μm for A. tigrinum. The cytoplasm of frog and
poiesis occurs during the spring and following hibernation;
toad erythrocytes is homogenous and packed with hemo-
therefore, the highest number of circulating erythrocytes
globin. Ultrastructural analysis reveals rare organelles.6
occurs at this time.
Because the erythrocytes of salamanders and newts com-
plete their maturation in the peripheral circulation, the cyto-
Laboratory evaluation
plasm is not homogenous, and ultrastructural examination
The microhematocrit method is used for obtaining a PCV.
demonstrates clusters of granular and vacuolar bodies.26
which is the most common method for evaluating the red
314
CHAPTER 22 Hematology of Amphibians
Table 22.1 Erythrocyte parameters for selected armphibian5.
PCV [%]
RBC [x10°/μL]
Hb [g/dL] 
Mcv [f]
MCHC [g/dL] 
Armerican bulfroga.b
39-42
0.450
9.3-9.7
21.1-25.9
Cuban tree froga
20-24
5.6-6.8
25-31
Fire-bellied toad
14-26
0.190-0.465
5.0-12.2
412-758
29-55
[male]
Fire-bellied toad
12-23
0.240-0.355
3.4-8.3
363-917
19-60
[female]
Leopard frog [rmale]a
19-52
0.227-0.767
3.8-14.6
722-916
23-27
Leopard frog [female]a
16-51
0.174-0.701
2.7-14.0
730-916
20-28
Mudpuppy
21
0.020
4.6
10.070
22
Tiger salamandera
40
1.657
9.4
aWright KM (2005) Amphibians. In: Exotic Animal Formulary, 3rd ed., J. Carpenter (ed.), St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders. p. 46.
bCathers T. Lewbart GA. Correa M, Stevens JB (1997) Serum chermistry and hematology values for anesthetized American bull frogs [Rana
catesbeiana]. J Zoo and Wildlife Medicine 28: 171-4
cWojtaszek J, Adarmowicz A (2003) Haematology of the fire-bellied toad, Bombina bombina. L. Comp Clin Path 12: 129-34
cell mass of amphibians. The cyanmethemoglobin method
tuate less than those of wild amphibians. Because amphib-
commonly is used to determine the hemoglobin concentra-
ians are ectothermic. the rapidity of their hematologic
tion in amphibian blood. As with blood hemoglobin deter-
-ua aul un sau aq paend aq u sasuodsa
minations in birds, reptiles, and fish, this procedure requires
ment, such as temperature fluctuation.15
cen trifugation of the blood-cyanmethemoglobin mixture to
remove the free erythrocyte nuclei before the optical density
is measured.
Leukocytes
 The total erythrocyte count in amphibians can be deter-
 mined either by manual counting with a hemocytometer or
Morphology
by an electronic cell counter. Manual counting methods to
The leukocytes of amphibians, like those of most mammals
obtain red-cell concentrations in amphibian blood include
are classified as being neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils,
the erythrocyte Unopette system (Becton-Dickinson, Ruth-
lymphocytes, and monocytes. Amphibian leukocytes gener-
erford, NJ) and Natt and Herrick's method. These methods
ally are larger than those of mammals.
are the same as those described for use in avian blood (see
Amphibian neutrophils resemble those of mammals, and
Chapter 19).
they range from 10 to 25μm in diameter for most species
(Fig. 22.3).2 They have multilobed nuclei with small cyto-
Responses in disease
plasmic granules that vary in size, shape, and ultrastructure
i   a a  a 
between species. Cells with small eosinophilic cytoplasmic
to be greater than 1o0 days, which may have an impact on
granules often are referred to as heterophils, whereas those
the erythrocytic response. Because newts and salamanders
cells that do not are referred to as neutrophils. 2.17,224.26
generally are more fishlike than toads and frogs. interpreta-
Amphibian neutrophils typically are peroxidase positive, but 
tion of their hemograms may be more like those of fish.
whereas hematologic changes in toads and frogs may be
Eosinophils of amphibians are similar in size to neutro-
more like those of reptiles. In general, amphibian PCVs are
phils, and they have a slightly basophilic cytoplasm, with
lower than those of mammals and birds, and these values
small to moderate-sized, round to oval, eosinophilic cyto-
vary with species, age, gender, environmental termperature.
plasmic granules (Fig. 22.4). The nuclei of eosinophils are
photoperiod, season, and life style of the amphibian (Table
less lobed than those of neutrophils. Eosinophils are peroxi-
 22.1),*22 Normal erythrocytes exhibit a slight anisocytosis:
dase negative, and the phosphatase activity varies with
however, increased anisocytosis suggests erythroid regen-
eration or dyscrasia caused by an increased concentration of
Colorado River toad (Bufo alvarus). are negative for aryl
large red cells. Because of the stability of their environments.
sulfatase and β-glucuronidase activity.? Some amphibian
eosinophil granules have a crystalloid ultrastructure, but
315
SEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Figure 22.3 A neutrophil (arrowhead) and an eosinophil (arrow) in the
Figure 22.5 A basophil (arrow) in the blood of a salamander
blood of a salarmander (Ambystoma tigrunum). Wright-Giemsa stain.
(Ambystoma tigrunum). Wright-Giemmsa stain.
Figure 22.4 An eosinophil (arrow) and a basophil (arrowhead) in the
Figure 22.6 A lyrmphocyte (arrow) in the blood of a salarmander
blood of a salarmandler (Ambystoma tigrunum). Wright-Giensa stain.
(Ambystoma tigrunum). Wright-Giemsa stain.
others, lack the crystalloid structures that are typical of the
larger forms in the blood films of normal amphibians. The
ultrastructural morphology of eosinophils from higher
lymphocytes are round, with round nuclei, and they have
vertebrates.2
dense chromatin clumping as well as a scant amount of
 The size of amphibian basophils varies between species.
pale-blue cytoplasm (Fig. 22.6). Many of the lymphocytes
Typically, these basophils have nonsegmented nuclei and
have distinct azurophilic granules from frogs of the family
large. metachromatic granules (Figs. 22.4 and 22.5). The
 Ranidae.215.16.26 Amphibian lymphocytes, like mammalian 
granules contain acid mucopolysaccharides (i.e., glycosami-
lymphocytes, are nonspecific esterase positive and peroxi-
noglycans) that are less sulfated than those of mammals, and
dase negative but, unlike mammalian lymphocytes, are
the histamine content is lower than that of mammals.26
negative for β-glucuronidase and aryl sulfatase.26
Ultrastructural analysis demonstrates large numbers of
Monocytes in amphibian blood films are similar to those of
membrane-bound cytoplasmic granules with small numbers
of organelles.
size; abundant, blue-gray cytoplasm that may be foamy or
The lymphocytes of amphibians resemble those of other
vacuolated; and a variably shaped nucleus with less chroma-
vertebrates. Small lymphocytes are more abundant than
tin clumping than seen in lymphocyte nuclei (Fig. 22.7).
316
CHAPTER 22 Hematology of Amphibians
Amphibian monocytes may contain fine, azurophilic granu-
appear 15 days after hatching and mature monocytes with
lation and pseudopodia. They also contain some of the hydro-
round nuclei, which develop into kidney-shaped or lobed
lytic enzymes that are found in mammalian monocytes.
nuclei, appear 22 days after hatching.2426 Definitive neutro-
Granulopoiesis occurs in the liver, kidney. and bone
phils, eosinophils, and basophils in larval bulfrogs appear in
marrow of amphibians; however, some species lack bone
the peripheral blood late during development of the frog.
marrow. Myeloblasts and progranulocytes have not been
but all three appear at the same time.
positively described in amphibians. Immature neutrophils
Lymphopoiesis in amphibians resembles that in other ver-
have small granules of various shapes that increase in both
tebrates. Small lymphocytes are the most common, but
size and density with maturation, until the larger definitive
larger lymphocytes also may be seen.
peroxidase-positive granules are formed. Some species do
not develop primary granules; rather, they produce a differ-
Laboratory evaluation
ent population of granules. Evidence suggests that in some
As in other nonmammalian vertebrates, amphibians have
species, eosinophils begin as round cells, with a round
nucleated erythrocytes and thrombocytes that interfere with
nucleus and scant cytoplasm that contains large, dense, and
altomated methods for counting leukocytes; therefore.
round primary granules. Further development of eosino-
manual counting methods are used. The Natt and Herrick's
 phils results in a mixture of the larger primary granules and
or phloxine B method, as described for birds in Chapter 19.
the smaller secondary granules.26
can be used to obtain a total leukocyte concentration in
The monocyte is the first leukocyte to appear in the
amphibian blood.
peripheral blood of bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana) larvae, in
Theleukocyte differential is performed usingRomanowsky-
stained blood films (Table 22.2a.b). Because most blood
samples from amphibians are collected into heparin, making
blood films either with blood containing no anticoagulant
or immediately after mixing of the blood with the heparin
(to decrease cell clumping and improve staining) is best.
Responses in disease
Normal total leukocyte counts exhibit inter- and intraspecies
most numerous leukocyte and the neutrophil is the most 
numerous granulocyte in the peripheral blood of most
amphibian species studied. Little is known regarding the
function of the various amphibian leukocytes. The process
of interpreting the amphibian leukogram is extrapolated
from that used with other vertebrates. Amphibian neutro-
phils have both migratory and phagocytic activity, and they
participate in inflammation. Likewise, amphibian mono-
cytes are phagocytic and, most lilkely, function in a manner
similar to those of other vertebrates. Therefore, increases
Figure 22.7 A monocyte (arrow) exhibiting leukophagocytosis in the
in the neutrophil and monocyte counts likely suggest an
blood of a a tree frog (Litoria caterulea). Wright-Giermsa stain
inflammatory response.
Table 22.2a Leukocyte parameters for selected armphibians.
WBC
Neut/Heterophils
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
 Eosinophils
Basophils
x103/μL
x10²/μL
x10²/μL
×10²/μL
x10”/μL
×10²/μL
Fire-bellied toad [male]a
2.21-18.48
0.20-5.70
2.30-10.80
0.20-1.80
06'0-0
0.10-4.20
Fire-bellied toad [femmale]a
1.04-14.25
0.10-4.40
0.70-7.10
0.10-1.60
0-0.80
0.10-2.30
aWojtaszek J, Adamowicz A (2003) Haematology of the fire-belled toad, Bombina bombina. L. Comp Clin Path 12: 129-34.
317
SEcTloN Il Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Table 22.2b Leukocyte parameters for selected ammphibian5.
WBC
Neut/
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
 Eosinophils
Basophils
x10²/μL
Heterophils
%
%
%
%
%
African clawed frog?
8.2
6.9-9.1
62.6-68.0
O-1
0
7.1-9.9
Armerican bullfroga.b
2.3-8.1
6.8-37.2
47.9-77.9
0-2
2.8-15.0
9-0
Edible froga
6.1
6.7-10.9
48.7-55.3
0-2
18.1-20.7
15.3-17.9
Grass froga
14.4
5.5-7.51.5
65.6-71.4
O-1
11.6-17.4
22-26.4
Japanese newt
1.51-2.09
25.4-30.6
2.6-3.4
5-7
3.3-4.7
53.8-60.2
aWright KM (2005) Amphibians. In: Exotic Animal Forrmulary, 3rd ed., J. Carpenter (ed.), St. Louis., MO: Elsevier Saunders. p. 46.
bCathers T, Lewbart GA, Correa M, Stevens JB (1997) Serum chermistry and hematology values for anesthetized American bullfrogs [Rana 
catesbeiana]. J Zoo and Wildlife Medicine 28: 171-4
cPfeiffer CJ, Pyle H, Asashima M (1990) Blood cell morphology and counts in the Japanese newt [Cynops pyrrhogaster]. J Zoo and Wildlife Medicine
21: 56-64.
Eosinophils have an inferior ability to phagocytize parti-
cles or microorganisms compared with that of neutrophils.
but they do respond to metazoan parasitic infections.26
 Therefore, peripheral eosinophilia may suggest a parasitic
infection.
Amphibian basophils may function in a manner similar to
those of mammals. They rarely are found in the peripheral
example, the Japanese newt normally has a differential leu-
kocyte count that includes as much as 60% basophils.22 In
this species, basophils are considered to play a significant
role in immunosurveillance.
 Lymphocytes of frogs and toads demonstrate an immuno-
logic sophistication similar to those of higher vertebrates. The
lymphocytes can be classified as B cells that produce immu-
noglobulins or as T cells with populations of functional diver-
sity, such as helpers and different effectors.?° In contrast, the
lymphocytes of newts and salamanders appear to lack such
Figure 22.8 A reactive thrombocyte (arrow) with fine eosinophilic
 cytoplasmic granules in the blood of a salamander (Ambystoma
refinement. Japanese newts demonstrate a transitory lym-
tigrunum). Wright-Giemsa stain.
phocytosis after tail amputation for blood collection.22
Laboratory evaluation
Thrombocytes
The total thrombocyte count can be obtained from the same
charged hemocytometer used to obtain the total erythrocyte
Morphology
and leukocyte count. The thrombocytes resemble the eryth-
Amphibian thrombocytes are nucleated cells resembling
rocytes in the hemocytometer, but they are smaller and
those described for birds, reptiles, and fish. They tend to
appear to be round to oval, with a greater nucleus:cyto-
resemble small, mature lymphocytes but often are spindle-
plasm (N:C) ratio compared to the erythrocytes. All squares
shaped, with a dense, round to oval nucleus and abundant,
 in the central large square of a Neubauer-ruled hemocytom-
colorless cytoplasm (Fig. 22.8). The thrombocytes of some
eter are counted on both sides, and the average number of
amphibians, such as Xenops and Rana sp., are alkaline phos-
thrombocytes in one large square is calculated and multi-
phatase positive, whereas the lymphocytes are negative.26
plied by 2000 to obtain the total thrombocyte count per
Anucleated thrombocytes that resemble mammalian plate-
microliter. Accurate counts may be difficult to achieve.
lets have been described in some species.
however, because thrombocytes tend to clump (Table 22.3).
318
CHAPTER 22 Hematology of Amphibians
Table 22.3 Thrombocyte counts for selected amphibian5.
African
Edible Froga
Fire-Bellied
Fire-Bellied
Grass Froga
Clawed Froga
Toad [Male]
Toad [Female]b
Thrombocytes x10°/μL
17.7
16.3
2.76-10.69
1.43-19.47
20.8
aWright KM (2005) Amphibians. In: Exotic Animal Formulary, 3rd ed., J. Carpenter (ed.), St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Saunders. p. 46.
bWojtaszek J, Adarmowicz A (2003) Haematology of the fire-bellied toad, Bombina bombina. L. Comp Clin Path 12: 129-34.
Responses in disease
have different origins. One population, originating in the
Functionally. thrombocytes are equivalent to mammalian
liver, has a centrally positioned nucleus; the other, originat-
platelets, and they participate in coagulation. Immature
ing in the kidney, has a peripherally located nucleus. The
forms of thrombocytes (round cells with round nuclei) are
different erythrocyte populations also have different larval
not normally found in the peripheral blood of amphibians;
hemoglobins. During metamorphosis, a third population of
therefore, their presence suggests either a regenerative
erythrocytes appears, and this population persists in adults.
response or dyscrasia. Thromboblasts have fine, nuclear
Dark-field illumination can be used to differentiate larval
chromatin, with a large, irregular, and eccentric nucleolus
and weakly basophilic cytoplasm. Prothrombocytes have
cence, from adult erythrocytes, which lack luminescence.
elongate nuclei and vacuolated cytoplasm with pale blue
The metamorphosis from larval to adult amphibians is
granules. Low and high thrombocyte counts are interpreted
accompanied by the synthesis of hemoglobins with different
in the same manner as those described for other nonmam-
oxygen affinities and various intracellular modulators of
malian vertebrates.
hemoglobin-oxygen affinity. Gilled larval amphibians have
blood with a higher affinity for oxygen than that of air-
breathing adults. The tetrameric hemoglobin of amphibians
consists of two c-lilke and two β-like globin chains, thereby
Blood parasites
creating four larval-type and four adult-type hemoglobins.
No globin chains are shared between larval and adult
Microfilaria and trypanosomes commonly are seen in
sa u readde on suan uou i sud
during tail regression, and it is the only hemoglobin found
fheca are found on occasion. Common differentials for
amphibian intraerythrocytic inclusions include hemogrega-
3 weeks after metamorphosis. Adult amphibians have higher
hemoglobin concentrations and PCVs compared with the
rines such as those described in reptiles (see Chapter 20.
larval forms. Metamorphosis results in decreases in adenos-
Hematology of Reptiles). Aegyptianella spp., anda Pirohemocyton-
ine triphosphate (ATP) and guanosine triphosphate concen-
like virus. Lankesterella spp. may also be found within the
trations in the erythrocytes, thus suggesting a change in the
phosphate regulation of hemoglobin in adults compared
are considered to be an incidental finding: however, they
with larval forms.
may be pathogenic when they occur with anemia.
Metamorphosis in newts and salamanders is not always
associated with a transition in hemoglobin such as that
occurring in frogs and toads. When newts and salamanders
Hematopoiesis
change from aquatic to aerobic respiration at metamorpho-
sis, the larval and adult hemoglobins have the same affinity
Development of the amphibian erythrocyte is similar to that
for oxygen. The reduced oxygen affinity of the blood in
described for other vertebrates with nucleated erythrocytes.
adults. however, frequently is achieved by an increased
Maturation of the rubriblast to the mature erythrocyte
erythrocyte concentration of ATP.? Even so, some species.
involves a progressive change of cytoplasmic basophilia to
ence no decrease in the oxygen affinity of blood at meta-
a decrease in the nuclear and nucleolar size, and an increased
morphosis, and the hemoglobin and total erythrocytic
chromatin density.
organic phosphate concentrations remain unchanged.
The liver is the predominant erythropoietic tissue of both
Toads, which primarily rely on aerobic respiration, tend
larval and adult frogs.? Larval amphibians may have two
to have higher hemoglobin and erythrocyte phosphate con-
centrations and a lower blood oxygen affinity compared
319
sEcTloN Ill Hematology of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
with frogs. which primarily rely on anaerobic respiration.
14. Gutierre RC, Egami MI, Antoniazzi MM, Jared C (2008) Cyto-
Aquatic amphibians do not have the same association
     
Siphonops annularus (Amphibia, Gymnophiona). Comp Clin
dependence on aerobic production of energy for activity as
Pathol 17: 221-8.
terrestrial amphibians do. The exchange of gases from the
15. Harris JA {l972) Seasonal variation in some hematological
characteristics of Rana pipiens. Comp Biochem Physiol 43A: 975-89.
blood to the surrounding water occurs through the skin of
16. Hasebe T, Oshima H, Kawamura K, Kikuyama S. Rapid and
aquatic amphibians.
selective removal of larval erythrocytes from systemic circula-
tion during metamorphosis of the bullfrog, Rana catesbeiana. Dev
Growth Difer 41: 639-43.
References
17. Jerret DP, Mays CE (1973) Comparative hematology of the
hellbender (Cryptobranchus allganiensis) in Missouri. Copeia 2: 331.
1. Barta JR, Desser SS (1984) Blood parasites of amphibians from
18. Jones RM, Woo PTK (1989) Use of kidney impressions for the
Algonquin Park, Ontario. J Widl Dis 20: 180-9.
detection of trypanosomes of anura. J Wiid! Dis 25: 413-15.
2. Cannon MS, Cannon AM (1979) The blood leukocytes of Bufo
19. Kuramoto M (198l) Relationships between number, size, and
alvarius: light, phase-contrast, and histochemical study. Can J
shape of red blood cells in amphibians. Comp Biochem Physiol A
Zoo/ 57: 31422.
69: 771-5.
3. Cathers T, Lewbart GA, Correa M, et al. (1997) Serum chemistry
20. Levine ND, Nye RR (l977) A survey of blood and other tissue
and hematology values for anesthetized American bulfrogs
f"saneis paun au u suadd puna saouy piedoa[ jo sanseied
(Rana catesbeiana). J Zoo! Wildl Med 28: 171-4.
Wild Dis 13: 17-23.
4. Coates ML (1975) Hemoglobin function in the vertebrates: an
21. Mitruka BM, Rawnsley HM (198l) Clinical Biochemical and
evolutionary model. J Mo! Evol 6: 285-307.
Hematological Reference Values in Normal Experimental Animals. 2nd
5. Crawshaw GJ (1992) Amphibian medicine. In: Kirk RW, Bona-
ed. New York: Masson Publishing USA, pp. 89-145.
gura JD (eds.), Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XI. Small Anima!
22. Pfeiffer CJ, Haywood P, Asashima M (1 990) Blood cell morphol-
Prachice. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp. 1230-1.
j0z f {asnord sdou) imau asaueder aui ul siunoo pue Ao
6. Curtis SK, Cowden RR, Nagel JW (1979) Ultrastructure of the
Wldl Med 21: 56-64.
bone marrow of the salamander Plerhodon glutinosus (Caudata:
 23. Speare R, Freeland J, Bolton SJ (l99l) A possible Iridovirus in
Plethodontidae). J Morphol 159: 151-84.
erythrocytes of Bufo marinus in Costa Rica. J Widl Dis 27:
7. Davis AK (2008) Ontogenetic changes in erythrocyte morpho]-
457-62.
-eau 'unpzodipi puoysiquy 'siapueue[es aou [eaiel ut A80
 24. Surbis AY (l978) Ultrastructural study of granulocytes of Bufo
sured with image analysis. Comp Clin Parho! 17: 23-8.
marinus. Fla Sci 4l: 42-5.
8. Desser SS (1987) Aegyptianella ranarum sp. n. (Rickettsiales,
25. Stenberg PL, Bowerman WJ (2008) Hemoparasites in Oregon
Anaplasmataceae): ultrastructure and prevalence in frogs from
spotted frogs (Rana preriosa) from central Oregon, USA. J Wild
Ontario. J Wiidl Dis 23: 52-9
Dis 44: 4648.
 9. Desser SS, Barta JR (1989) The morphological features of Aegyp-
26. Turmer RJ (1988) Amphibians. In: Rowley AF Ratcliffe NA
  r  i e  
(eds.), Vertebrate Blood Cells. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Corsica. J Wiidl Dis 25: 313-18.
Press, 129-209.
10. Duellman WE, Trueb L (1 994) Biology of Amphibians. Baltimore:
27. Woo PTK (1983) Sensitivity of diagnostic techniques in deter-
Johns Hopkins University Press.
mining the prevalence of anuran trypanosomes. J Wiid! Dis 19:
11. Essani K, Granoff A (1989) Properties of amphibian and piscine
24-6.
iridoviruses: a comparison. In: Ahne W, Kurstak E (eds.), Viruses
28. Wojtaszek J, Adamowicz A (2003) Haematology of the fire-
of Lower Verrebrates. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 79-85.
bellied toad, Bombina bombina L. Comp Clin Path 12: 129-34.
12. Forbes MR, MCRuer DL, Shutler D (2006) White blood cell
29. Wright KM (2006) Overview of amphibian medicine. In: Mader
profiles of breeding American toads (Bufo americanaus) relative
DR (ed.), Reprile Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Saunders
to sex and body size. Comp Clin Pathol 15: 155-9.
Elsevier, pp. 941-71.
13. Gruia-Gray J, Petric M, Desser SS (1989) Utrastructural, bio-
30. Wright KM (200l) Amphibian hematology. In: Wright KM,
chemical, and biophysical properties of an erythrocytic virus of
Whitaker BR (eds.). Amphibian Medicine and Caprive Husbandry.
frogs from Ontario, Canada. J Wildl Dis 25: 497-506.
Malabar, FL: Krieger Publishing Co., pp. 129-46.
320
IV
Clinical Chemistry of
Common Domestic
Species
23
Laboratory Evaluation and Interpretation
of the Urinary System
Donald Meuten
 North Carolina State University
ancillary tests are also useful to monitor the patient's
General
response to treatment.
Understanding the physiology of the kidney makes the
The primary reason for assessing the urinary system is to
understanding of clinical pathology simple. If structures are
recognize failure of that system. Laboratory abnormalities
damaged, then functions are lost, and if the remaining neph-
will not appear until so many nephrons are damaged that
rons cannot compensate a clinical laboratory or physical
the remaining nephrons can no longer compensate for the
examination finding will generally be obvious. For example.
damaged ones. Once identified, renal failure is then catego-
glomeruli exclude albumin from the ultrafiltrate, if glomerl-
rized as acute or chronic. This identification is further nar-
loneprhitis is present, then this exclusionary function is lost.
rowed down to a specific disease diagnosis or, at least, to the
If the disease is severe enough and the remaining nephrons
renal structure that is diseased, e.g., if the disease is centered
cannot compensate there will be proteinuria, hypoalbumin-
on the glomeruli (glomerulonephritis or amyloidosis).
emia, and potentially, ascites and dependent edema (Table
tubules (nephrosis), interstitium (interstitial nephritis).
23.1).
 Depending on severity and chronicity of disease, as well
obstruction, or rupture).
as any treatments that have been undertaken to slow disease
Laboratory analysis of the serum biochemical profile and
progression, laboratory abnormalities may be nonexistent.
complete urinalysis are practical means to accomplish the
mild, moderate, or marked. The severity of renal disease can
assessment of renal function. The most accurate way to
be graded as 1, 2, 3, or 4 based on severity of clinical signs.
identify renal failure is to directly measure GFR; however.
physical examination results, and laboratory abnormalities.
in veterinary medicine this is rarely done. Instead, we use
The stage of the renal disease correlates with the severity of 
indirect evidence to estimate reductions in GFR, and
the renal lesions and is correlated with prognosis. As the
from this to imply that renal failure is present. Although
stage of the renal disease progresses so does the severity of
indirect, it is adequate. If a more precise assessment of renal
the laboratory abnormalities and the percentage of animals
function is desired, then GFR can be measured by clearance
that have that abnormality. For example, 20% of azotemic
Studies.
dogs have only mild hyperphosphatemia in stage l renal
Fortunately. there are many ways to recognize failure of
disease, but the incidence of hyperphosphatemia increases
the urinary system based on the history, biochemical profile,
t0 10o% in stage 4, at which point serum phosphorus con-
and evaluation of urine. Among other things, these include
centration is markedly increased.
identification of anuria, polyuria, azotemia, uremia, electro-
Laboratory abnormalities will not appear until enough
lyte abnormalities, hypoalbuminemia, inappropriate urine
nephrons are incapacitated (severity) and the remaining
specific gravity, casts, cystitis, and hematuria. When renal
nephrons cannot compensate. Two classic examples are
failure is severe the clinical recognition is easy, when failure
dilute urine (isosthenuria) and azotemia. Inability to con-
is mild and/or the disease is in the earliest stages, then rec-
ognition is difficult and may require ancillary diagnostic tests
are not functioning properly. Azotemia is not seen until
such as creatinine clearance, fractional excretion of sodium,
approximately 75% of nephrons are compromised. However.
assessment of microproteinuria, or ultrasonography. These
the finding of azotemia alone does not allow us to narrow
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
323
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
the kidneys, blood pressure, interstitial and intratubular
Table 23.1 The concentration of certain substances measured in 
pressures, as well as number of functioning nephrons. It is
serum or plasma are affected by renal function, in that the kidneys
not easy to measure GFR directly, but it can be measured by
play a role in the excretion, conservation or production of those
substances. Damage to specific renal structures results in dammage to
studies that use substances which are freely filtered by the
 renal function. The abnormalities listed are generalizations and not 
glomerulus, and that are neither secreted nor reabsorbed,
constants. Their presence will depend on the severity of the lesion.
such as inulin, iohexol, mannitol, p-amminohippuric acid.
 chronicity, treatments, and compensatory ability of surviving 
and exogenous creatinine. Glomerular filtration rate can
nephrons.
also be estimated by endogenous creatinine clearance
studies. The methodologies of these and other tests can be
Substance
Function Lost
Abnormality
found in many other resources.
Because of the complexity of direct GFR measurement
 N
 Excretion 
 Azotemia 
studies, it is seldom measured in veterinary medicine.
Water
Balance 
 Polyruia, anuria, oliguria
 Instead indirect evidence of decreased GFR is derived from
ue ‘[] was pu [sodsoud] [o] [nn] as
P
Excrete
Hyperphosphatemia
additional data is gleaned from the complete urinalysis, and
Na CI
Conserve 
 Normo- to hyponatremia.
/ or urinary protein and creatinine clearance, as well as the
hypochloremia
 fractional excretion of sodium, among other tests.
Excrete
A decreasing GFR is the best indicator of renal insuff-
K
Hyperkalemia
ciency, and since UN and Ct are both freely filtered by the
Ca
Conserve
Hypocalcemia
glomerulus they are the analytes most commonly used to
Acid ba5e
Balance 
Acidosis mmetabolic; alkalosis 
estimate GFR (Fig. 23.l). As the GFR decreases plasma [UN]
COW
and [Ct] increase; however, GFR must be reduced by 75%
before [UN] and [Ct] increase in blood plasma. Because
Albumin 
Conserve
Proteinuria,
azotemia is not evident until 75% of nephrons are no longer
 hypoalbuminemia, ascites
functioning adequately. and because the ability to concen
Erythropoietin 
 Produce
 Anermia, nonregenerative
trate urine is lost after 66% of nephrons are compromised.
azotemia and dilute urine or polyuria caused by renal failure
Vitamin D
Produce
 Hypocalcemia, osteodystrophy
are not detected until a large portion of the total renal mass
Lipase, amylase
Excrete
Increased one- to threefold 
is compromised. Therefore, they are not early indicators of
Antithrombin I!
Conserve
 Decreased AT Ill, thrombi
renal failure. These percentages indicate the tremendous
reserve of renal function, since only 25% of total renal mass
is needed to excrete sufficient nitrogenous waste to prevent
azotemia, and only 33% is needed to concentrate urine and
down its cause because azotemia can be prerenal, renal, or
 preserve the body's fluid volume.
postrenal.
 It should be noted that no serum biochemical abnormali-
This chapter will follow the functions of the urinary
ties indicate irreversibility of renal damage. for, while glom-
system, predict clinical pathology results and diagnoses,
eruli have no regenerative capabilities, tubules have
and provide case examples in the discussion section. The
tremendous regenerative capacity if basement membranes
emphasis is on interpretation of laboratory data with less
are preserved.
If glomeruli and tubules sustain severe
focus on methodology. which is covered exhaustively in
damage the remaining nephrons compensate by hypertro-
many other excellent resources. A glossary of terms is at the
phy. For example. if a dog with normal plasma [Ct] of
end of chapter.
0.5mg/dL developed renal disease such that plasma [Ct]
increased to 1.0 mg/dL, then theoretically 50% of its neph-
rons are now not functioning properly. However, since that
Introduction and Case Examples
value of plasma [Ct] is still within the reference interval,
that 50% loss of function would not be detected by measur-
Glomerular filtration rate is the best predictor of renal func
ing [Ct] or [UN] because the renal reserve, or compensation
tion because it is directly related to total functional renal
via hypertrophy of remaining nephrons, would work to
mass or, in other words, to the number of functioning neph-
maintain plasma [Ct] within the reference interval of a
rons. It is the volume of plasma filtered at the glomerular
"normal" dog. However, and very importantly, once [Ct] is
capillaries into Bowman's space per unit of time. A GFR of
increased above the upper reference interval, then every
3-6 mL/min/kg is normal for a dog and 2-4mL/min/kg is
doubling of plasma [Ct] indicates a loss of function of 50%
normal for a cat. It is dependent on adequate blood flow to
of the remaining renal mass. Conversely. the recovery of
324
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
70
60-
00m
JN
2
GFR (ML/MIN/KG)
30-
20-
10-
C
:B
A
D
12.5
25%
50
75
100
GFR (%)
Xaxis=%functioning nephrons
for dogs and the BUN is less than 30 mng/dL and as GFR decreases the BUN increases (inset). In the exammple provided (A) correlates with 100% functional
nephron units and a BUN of approximately 12 mg/dL. When 50% of the nephron units are compromised (GFR decrea5ed 50%) the BUN has doubled to
 approximately 24 mg/dL but it is stillin reference interval (occult renal issues). Not until approximately 75% of the nephron units are compromised (GFR
is now 25% of normal) is the dog azotemic (C). Therefore BUN and serum creatinine (Ct) are poor indlicators of early renal insufficiency. If the GFR is
decreased by half again (D) by advancing renal disease, then a rule of thumb is the BUN and Ct will double. Likewise a decrease in BUN and Ct by half 
 indicates the GFR has doubled, meaning there is irmprovement in renal function, e.g. more nephrons are functioning. Monitoring BUN or Ct to asses5
deterioration or irmproverment of renal function can be cdone only after they are increased, but GFR can be used to mnonitor patients with renal
insufficiency at any time.
nephrons from an insult can be monitored, for every 50%
well as the speed of flow of the glomerular filtrate within
reduction in plasma [Ct] or [UN] indicates that 50% of the
the tubules.
nephrons have returned to function. This is because there
Plasma [Ct] within the reference interval does not mean 
is a logarithmic relationship of plasma [Ct] to GFR (Fig.
the kidneys are normal, it means that 25% of the renal mass
23.1). It is this principle that allows us to monitor progres-
is functioning adequately enough to excrete creatinine and
keep it within the reference interval. An endogenous creati-
 once the upper limit of the reference interval has been sur-
nine
clearance study is a better indicator of renal
passed. However, more sophisticated methods are required
function than plasma [Ct] or [UN]. Endogenous [Ct] clear-
to determine if renal disease is present when plasma [Ct] is
ance can be used to estimate GFR because the production of
not increased because of the great amount of renal func-
 [Ct] is relatively constant and essentially loo% is excreted
tional reserve, e.g., the tests of endogenous or exogenous
via the kidneys (the small amount that is secreted by proxi-
creatinine clearance, inulin clearance, clearance of radio-
mal tubules is negligible for this estimation). Creatinine
isotopes, and assessment of fractional excretion of electro-
clearance is useful when renal disease is suspected but the
lytes, etc.
plasma concentrations of [Ct] and [UN] are not increased.
 It should be noted that plasma [Ct] is a better indicator of
Creatinine clearance can be calculated from the serum [Ct].
GFR than plasma [UN] because its rate of production and
urine [Ct], the volume of urine produced in a defined period.
excretion are fairly constant, and it is neither metabolized
and the weight of the patient. The urinary bladder is com-
by extrarenal nor renal processes. In contrast, plasma [UN]
pletely emptied of urine at the start of the study and the
is influenced by more nonrenal factors than is [Ct] and a
volume produced in the duration of the study is measured.
significant proportion of [UN] excreted into the glomerular
filtrate is reabsorbed. Furthermore, the rate of reabsorption
Urine Ct xvolume urine/time/kg
Creatinine clearance =
 of [UN] varies with the hydration status of the animal, as
Serum Ct
325
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
AZOTEMIA
Case. 40kg dog has a serum Ct of 1.0 mg/dL
and in 1 hour produces 30ml of urine that
has a urine Ct of 2o0mg/dL.
Urinc s.g.:
Concentrated
Not cuncentrated
/
 200 mg/dL ×30mL/60 min/40 kg
Pre-renal
Renal
Creatinine clearance =
1.0 mg/dL
ou roilun uyls
 200mg/100 ml × 0.0125mL/min/kg 
PCV inc
Acute vs. Chronic: Hx EEx PCV All
 1mg/1 00 mL
All inc
Acute: Fine yesterday. god body condition
= 2.5mL/min/kg 
Others
PCV Alb in RR to inereased
Chronice: Weeks, wt. loss, PCV Alb der
Reference range for dogs is 3-6 mL/min/kg
Exceptions:
Location: Glom, Tub, Interst, Pelvis
This dog has reduced Ct clearance not reflected by the serum
Derc ADH
URINALYSIS:
[Ct]. which is within the reference interval. This may be seen in
Elypercalcentia
Glomerular = protein -++
posttreatment of renal failure, when the serum [Ct] has returned 
Medullary washout
Tubular = casts +++
to reference interval: the patient feels better but there is still
Steroids
Interstitial = chrcnic
'sisad Ae suosal euan aos 'ba uoung leuan pasduos
Pyometra
Pelvis - casts, whc, rhr,hacteria
 such as interstitial fibrosis. These patients will benefit from dietary
Correlate azntemia with USG, PCv, alhumin and hydration status to determine if
changes and ao libitum access to water. This might be predicted 
azoteniais pre-enal orrenal or a comination, Conentrated mrine for a dog is >
1.030 and for a cat >1,D40), the greater the USfi over these low end ranges for
from clinical experience but it would not be known without 
adequate concentration the greater our confidence that the lkidney can
assessment of urinary creatinine clearance. In a 24-hour study of 
concentrate urine and the cause nf the azotemia is pre-renal, Nnt concentrated
endogenous creatinine clearance, the urinary bladder is emptied
paraneters heing asscssed, 11S(i 1.07-1,0I3 (isnsthenuria) with azntemia
of urine at the start of the study, the volume of urine produced 
mcans there is renal failure,if the animal is dehydrated some of the azotemia
in 24 hours is measured, and a serum sample is collected, usually
may he duc to hypovalemia USG 1.014 tn I.029 in a dehydrated dog is prohahly
inappropriate and suggests there may be concurrent renal issucs and
 in the middle or at the end of the study.
dehydration ecreased Al orinreases in suhstancs that iterfere with A
may prevent tuhules from concentrating urinc. Tlhis is confusing if the aninal has
azotemafrondehyratinnbut theurineisdilutebecauseof anintefering
substanre: hypercalccimia, sternids, pyometra ctc.
Figure 23.2 General approaches to azotemia
Endogenous creatinine clearance can also be used in the
diagnostic evaluation of a patient in which occult renal
nephron, or rupture within the urinary system. Any time
disease is suspected. This patient is not azotemic but has
azotemia is recognized the next step is to correlate it with
polyuria, polydipsia, and dilute urine. This situation may be
the urine specific gravity (USG), and to determine if urine
observed when functional renal mass is reduced to between
is exiting the body, and if so, in what quantities (i.e., is there
66% and 75%. If more accurate assessment of renal func-
anuria, oliguria, or polyuria?). Azotemia with concentrated
 si n  e  s 
urine is of prerenal origin (exception is some cats); azotemia
inulin or iohexol can be performed as well as injected radio-
with unconcentrated urine is of renal origin (Fig. 23.2).
isotopes or renal scintigraphy. These studies are usually only
Azotemia due to postrenal causes has urine of various con-
performed in specialty hospitals and when the clinician and
centrations; and diagnosis of postrenal azotemia is depen-
owner want the patient monitored closely.
dent on determining that urine is not being excreted, i.e..
there is an obstruction or rupture.
Urea nitrogen and creatinine
Mild azotemia is characterized by a serum [Ct] (in mg/dL)
 A major function of the urinary system is to excrete UN and
of: 1.5-2.0 in the dog, 1.6-3.0 in the cat. Moderate azotemia:
Ct. When this function is lost, plasma concentrations of [UN] 
2.0-5.0 dogs, 3.0-5.0 cat, and severe azotemia is >5.0 in both
and [Ct] increase—a condition termed azotemia. Azotemia
the dog and cat. Extreme values >lo.0 may be observed
is the single best laboratory abnormality that indicates
when hypovolemia (e.g., dehydration) is superimposed on
problems in the urinary system. Azotemia is caused by pre-
renal or postrenal causes of azotemia. The magnitude of
renal, renal or postrenal causes. Prerenal azotemia is due to
serum [UN] or [Ct] does not predict a pre-, renal or postre-
hypovolemia (e.g., dehydration, shock). Renal azotemia is
nal cause of azotemia.
caused by lesions in one of five locations: glomeruli, tubules.
Urea nitrogen and creatinine are byproducts of nitrogen
intersititium, renal pelvis, or blood vessels, and postrenal
metabolism and they, along with a complete urinalysis, are
the most practical indicators of renal failure. Both UN and
326
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
Ct are excreted via glomerular filtration, and as the GFR
urine (obstructed or ruptured urinary tract) all result in
decreases the plasma concentrations of [UN] and [Ct]
increased serum [UN] and [Ct]. If UN and Ct are not excreted
increase, resulting in azotemia. Urea is produced in the liver
in adequate amounts their concentration increases in plasma
from ammonium and bicarbonate. It has a molecular weight
(azotemia), and this may lead to the clinical signs of urinary
of 60 daltons and is the main means of nitrogen excretion
toxin accumulation in the patient, known as uremia.
in animals. The term "blood urea nitrogen" (BUN) is no
Although both substances are reported in the biochemical
longer a relevant term because of changes in measurement
profile, an increased concentration of either implies the
methodology. Originally, a urease method released nitrogen
same thing: decreased GFR. Neither substance increases
 from urea and the amount of nitrogen was measured, i.e..
until approximately 75% of nephrons are nonfunctional. In
BUN. Now urea is measured from the release of ammonium
fact, this percentage is probably closer to 80-90%. The
remaining nephrons compensate by hypertrophy. especially
by the International Clinical Chemistry Federation. They
in chronic renal failure. Therefore, when azotemia is detected 
 s   a   , 
the total nephron mass not functioning adequately may
from BUN to UN, and impossible to force the acceptance of
actually be greater than 75%. The remaining nephrons com-
carbamide, so throughout this chapter, the term UN will be
pensate and maintain the overall GFR such that serum [UN]
used.
and [Ct] stay within the reference interval, delaying azote-
 Decreased plasma [UN] is uncommon. A decreased serum
mia until more nephrons are lost.
[UN] implies decreased production of urea, either due to
Since serum [UN] and [Ct] do not increase until 75% of
hepatic failure, or portosystemic shunt, if additional abnor-
the nephrons are compromised they are not useful in the
malities are present. Congenital hepatic shunts are probably
detection of early renal failure, i.e., they are insensitive
the most common cause of decreased serum [UN]. and
indicators of lower levels of renal dysfunction. However.
acquired shunts will have the same end-result.
they are fairly specific as relatively few nonrenal factors
Urea nitrogen is freely filtered by glomeruli and approxi-
cause their increase. Table 23.2 lists nonrenal factors that
mately 50% is reabsorbed passively by the proximal tubules.
increase these substances. The most common causes are
with ~lo% being actively reabsorbed by the collecting
dehydration (hypovolemia) and GI hemorrhage. Although
tubules. The amount reabsorbed varies with the rate of flow
 dehydration eventually leads to increases in both substances.
through the tubules. The slower the flow, the more UN is
[UN] increases first. The ratio of serum [UN]:[Ct] in small
reabsorbed. Hence with dehydration more UN is reabsorbed
animals is approximately 20:1 and in large animals 10:l. An
and therefore serum [UN] may be disproportionately higher
increased ratio is associated with dehydration or intestinal
than serum [Ct] in a dehydrated animal ([UN]/[Ct] ratio is
bleeding whereas a decreased ratio is associated with fluid
 >30 rather than approximately 20 with normal hydration in
diuresis, the presence of noncreatinine chromogens, or the 
unique ability of cows and horses to metabolize and excrete
glands into the gastrointestinal (GI) tract where it is degraded
UN through their gastrointestinal tracts.
by bacteria into ammonium, absorbed and converted back
   [l s   
into urea by the liver. Therefore, there is no net excretion
Blood in the GI tract is broken down, reabsorbed as amino
of UN via the gastrointestinal system in most species.
acids and ammonia, delivered to the liver, and converted
However ruminants have a unique rumen microflora that
can degrade and assimilate the urea into amino acids, and
reabsorb these resulting in a protein gain and net urea excre-
tion. This is the logic of feeding cattle nonprotein nitrogen
Table 23.2 Nonrenal factors that increase serum [UN] and [Ct].
sources such as liquid urea as a source of protein. And why
it is especially critical in ruminants to correlate serum [UN]
Both
UN
with [Ct] and urine specific gravity to predict renal disease.
Increases in serum [UN] without concurrent increase in [Ct] 
Dehydration
 Gl hemorrhage
Noncreatinine chromogens
have been used to suggest rumen stasis (and GI bleeding).
Hypovolemia 
Oxyglobin
Shock 
Glucose Ketones
cattle do, and serum [UN] is used in the assessment of renal
Carotenes Uric acid 
function in this species along with [Ct] and urine specific
Vitamins A and C
 gra vity.
Protein-rich meals, fever, sepsis, and anorexia are listed as factors that
Creatinine is synthesized in muscles from the conversion
will increase serum [UN]. While sepsis and developing cachexia can 
 of creatine and creatine phosphate into the ring structure
lead to increased release of creatine and increased creatinine 
that is creatinine. Failure to deliver blood to the kidneys
production, these increases tend to be mild and do not interfere with
(dehydration, cardiac insufficiency, or shock), or failure
clinical interpretation .
within the kidneys (variety of diseases), or failure to excrete
327
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
into UN for excretion by the kidneys. Hemorrhage does not
enous substances (low protein, high carbohydrate) that
have to be so severe as to cause anemia, and in fact, hemor-
should result in less UN production via the liver, and there-
rhage may be mild enough that it requires an occult blood
fore reduce the work load on the failing kidneys. Excess
test on feces to be certain it is present. Other "high protein
muscle catabolism (e.g., starvation, or fever) could increase
meals" may increase UN production post prandially, but they
the production of UN but it rarely produces azotemia. If
do not cause azotemia in normal patients. This is the prin-
there is an increase it will be mild and will not interfere with
ciple of "renal diets," i.e., the feeding of a diet low in nitrog-
clinical interpretation.
UN 78 mg/dL Ct 1.2 mg/dL urine s.g. 1.034
hundred percent of creatinine excreted in the glomerular filtrate
UN :Ct ratio 65 : 1
passes out in the urine. However, approximately 50% of [UN] 
excreted in glomerular filtrate is reabsorbed via the tubules. The
First interpretation: A disproportionate increase in [UN] relative to
aut pue saingnt aul jo ylieay jo uopuny e s! paglosgeay junowe
[Ct], coupled with a concentrated urine is mostly likely due to Gl
flow rate of filtrate through the tubules. The slower the flow rate
suoe lanin pue suoisoa pise on Aepuos abeuou
(dehydration) the greater the reabsorption of UN; up to 70% of
related to NSAIDs use.
urea may be reabsorbed versus the expected 50%. The faster the
Further tests: occult blood test on feces, and/or suspension of
flow rate (diuresis) the lower the amount of [UN] reabsorption,
NSAIDs, and evaluation of hydration status.
perhaps only 40% or less is reabsorbed. Therefore, with
Second interpretation: Dehydration resulting in increased renal
dehydration [UN] increases more than [Ct], and with diuresis [UN] 
retention of UN. However, since [UN] is increased and [Ct] is 
decreases faster than [Ct], and both of these situations may be 
within reference interval Gl hemorrhage is more likely than
 seen clinically. The faster decrease in [UN] during fluid therapy is
dehydration. Evaluate hydration status.
due to increased production of glomerular filtrate, leading to a
Dehydration can increase [UN] without a commensurate increase 
faster transit time of fluid in tubules, and therefore reduced time
in [Ct] and the ratio of [UN]:[Ct] may be high, i.e., >20:1. One
to reab sorb UN.
Case Example 23.2. 9-year-old dog. 6% dehydration noted clinically
[UN] 88 mg/dL, [Ct] 2.8 mg/dL, USG 1.058,
The packed cell volume and albumin may also be increased if
[UN] : [Ct] ratio 31: 1 
dehydration is severe enough. and if neither PCV nor albumin
were decreased below the lower reference interval prior to the
Interpretation: Prerenal azotemia, as evidenced by a
onset of dehydration. If the dog was not anemic, then PCV may
disproportionate increase of [UN] compared to [Ct]. with a highly
be increased; however, if the dog was anemic prior to the onset
concentrated urine, and clinical signs of dehydration. Urea
 of dehydration, then the decrease in plasma volume may cause
reabsorption is increased secondary to decreased flow of
an increase in the PCV to within the reference interval thus 
glomerular filtrate caused by the hypovolemia of dehydration.
masking the anemia.
Case Example 23.3. Mixed breed dog dehydrated 6% clinically
Initial results: [UN] 120 mg/dL, [Ct] 4.5 mg/dL,
(33%). Serum [UN] is almost within the reference interval, and
USG 1.062, [UN] : [Ct] 26 : 1
[Ct] is nearly twice the upper reference interval value. This is due
to the increased flow of filtrate through the tubules caused by
Post IV fluids: [UN] 34 mg/dL, [Ct] 2.9 mg/dL,
the fluid therapy which allowed less time for [UN] and water to
USG 1.008, [UN] : [Ct] 12 : 1
be reabsorbed and, therefore, more [UN] and fluid remained in
the plasma ultrafiltrate, allowing more to be excreted (polyuria).
Interpretation: Prerenal azotemia; disproportionate increase of [UN] 
This led to a faster decrease in [UN] than [Ct]. During fluid 
to [Ct] with concentrated urine and clinical dehydration. Dog is
diuresis the increased flow of fluid through the kidneys decreases
still mildly azotemic post fluid therapy and the decrease in [UN] 
the reabsorption of UN to <40% and therefore BUN decreases
is of greater magnitude (70% less) than the decrease in [Ct]
faster than creatinine during fluid therapy.
328
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
Approximately 40-60% of the UN excreted in the glomerular
 plasma [sodium] or [UN] it may result in decreased concentrations
filtrate is reabsorbed via the tubules by passive (proximal tubules)
of either substance in the interstitium, leading to a decreased
and active mechanisms (via ADH in collecting ducts). There are
ability to reabsorb water passively and therefore, to a decreased
urea transporters (UT1. UT2, UT3) that are active in different
ability to concentrate urine. Hence, a dilute urine results that is 
regions of the tubules to accomplish urea reabsorption. The
noted clinically as polyuria. This combination of events that leads
amount reabsorbed is a function of the health of tubules and the
to decreased medullary tonicity is referred to as medullary washout.
rate of flow in the glomerular filtrate. A portion of the [UN]
It is seen with hypoadrenocorticism (prolonged hyponatremia) and 
remains in the interstitium, along with sodium and chloride, and
with prolonged decreased production of UN due to hepatic shunts
contributes to the hypertonicity of medulla that is part of the
(congenital or acquired) as well as severe chronic liver failure. Urea
counter current multiplier system. The degree of saturation in the
U hnsan uen aune, laa uou pue aalaul ui pazisauus s!
interstitium is proportional to the concentration of UN, sodium.
decreased production and therefore decreased plasma [UN]. Single
and chloride in the medulla, which makes it hypertonic compared
digit [UN] combined with hypoalbuminemia, and microcytosis may
to the fluid in the tubules, and this gradient is needed to help
be subtle clues that indicate hepatic shunts
concentrate the glomerular filtrate as it is processed into urine.
 Psychogenic polydipsia will wash out the medullary interstitium
Urea and sodium are the two substances primarily responsible for
of UN and sodium via marked diuresis resulting in hyposthenuria
the passive reabsorption of water from tubules in the descending
and PU PD.
limb of the loop of Henle. If a patient has prolonged decreases in
 Case Example 23.4. 1-year-old small breed dog, poor growth, thin, and bizarre behavior
(snapping at objects, not playful)
[UN] 5 mg/dL, [Ct] 1.1mg/dL, USG 1. 012, [UN] : [Ct] 4.5 : 1
were observed in the urine. These crystals and ammonium
biurate uroliths (green, green-brown (Figs. A23.18 and A23.19))
Serum [albumin] 1.8 g/dL (Reference Interval (RI):
are caused by the markedly elevated ammonia concentration in
2.6-3.9);liver enzymes within Rl.
plasma, which, since it is freely filtered at the glomerulus,
contributes to an ultrafiltrate that is both supersaturated with
interpretation: Decreased [UN] and [albumin] in a young dog with
ammonia and alkaline in pH and leads leads to ammonia
possible CNs disturbances (snapping at objects) and dilute urine
crystallization. Most cases of congenital liver shunts have no to
 is likely caused by congenital hepatic shunt and decreased
 only mild increases in serum liver enzymes and are not 
synthesis of [UN] and albumin by the liver. Inability to 
bilirubinemic. This is in contrast to most cases of acquired liver
 concentrate urine is due to a renal medullary interstitium that
 shunts which have moderate to marked increases in liver
never developed a high [UN], resulting in an inability to produce
enzymes and bilirubinemia because the severe liver lesion
concentrated urine (medullary washout). It would be a classical 
precedes the development of the shunt.
sign of congenital hepatic shunt if ammonium biurate crystals
All species can excrete [UN] through their salivary glands.
up to 18 hours. The protein is broken down in the GI tract
However, only ruminants and horses have unique micro-
and the ammonium produced is reabsorbed and converted
flora that convert the [UN] into amino acids, reabsorb these
into UN by the liver. This is the principle of feeding reduced
and have a net excretion of UN. Cattle are so efficient
protein diets to patients in renal failure. These patients may
     n  i   s m
benefit from a low protein diet that results in less UN pro-
bilateral nephrectomy before serum [UN] increases. Cattle
duction, and therefore reduces some of the work performed
can be fed liquid urea because of their unique rumenal
by the kidneys. Other nonrenal factors that may increase
microflora. Cattle on a nitrogen-deficient diet or those that
serum [UN] include: intestinal hemorrhage (the globin
are severely anorectic will excrete the majority of their UN
portion of hemoglobin is a protein): sepsis and fasting, which
via the GI tract. Horses are not as efficient but have micro-
increase protein catabolism; and decreased renal perfusion
flora in their cecum and colon which accomplish some net
(favors increased tubular reabsorption). Conditions that may
excretion of UN (case examples are found in the creatinine
decrease UN production are: liver failure, intra- or extrahe-
section).
patic shunts, malnutrition, hyperthyroidism (increased 
Normal dogs fed a high protein meal may have a slight
catabolism and increased GFR; hyperthyroidism may also
increase in their serum [UN] peaking at 6 hours and lasting
decrease [Ct] due to cachexia), and diuresis.
329
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Methodology considerations: Urea
the reference point that is due to the renal or postrenal
disease. Postrenal azotemia from urinary obstruction or a
are less accurate than strips that assay the release of
bladder rupture is generally considered to produce the
ammonia, which is a semiquantitative determination. These
  s  sn id ro  in
methods are somewhat useful for broadly estimating
is not diagnostic. Decreased serum Ct or at least decreased
"normal" or "increased" serum [UN] in after-hours situa-
synthesis of Ct is seen rarely with chronic liver failure
tions, but are not accurate and should not be relied on to
and is more frequently associated with conditions that
monitor a patient over time. They are good at identifying
decrease muscle mass such as chronic cachexia and is occa-
low or normal values and are not adequate to quantify
sionally observed in hyperthyroidism of cats. In fact, the
abnormally high values. If the strip indicates that a patient
decrease synthesis of Ct with hyperthyroidism may mask
is azotemic, then a blood sample should be collected prior
the development of azotemia in geriatric cats with concur
to fluid therapy. and serum should be analyzed by a quan-
rent hyperthyroidism and chronic renal diseases. Interpreta-
titative chemical methodology. If serum strips are used to
tion of an increase in serum Ct is done by examining UN.
assess uroabdomen, then the color difference between
USG, and the rest of the data. A small amount is secreted
abdominal fluid and serum should be definitive, and it is
by the proximal tubules of male dogs but this is clinically
recommended that results are confirmed with quantitation
inconsequential; cats and ponies do not secrete or reabsorb
of [UN] or [Ct] in fluid and serum (refer to the uroabdomen
Ct. Factors that increase endogenous muscle catabolism
section). Reagent strips are a benefit for after-hour estima-
such as sepsis, developing cachexia, can increase the release
tions but should not replace chemical measurement of urea.
of creatine and, hence, the quantity of creatinine that is
urea nitrogen.
produced. However, these increases are mild and rarely
Creatinine is a waste product of creatine and creatine phos-
interfere with clinical interpretation. An increased blood
phate found in muscle. Creatine (from the Greek word for
creatinine is most likely due to decreased excretion—
flesh kreas) is produced in the liver with a minor role from
prerenal, renal, or postrenal mechanisms.
the pancreas, transported to skeletal muscle, where 95% of
Cattle and horses occasionally have disproportionate
the total body creatine is located and enzymatically con-
Ae stul pue '[nnl on paiedmo se [o] wnas un sasau
verted into creatine phosphate via the enzyme creatine
be due to an increase in noncreatinine chromogens that
kinase. Creatine phosphate serves as an energy store for
falsely increase serum [Ct] but do not affect serum [UN].
production of ATP and along with creatine is spontaneously
Creatinine is measured spectrophotometrically, and any
degraded in muscles to creatinine, which has no charge and
chromogenic substance (or noncreatinine chromogen) will
freely passes out of muscle cells. Creatinine production is
also be measured, resulting in a false increase in the mea-
relatively constant (2%/day) and is roughly proportional to
sured serum [Ct]. The Jaffe reagent is used most frequently
muscle mass. It is a ring structure, has molecular weight of
in veterinary laboratories to measure creatinine and it reacts
113 daltons, and is filtered freely through the glomeruli as
with many noncreatinine chromogens. At normal concen-
 the majority of circulating Ct is not protein bound and it has
trations of Ct, noncreatinine chromogens can contribute up
no charge. Although dietary meat protein (creatine) could
-a a ua [] s ps an n %o o
increase the serum creatinine frorm gastrointestinal absorp-
 a     n n 
tion this increase is offset by a concurrent increase in GFR
mogens do not increase, and in nonruminants, there is a
stimulated by the meal. The increase in Ct from the meat is
concurrent increase in [UN] so the interpretation will be
so mild that the postprandial increase in GFR actually
azotemia. However, there are several situations where these
decreases the serum concentration of Ct within 2 hours of
noncreatinine chromogens contribute to the measured [Ct]
the meal.
such that they will interfere with clinical interpretation. In
 In a normal animal UN and Ct are in high concentrations
small animals, this is seen almost exclusively with artificial
in the urine, up to 300mg/dL of Ct in urine and in low
transfusates such as oxyglobin products. The serum [Ct] can
concentration in the serum, l mg/dL of Ct. If the kidney is
be increased as high as 20mg/dL, but serum [UN] will
functioning insufficiently there is less Ct excreted in the
remain within the reference interval. In addition to other
urine, lo0mg/dL or less and Ct is retained in the serum,
analytes, these animals will have falsely increased plasma
4mg/dL or greater. The magnitude of increase in UN or Ct
hepatic enzymes, and the serum may be yellow-orange.
cannot be used to correctly identify if the azotemia is due
depending on the dose of artificial transfusate administered
as well as the cause of the anemia.
tion in an animal with renal or postrenal azotemia will
   a ad e s  
amplify the increase in UN and Ct and can produce marked
is seen most frequently in cases of equine colic and is attrib-
azotemia, UN >200mg/dL and Ct >20 mg/dL. Fluid therapy
uted to an increase in chromogens other than creatinine.
will decrease the contribution from dehydration (prerenal)
The most common noncreatinine chromogens are ketones.
and where the UN or Ct stops its decline can be considered
glucose, carotenes, and vitamin A—substances that tend to
330
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
be higher in herbivores—as well as pyruvate, ascorbic acid.
A serum [Ct] of your shoe size or greater indicates azote-
and uric acid (Table 23.2)
mia is present, but it does not mean that the cause of the
When [Ct] is disproportionately higher than [UN]. such
increase is irreversible. For example, prerenal azotemia is
that the serum [UN]:[Ct] ratio is 5 or less, then noncreati-
reversed by implementing fluid therapy. or, if a disease
nine chromogens are a likely cause, especially in horses. This
process leading to renal azotemia spares the basement
is particularly likely if [UN] is within or only mildly increased.
membrane, then the tubules may regenerate. If a renal
above the RI, but [Ct] is clearly increased (3-6 mg/dL). The
lesion is mild and remaining nephrons compensate, if a
easiest way to determine if the increase in [Ct] is due to
ruptured bladder causing uroabdomen is repaired, if an
renal or nonrenal causes is to compare the USG and the
obstruction to urinary outflow tract is relieved, etc., then
serum [UN]. If the USG and the serum [Ct] are increased
the cause of the azotemia may be corrected. However, it is
but [UN] is within the RI, then the horse has noncreatinine
equally true that a return of serum [Ct] to the reference
chromogens artifactually increasing the serum [Ct]. If the
interval does not mean the kidneys are normal or fully
USG is increased and [UN] is increased but [Ct] is dispro-
functional. In fact, it simply means that >25% of nephrons
portionately higher than the increase in [UN]. then the
 a  [     
horse has prerenal azotemia and noncreatinine chromogens
ence interval. If serum [Ct] returns to the reference interval
 are contributing to the [Ct] measurement. If USG is isosthe-
but renal concentrating ability does not return, this implies
nuric and there is azotemia, then the animal has renal azo-
a reduction of functioning renal mass by two-thirds. If renal
temia. This presents a clinical dilemma, which is compounded
concentra ting ability returns then it could mean the kidneys 
when the [UN] is not increased as much as the [Ct] due to
are entirely normal, or simply that the lesions in the kidneys 
the enteric excretion of UN in horses and cattle.
involve less than two-thirds of the renal mass. That is to
say that significant disease could still be present, and
       
water. In most clinical situations this apparent return to
normal is cause for celebration. If you wanted to follow
Case Example 23.5. 10-year-old horse with
these patients over time, practical methods would be to
colic, clinical signs of dehydration
monitor patient weight, water intake, urine volume, USG.
are equivocal
 and serum [UN] and [Ct]. If closer monitoring was desired.
or if you wanted to more accurately determine the func-
Serum [UN] 35 mg/dL, [Ct] 5.1mg/dL,
tional renal mass, then specialized studies such as exoge-
urine not obtained, [UN] : [Ct] ratio 7
nous or endogenous creatinine clearance,
fractional
0l anp [nn] oi [o] jo aseaoui apeuoilodoudsia uoeladlai
excretion of sodium, microproteinuria, or ultrasonography 
could be offered or performed.
noncreatinine chromogens and/or possible excretion of [UN] in 
 gastrointestinal tract. A [UN] of 35 mg/dL is mild to
After azotemia is identified the next step is to decide if 
the cause is prerenal, renal, or postrenal. Determining the 
insignificant, however, a [Ct] of 5.1 mg/dL is a moderate
increase and is of concern. This is especially true if banamine
USG and urine volume are critical next steps (Fig. 23.2).
and/or phenylbutazone are to be administered to alleviate pain
Prerenal azotemia is due to hypovolemia, or inadequate 
and aid in the prevention of laminitis. NSAIDs are 
blood flow to the kidneys, such that the kidneys cannot
contraindicated if the horse is dehydrated, not drinking. or
adequately filter and excrete waste substances from the
azotemic as the propensity for NSAIDs to cause medullary crest
plasma. The continued basal production of UN and Ct com-
bined with the decrease in GFR will lead to increased plasma
necrosis in the kidneys is enhanced in these situations. This is a
practical clinical dilemma. If the increase in [Ct] is due to
concentrations of both. Causes are hypovolemia due to
dehydration, cardiac insufficiency, and shock. Dehydration
noncreatinine chromogens, then the horse would benefit from
NSAIDs. However, prerenal azotemia may be present in this
is one of the most common causes of azotemia in veterinary
horse, so obtaining the USG before fluid therapy is the best
medicine. Easily reversible with fluid therapy, but if persis-
means to determine if there is a renal contribution to the
tent it can lead to ischemic renal damage and therefore.
azotemia. Fractional excretion of sodium <1% would be
renal azotemia.
Urine [Ct]:serum [Ct] ratios can be used to distinguish
definitive evidence of no renal involvement, whereas fractional 
excretion of sodium >1% indicates renal disease. In the latter
renal and prerenal azotemias. Ratios >50:1 indicates prere-
case NSAIDs are contraindicated. If they occur, the renal lesions
nal azotemia and ratios <37:l indicate renal azotemia.
induced by NSAIDs in horses are usually mild. From a practical
vew, colic is much more common than renal failure in horses 
Example: urine [Ct]1000 mg/dL serum [Ct]4
and therefore odds are that the increase in [Ct] is due to
= 250 = prerenal azotemia
noncreatinine chromogens.
urine [Ct]100 mg/dL serum [Ct]4 = 25 = renal azotemia
331
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Prerenal azotemia
Renal azotemia
Dehydration is the most common cause and characteristic
Any renal disease that causes damage to greater than 75%
results for this are increased serum [UN] and [Ct]. concen-
of the nephrons and reduces GFR below 25% will decrease
trated USG, decreased urine volume, increased PCV and
the excretion of UN and Ct. If enough nephron units are
serum [albumin]. and clinical signs of dehydration (Fig.
compromised, and the remaining units cannot hypertrophy
23.2).
to compensate sufficiently. then the decrease in GFR will
 Azotemia occurs because there is continued basal produc-
result in azotemia. The lesions do not have to directly
tion of UN and Ct but neither is excreted because the
involve glomeruli because of the concept that the nephron
decreased blood volume reduces GFR (inadequate blood
is a unit made of interdependent parts, and if one part of
flow to glomeruli). In cases of prerenal azotemia (dehydra-
the nephron is injured then other part will be compromised.
tion, for example) urine production should decrease (oligu-
For example, if the tubular portion of the nephron is
ria, anuria) as the body attempts to conserve plasma volume
destroyed or damaged, then the glomerulus that freely fil-
(water), and USG should increase. In general, the magnitude
tered UN and Ct is rendered nonfunctional because the
of the azotemia cannot be used to prove that dehydration is
glomerular filtrate will have nowhere to drain.
the cause of the azotemia, but generally the increases in
Further, since 90% of the blood supply to the tubules
[UN] and [Ct] observed with dehydration are mild to moder-
passes through the glomerular capaillaries, if glomerular
ate (e.g. serum [UN] 35-120 mg/dL and [Ct] 2-5mg/dL). If
lesions are severe enough, blood flow to the tubules will be
dehydration is superimposed on a case of true renal failure,
compromised, resulting in tubular defecits. Additionally.
then the azotemia can be severe (e.g., [UN] >200 mg/dL, [Ct]
proteins that leak through diseased glomeruli may cause
 >10 mg/dL). Fluid therapy will remove the prerenal contri-
damage to tubules through various mechanisims including
bution and decrease serum [UN] and [Ct]. The point at
cytokine induction direct toxicity, and overload of lysosomal
which these values plateau is the degree of azotemia that is
degradation mechanisms. If enough nephron units are com-
due to the true renal lesions. If the patient does not have
promised, and the remaining units cannot hypertrophy to
preexisting anemia or hypoalbuminemia then both of these
compensate sufficiently, then azotemia will develop.
analytes are expected to be increased in cases of dehydra-
In cases of acute severe renal failure urine volume will be
tion. The only practical cause of hyperalbuminemia is dehy-
decreased (oliguria or anuria). In cases of chronic renal
dration. If the PCV was decreased prior to onset of
failure, urine production will be increased (polyuria).
dehydration then the PCV may shift upward to within the
Patients with renal azotemia will have isosthenuric and
reference interval during dehydration, which would mask
 some hyposthenuric urine and most will have several other
the anemia. In cases of prerenal azotemia, the fractional
abnormalities noted in the urinalysis, clinical chemistry
excretion of sodium is <l %.
panel, CBC, physical examination, history, etc.
Exceptions to the generalization that prerenal azotemia is
Once renal failure is recognized, the next steps are to
associated with concentrated urine are concurrent condi-
determine which region of the kidney is diseased, and to
 tions that prevent urine from being concentrated. These
determine whether the renal failure is acute or chronic
include primary and secondary diabetes insipidus, hypercal-
(Table 23.3). This distinction is critical, because acute renal
cemia, steroids, pyometra, and medullary washout. Despite
failure may be reversible while chronic renal failure is not.
clinical dehydration the kidneys cannot concentrate urine
Characteristic features of acute renal failure are variable.
adequately because there is inadequate ADH, or a substance
but generally include a good body condition, sudden onset
is interfering with ADH, or the renal medullary interstitium
is no longer saturated with sodium and urea. Calcium inter-
feres with the action of ADH and when hypercalcemia is
Table 23.3 Expected results in acute versus chronic renal failure.
present urine is often dilute, even if the animal is dehydrated
and azotemic. Azotemia is present in 90% of dogs with
Acute
Chronic
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) due to dehydra-
 a a  a n d s e  '
PCV
WRI
Decreased
 Albumin 
WRI
because of chronic hyponatremia and resultant medullary
Decreased 
K
Increased, variable
Decreased
washout. Because the constellation of laboratory and clinical
Urine volume
Anuria, oliguria 
Polyuria. polydipsia 
signs associated with hypoadrenocorticism are similar to
 Body condition
Good
Poor
those caused by renal failure (namely, azotemia, inade-
 History 
Sudden onset 
 Gradual deterioration
quately concentrated urine (e.g., USG <l.020), anorexia.
Size of kidneys
Normal to enlarged 
 Small, iregular contours 
and vomiting) Addisonian dogs may be initially misdiag-
nosed. Fluid therapy will rapidly correct the azotemia in
These are generalizations and there is a range of actual results and
these dogs and when fluid therapy reverses azotemia over-
 species variations. (WRl = within the reference interval).
night, or in hours then true renal failure was not present.
332
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
(the animal often being reported as "fine yesterday").
relief of the obstruction. Uroabdomen is confirmed by an
depression, lethargy, and decreased to absent urine output.
abdominal fluid [Ct] > serum [Ct] and is discussed under
Laboratory data will include PCV and albumin concentration
diseases in this chapter.
within the reference interval (or increased if dehydration is
present) and increased potassium concentration.
The most common cause of acute renal failure is nephosis.
Urine concentration
meaning tubular degeneration and necrosis, which is most
commonly caused by a nephrotoxin. Acute nephrosis will
Correlate the urine specifc gravity with serum [UN] and [Ctj, as
be reflected in the urinalysis by isosthenuria, numerous
well as all the other case data. Measuring USG is a simple and
casts, mild proteinuria, mild glucosuria, and variable cellular
effective test to assess renalfunction.Generalizations:azotemia and
 abnormalities in the sediment. If the kidneys can be imaged
concentrated urine = prerenal cause; azotemia and unconcentrated
 or palpated, they will be normal sized or enlarged and have
urine=renal tubular disease/involvement.
regular contours.
Kidneys reabsorb more than 99% of the water that enters
Chronic renal failure can be the result of glomerular dis-
the tubules. Water is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules
eases as well as chronic interstitial nephritis, pyelonephritis.
passively, in the descending loop of Henle passively due to
progressive familial nephropathy, and even bilateral stag-
the osmotic pull of the saturated medullary interstitium
horn calculi. In short, anything that can cause enough tissue
(countercurrent multiplier system), passively in the distal
damage to result in end-stage renal failure. Characteristic
tubules, and actively in the collecting ducts through the
features of chronic renal failure are steady weight loss.
actions of ADH. Failure in one or more of these locations
mediocre to poor body condition, lethargy. polyuria and
 may result in polyuria, and interference with of one or more 
polydipsia, and laboratory data that include nonregenerative
 of these mechanisms is used by different diuretics to stimu-
anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and hypocalcemia (the latter is
late water excretion.
uncommon in horses). Hypokalemia is often seen in cattle
The ability to produce concentrated urine is dependent on
and cats. If the kidneys can be imaged they will be small and
several factors. At least one-third of the renal mass must be
have irregular contours especially when the disease is fully
functional, adequate amounts of ADH must be produced,
developed.
the medullary intersitium must be saturated, the hydration
Postrenal azotemia is due to obstruction of outflow or a
status must be conducive, and there must be an absence of
rupture in the outflow tract. Azotemia is present due to an
concurrent diseases. Therefore, animals with impaired urine
inability to excrete UN and Ct from the body, along with the
concentration will have one or more of the following: lesions
continued basal production of both and the reabsorption of
  sl    som 
both from the abdomen or the subcutis if the urinary bladder
decreased ADH production (central diabetes insipidus).
or the urethra ruptures. The bladder will be enlarged on
refractoriness to ADH (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
 palpation if the obstruction is distal to the bladder and it will
hypercalcemia, excess glucocorticoids, pymometra, or hypo-
be small or undetectable if there is a rupture of the bladder.
kalemia). decreased medullary hypertonicity (medullary
In this case, depending on duration and completeness of the
washout), over hydration, or solute overload (diabetes mel-
obstruction, the azotemia may be mild to marked, UN > 200
litus, diuretic administration).
and Ct > 10. If the animal becomes dehydrated, then part of 
  iai a s i  is an
the azotemia will be attributable to prerenal factors. In
of hydration status. Dilute urine is "normal" in an overhy-
postrenal azotemia, USG is variable and does not help to
drated individual as the kidneys attempt to excrete the
identify the cause of the azotemia, however, the fact that
excess body water. For example, dilute urine is expected
urine production is decreased or absent (i.e., oliguria or
both in psychogenic polydipsia, and during fluid therapy.
anuria) is helpful in localizing the cause of the azotemia.
Isosthenuric urine in a dehydrated or azotemic patient is
The dignosis of postrenal azotemia is made more from
abnormal and suggests the renal lesion involves the tubules.
historical and physical examination findings than through
 Persistently dilute urine in a nonazotemic patient is abnor-
laboratory evaluation. Most cases of postrenal azotermia are
mal and could involve renal or nonrenal mechanisms.
seen in males due to their narrow urethra. Obstruction of
 Kidneys concentrate and dilute the glomerular filtrate as it 
the outflow tract is uncommon in females due to their wide
passes through tubules by removing solutes and water in dif-
urethra. Urine obtained via cystocentesis in an obstructed
ferent segments of the nephron. Glomerular filtrate is plasma
animal is often red, and there are often a lot of red blood
minus albumin and it starts with a specific gravity approxi-
cells and inflammatory cells. Hyperkalemia can be severe
mately 1.010 (300 mOsm/kg). and in an animal with normal
(>8 mEq/L) and life-threatening. especially in male cats with
hydration, it finishes with a concentrated specific gravity.
a complete urethral obstruction. Blocked intact male cats
If serial urinalyses reveal urine with a specific gravity of
can have rapid and marked increases of [UN] and [Ct] with
1.007-l.013 it indicates that the kidney neither concen-
[Ct] > l5mg/dL. The azotemia decreases rapidly following
trated nor diluted the glomerular filtrate, i.e., the urine is
333
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
isosthenuric with respect to blood plasma, which has a spe-
Table 23.4 Causes of polyuria (polydipsia) and dilute urine.
cific gravity of approximately 1.007-1.014 and an osmolaltiy
of 300mOsmo. This is the least favorable range of urine
 Decreased ADH—Central diabetes insipidus (DI)
specific gravities to detect over time. Urine specific gravities
 Pituitary (hypothalamic rare) tumor, abscess, idiopathic, congenital 
that are <l.007 or >l.013 imply there was some renal func-
tion. Dilute urine indicates that the kidney had enough
 Inad equate response of tubular cells to adequate ADH-
function to remove more solutes than water, because dilu-
 Nephrogenic DI
tion is an active process.
Hypercalcemia, steroids, hypokalemmia, pyometra E. coli endotoxin,
 congenital lack of response of tubular cells to ADH
Any random USG can be "normal," hence the wide range
of reference values, including 1.oo1. The most important
Decreased renal mass = lesions in kidneys, loss of tubular cells
task is to determine the pattern of concentrating ability. by
With azotermia = >75% involverment; especially if lesions in rmedulla
correlating USG with serum [UN] and [Ct]. urine volume.
 and pelvis
and the clinical data. If multiple urinalyses taken at different
Without azotemia = 66-75% involvemment of total renal ma55
times of the day reveal hyposthenuria to isosthenuria, with
 Excess fluid intake
or without azotemia, this is abnormal (i.e., USG: l.004.
 Psychogenic polydipsia
1.008, 1.005, etc.). A random urine sample with a USG of
Fluid overload diuresis
1.008 taken from a nonazotemic animal with a history of
 Medullary washoutmedullary interstitium not saturated with 
PU PD is abnormal. Urine specific gravities that consistently
 sodium and urea
stay below l.007 are probably not due to renal lesions espe-
Adldlison's—prolonged hyponatrermia
cially if the animal is not azotemic but are more likely due
Liver failure—decreased urea nitrogen (other laboratory data will also
to lack of ADH (diabetes insipidus), or substances that inhibit
 5upport); congenital and acquired shunts; end-stage liver disease
the action of ADH or psychogenic polydipsia. Concentrated
Psychogenic polydlipsia
urine obviously indicates function, removal of more water
Fluid overload dliuresis
than solutes. Although any urine specific gravity can be
Solute overload
"normal" there are "expected" values for each species as well
 Diabetes mellitus, acromegaly, Fanconi's syndrome, salt toxicity
l n ,  r a 
 Diuretics—many with actions at dlifferent regions of the tubules
23.5). A morning urine sample is ideal to assess concentrat-
ing ability as this is the time of the day of maximum
Others/incompletely understood mechanisms
Hypoparathyroidlisn, hyperthyroidisrn, polycythemmia, myeloma
con cen tra tion.
without hypercalcemia
 Isosthenuria and hyposthenuria are associated with renal
and nonrenal diseases (Table 23.4). When it is attributed to
renal disease it implies that the lesion is primary within or
involves the tubules. Glomerular diseases may be associated
gravity by the amount of light refracted, and this is adequate
with dilute urine because 90% of the vascular supply to
for clinical decision making. The USG is dependent on
tubules passes through glomerular capillaries. Therefore if
several factors, one of which is the concentration of small
the glomerular lesion is severe enough it may eventually
solutes in solution. Suspended particles, such as mucus,
compromise tubular function. Interstitial diseases are often
crystals, and cells do not affect USG because they are not
associated with dilute urine because tubules and interstitum
dissolved; however, they can make the urine cloudy and
are anatomically adjacent to each other and eventually
may make reading the line on the refractometer difficult.
lesions in one area involve the other. These examples illus-
Adding soluble ions or molecules or removing fluid in
trate the nephron concept: injury to one part of the nephron
may eventually lead to injury of the rest of the nephron.
and rermoving solutes and replacing therm with water will
This is why, in chronic renal failure, it is difficult to deter-
lower the specific gravity resulting in dilute urine.
mine which part of the nephron was the site of the original
The scales in refractometers are calibrated to estimate
or primary injury/disease. Following a patient's USG over
specific gravity and/or proteins. The scales are different for
time is a practical, affordable laboratory test to monitor the
each of dogs. cats, and horses. The differences are minor but
progression or improvement of renal function; however, it
significant such that the scale for one species should not be
is not as discerning as fractional excretion studies or creati-
Used for another. There is also a maximum reading. e.g.
nine clearance studies.
1.060. Although the urine could be diluted to determine the
 Reagent strips should not be used to estimate USG, because
exact reading this is not necessary, as the clinical decision is
false negatives and false positives are common, and they are
obvious; the patient can concentrate urine to a very high
therefore considered unreliable. Urine specifc gravity is
level.
determined best via a refractometer and although this does
Urine specific gravity is an estimate of osmolality and
there is a good linear relationship between them. Measuring
334
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
Dog
Cat*
Horse
Cow
Expected 
1.020-1.045
1.020-1.050
1.020-1.045
1.020-1.045
Max. conc
1.060 >
1.080>
1.050>
1.050>
Acdequate 
1.030 >
1.035>
1.025>
1.025>
Isosthenuria
1.007-1.013
across this table
Hyposthenuria 
<1.007
across this table
With 5 %
 Dehydration
1.040-1.075
1.045-1.088
* Some cats with renal azotemia can concentrate urine.
osmolality via freezing point depression is the gold standard.
will increase the UsG without a concurrent increase in the
but is rarely done. The measurement is dependent on the
urine osmolality. If USG were increased by HES therapy. it
number and size of solutes in solution. As osmolality
could lead to an overestimation of renal concentrating
increases, the temperature at which the fluid freezes becomes
lower. This is the principle of the protective effect of anti-
Mechanisms for the production of isosthenuric or dilute
freeze on water in a radiator, and because ethylene glycol is
urine include: lesions in two-thirds of the kidneys, excess
fully miscible with water, it contributes to serum osmolality.
fluid intake, decreased ADH production, tubules refractory
and this is why the measured osmolality is so high in the
 to ADH, decreased medullary hypertonicity, plasma solute 
serum of patients with ethylene glycol toxicity.
overload, combinations of the foregoing. and unknown
The measurement of osmolality is generally confined to
mechanisms (Table 23.4). Almost all of these disease states
reference laboratories, as the equipment is either too expen-
can be diagnosed without a water deprivation study. Psy-
sive, or used too infrequently to make it practical in private
chogenic polydispsia, central diabetes insipidus (DI). and
practice. Beca use of the linear relationship between specific
renal failure in patients that are not azotemic are the three
gravity and osmolality, clinical decisions based on specific
diseases that may require a water deprivation study to dif-
gravity (SG) are acceptable. It should also be noted that
ferentiate them. The principle is to stimulate endogenous 
some solutes increase SG but have little effect on osmolality.
ADH production and release by withholding water and 
which could lead to misinterpretations of the data. For
inducing mild dehydration of less than 5%. If an animal is
example, in cases of marked proteinuria or glucosuria, every
able to concentrate urine with just water withdrawal, then
lg/dL of protein or glucose that is added to urine will
psychogenic polydipsia is the diagnosis. If the patient does
increase the USG approximately 0.o04, yet these solutes
not concentrate until exogenous ADH is administered, then
have little effect on the osmolality. The increased USG
 caused by proteinuria or glucosuria could lead to an over-
enous ADH administration do not stimulate urine concen-
estimation of the USG and, therefore, an overestimation of
tration, then renal disease is diagnosed. Never perform this
the concentrating ability of the kidneys.
test on an azotemic patient.
Additionally, adding the following substances to 1 mL of 
water will increase the specific gravity by 0.001 units: NaCl
Water deprivation testing
1.5 mg: urea 3.6 mg: glucose 2.7mg: albumin 4.0mg. Each
Before the study commences the bladder is emptied, baseline 
time the urine glucose increases by l g/dL (l+ on the dip-
data is gathered and additional values are recorded every
stick) the USG increases by 0.004. A 4+ urine glucose
1-3 hours, depending on the severity of the PU PD until the
would increase USG by approximately 0.0l0 units. These
study is stopped. The bladder is also emptied at each collec-
estimates and the principles are nice to know but they are
tion time point. Ideally, measurements should include body
rarely used to calculate or estimate a USG rather than simply
weight, skin turgor, PCV, plasma protein, serum [UN], USG,
measuring it.
as well as plasma and urine osmolality. Osmolality does not
An example of a potential clinical problem would be in a
have to be measured but it is ideal, and if it is measured the
 e  an pin i  y in o
results will generally not be known for a day or more so
astarch (HES). This artificial volume expanding solution
USG and body weight are the more practical indicators to
contains molecules of various sizes, some of which can pass
follow in private practice. A 3-5% weight loss is maximum
through the glomerulus. In normal dogs 20mL/kg of HES
stimulus to cause release of endogenous ADH. If this does
335
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
not cause urine concentration, or if USG has changed <l0%
serum [UN] and / or [Ct] should not increase in a water
over three consecutive measurements, then exogenous ADH
deprivation study. See the section of Chapter 32 in this book
should be administered. If plasma osomolality is known
that describes diabetes insipidus. Antidiuretic hormone
during the study, then ADH should be administered if plasma
(ADH, vasopressin) is produced by neurons in the hypothala-
osomolality is >310 mOsm/kg. as this osmolality is consid-
mus, is transported to and stored in the pars nervosa of the
ered adequate stimulus for the release of endogenous ADH.
pituitary. and is secreted in response to several stimuli
The study should be stopped when a USG from l.025 to
including increased plasma osmolarity. ADH acts on the col-
1.035 is measured, as it indicates adequate urinary concen-
lecting tubules to stimulate water reabsorption.
trating capacity. Because a common feature of these disease
An inherent risk of a water deprivation study is the pos-
states is medullary washout, one should expect the USG to
sibility of exacerbating renal damage in the patient that
increase in a stepwise rather than rapid fashion. Medullary
has renal failure but is not azotemic. If urine remains uncon-
washout arises from prolonged polyuria that leaches solutes
centrated after several hours then the disease present is
from the medullary interstitium, and until the interstitium
either DI or renal failure. Monitor serum [UN]. if azotemia
is resaturated with urea, sodium, and chloride, the kidney
develops, then stop the study. The renal failure patient
will only concentrate accordingly. Depending on the severity
has a reduced renal mass of between two-thirds and three-
of the medullary washout it may take up to 24 hours or
quarters and the closer the reduced mass is to the three-
longer of complete or partial water restriction for dogs with
quarters mark, the easier it will be to induce azotemia via
primary polydipsia to concentrate into the l.030 range.
dehydration. UsG in the isosthenuric range is more sugges-
Monitor serum [UN] and if azotemia develops stop the study.
tive of occult renal disease than is USG <l.007.
Case Example 23.5 (reference intervals, mg/dL).
C. Renal azotemia: [UN] and [Ct] increased and USG indicates
A
B
c
D
E
isosthenuria, need repeat UsG to see if concentration increases
 out of the 1.007-1.013 range.
Serum [UN]
28
85
190
110
60
E9
(OE-OL)
D. Prerenal azotemia: [UN] and [Ct] increased and USG elevated
Serum [Ct]
1.1
4
9.2
3.2
E
3.1
(concentrated): [UN]/[Ct] ratio increased to 34 which also
(<1.5)
 suggests prerenal; dehydration likely, evaluate hydration status.
Ratio serum 
28
21
21
34
20
21
 E. Renal azotemia: [UN] and [Ct] increased and USG close to
[UN]/[Ct] 
USG
1.034
1.006 1.0101.058
1.0141.044
concentrate its urine.
Interpretation  Normal  Renal  Renal   Prerenal  Renal  Prerenal
 F. Prerenal azotemia: [UN] and [Ct] increased and USG
 Concentrated; nearly identical values to example "E" but
A. "Normal": all results are within reference intervals, and USG
different causes based on results of UsG; there are no values 
indicates adequate concentrating capacity.
for [UN] and [Ct] that are too high for prerenal azotemia;
B. Renal azotemia: serum [UN] and [Ct] increased, and USG
however often the greatest increases are seen when there is a
dilute.
combination of prerenal and renal azotemia.
Case Example 23.6 (reference intervals, mg/dL).
A
C
D
E
Serum [UN] (10-30)
22
5
180
90
55
Serum [Ct] (<1.5)
1.5
1
9
2
10.2
Ratio [UN/[Ct]
16
5
20
45
5.5
USG
1.024
1.005
1.010
1.055
Not performed
Interpretation
 Normal 
Shunt 
 Renal tubular
 Prerenal
Horse or cow
A. "Normal": at least all results are within reference intervals, and 
B. Hepatic shunt: [UN] is decreased and urine is hyposthenuric,
USG indicates some concentrating capacity. Recall that any USG
implying renal ability to dilute urine but it may not be able to
is possible on a random urine sample.
concentrate, need more USG to identify a pattern. The
336
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
:uoipnpoid peday paseapap ol algeing!lie s! [nn] paseapap
delivery to liver for increased [UN] production (e.g., bleeding
recommend evaluation of liver function.
ulcer, hookworm infection, NSAIDs etc.).
C. Renal azotemia: [UN] and [Ct] are increased and USG indicates 
E. Horse: Disproportionate increase in [Ct] relative to [UN] resulting
isosthenuria. The USG should be repeated to determine
in low [UN]/[Ct] ratio. Differential diagnoses include: an increase
whether it will rise out of the 1.007-1.013 range. Dilute urine 
in noncreatinine chromogens combined with dehydration (e.g.
suggests tubular lesions, but we need to know the rapidity of
noted with colic). Similar results are expected in cattle with
onset, body condition of the animal, serum [albumin], and PCV
renal failure coupled with Gl excretion of UN, a urinalysis and
to differentiate acute from chronic renal disease.
H 'sallgissod asaul aeuaap diau pinom ysn Aepadsa 
D. Prerenal azotemia: [UN] and [Ct] increased and high [UN]/Ct]
isosthenuric urine is observed, then the results are consistent 
ratio suggestive of prerenal cause (e.g. dehydration leading to
with renal failure. If urine is adequately concentrated, then the
decreased GFR) with high USG (concentrated urine). One could
results are consistent with prerenal azotemia, and the presence
observe similar values with Gl hemorrhage, increased substrate
of noncreatinine chromogens.
Case Example 23.7 (reference intervals, mg/dL; PcV, %; albumin, g/dL).
A
8
C
D
E-1
E-2 with fluid therapy
Serum [UN] (10-30)
20
86
121
220
225
68
Serum [Ct] (<1.5)
1.0
2
6
11
12
6.2
Ratio [UN]/[Ct]
20
50
20
20
20
10
PCV (30-50)
42
59
48
21
62
41
Albumin (2.8-4.0)
3.0
4.8
5.1
1.9
4.9
3.0
USG
1.022
1.044
1.059
1.009
1.006
1.010
Interpretations:
Aigegod s ane leuan ay aepu! pue uauoduos euaaid 
A.
Normal
 acute and therefore tubular lesions are likely, possibly a
B.
 Azotemia with concentrated USG, increased [UN]Ct] ratio,
nephrosis; this is an example of renal and prerenal azotemia 
 polycythemia and increased serum [albumin] all attributable to
but it cannot be determined what portion of the azotemia is
dehydration causing a prerenal azotemmia. Gl hemorrhage
due to each of these factors. These data warrant performing
could produce similar results, the PCV does not need to be
serial urinalyses to monitor USG.
decreased for Gl hemorrhage to cause an increase in [UN] but 
E-2. IV fluid therapy resulted in decreased azotemia supporting the
an increased PCV fits better with dehydration, and an increase
interpretation that part of the azotemia was of prerenal
in [albumin] confirms dehydration.
 azotemia. There is a greater decrease in [UN] relative to [Ct] 
 Prerenal azotemia, there is not an increase in the [UN]/[Ct] 
which is typical of fluid diuresis and is caused by the increased
ratio in this example; the onty cause of increased serum
rate of flow of filtrate leading to decreased reabsorption of
[albumin] is dehydration (bisalbuminemia or a hepatocellular 
UN in tubules. The decrease in PCV and [albumin] is due to
carcinoma causing increased albumin either through increased
fluid therapy: the second UsG is isosthenuric and is expected
production by neoplastic hepatocytes, or due to reduced 
following fluid therapy (i.e., it cannot be interpreted). A large
negative feedback on production; both conditions are
portion of the azotemia before fluid therapy was due to
incredibly rare)
dehydration. Fluid therapy should continue to determine if 
D
Azotemia with isosthenuric urine indicates renal failure. The
fluids and other treatments can lower the azotemia further.
low PCV and low [albumin] indicate chronic renal failure.
The point at which fluid therapy cannot decrease the azotemia
Correlate laboratory results with body condition of patient,
further is the UN and Ct concentrations that are due to the
physical exam results, and history. Ultrasonography of kidneys 
true renal lesions. The patient can be further treated and
may reveal small, fibrotic kidneys.
monitored. Azotemia is not a death sentence. Many dogs and
 E-1. Azotemia with unconcentrated urine indicates there is renal
especially cats can be maintained with a low degree of 
disease, but that the kidneys are functional to some degree
azotemia and inability to concentrate urine for months or 
as they are able to produce urine more dilute than plasma.
 The increases in albumin concentration and PCV indicate a
or improvement of their renal disease.
337
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
hepatic diseases, hermolytic diseases, rhabdomyolysis, psy-
Case Example 23.8 (reference intervals,
chogenic polydipsia, and central diabetes insipidus. It is
mg/dL; PCV %; albumin, g/dL).
essential in distinguishing prerenal from renal azotemia.
A
B
C
Early detection of disease
· Glomerular diseases—proteinuria is the first abnormality.
Serum UN
200
221
120
and precedes hypoalbuminemia, nephrotic syndrome, azo-
(OE-OL)
temia, etc. Persistent proteinuria found in a symptomatic or
Serum [Ct] 
10
11
5
asymptomatic patient should prompt evaluation for glomer-
(<1.5)
ulonephritis, amyloidosis, and multiple myeloma.
Ratio [UN]/[Ct]
20
20
22
● Renal disease, especially in geriatric patients—is typified
PCV (30-50)
42
19
32
by the inability to concentrate urine adequately, often before
[Albumin] 
3.0
2.2
2.8
there is azotemia (exception some cats).
(2.8-4.0)
·● Hematuria is a common clinical pathology abnormality
USG
1.012
1.009
1.006
and is detected with uroliths, transitional cell carcinoma.
and several other diseases.
Urine volume
 Small amount 
Increased
Increased
History
Fine yesterdlay
Week's
Week's weight
weight l055 
l055 
Monitoring of renal patients
Body
poog
Poor
Poor.
● Urinalysis and especially USG are excellent inexpensive
 condition 
dehydrated 5 %
tests for following patients posttreatment to assess the pro-
 Interpretations:
is no longer azotemic. Persistent inability to concentrate
A. Azotemia, isosthenuric urine, history, and all other data point
urine in a previously azotemic patient suggests that the
to acute tubular disease; therefore, suspect toxic nephrosis.
disease is still present, or that over 66% of the nephrons are
 B. Azotemia, isosthenuric urine, history, and all other data point 
still not functioning adequately. It is likely that they may
to chronic renal disease/failure.
have been destroyed by the disease process and fibrosis has
C. Azotemia, lack of concentrated urine, history, urine volume,
replaced much of the renal mass. Return of concentrating
 and body condition all point to chronic renal disease/failure
ability indicates that the disease is gone or that less than
but PCV and [albumin] do not support this interpretation;
66% of the nephrons are still damaged. The presence of
suspect concurrent dehydration detected on physical exam
waxy casts in the urine sediment suggests persistence and
has raised these analytes into reference interval and after fluid
chronicity of the disease.
therapy both will be decreased; seems likely given they are at
Gross, microscopic, and chemical determinations are the
low end of reference interval and dehydration is 5%.
key components of a UA. Table 23.6 summarizes expected
results in normal animals. Table 23.7 provides guidelines for
urinalysis findings to predict renal site of pathology that may
be present. Urine composition is determined by the constitu-
ents and the quantity of plasma presented to the kidneys.
renal function, and material added to the glomerular filtrate
Urinalysis
as it passes through the kidneys, bladder, urethra, and lower
urinary tract. Urine examination should be done in-practice;
No other body system has an excretory product that is pro-
there is no reason to send it out. Urinalyses should be per-
formed on fresh urine (< / hour old), and if the macroscopic
duced regularly. is easy to obtain, and that informs us so
(i si g  id a no i a uo a
and reagent strip evaluations have no abnormalities, then
is an essential component of the evaluation of the urinary
 performing the microscopic examination is optional because
the sediment is rarely abnormal if the macroscopic exam and
system. Urinalyses have an excellent cost:benefit ratio as a
screening test in all species. It is an absolute requirement for
reagent strips are normal. This is especially true if the UA is
being used to screen an apparently healthy patient.
the diagnosis or to rule out urinary diseases. It is excellent
as a follow-up test to determine the progression or improve-
ment of urinary diseases. It is very useful in the diagnosis of
Summary
some nonurinary diseases. It should be part of all geriatric
· Excellent cost :benefit ratio, costs almost nothing to run
exams, is performed in-practice, and it costs almost nothing.
●Essential
to distinguish prerenal from renal-origin
Some of the nonurinary diseases a UA helps diagnose are:
azotemia
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease), diabetes mellitus.
● Detects diseases in early stages
338
Table 23.6 "Normal"/expected findings in UA.
600
Cat
Horse
Cow
Color
Yellow
Clarity
Clear
Clear
Apno
Clear
SG
1.020-1.045
1.020-1.050
1.020-1.045
1.020-1.045
pH
5-7
5-7
7-8
7-8
 Protein 
Neg to trace
Neg
Neg
Neg
 Biirubin 
Trace
Neg 
Neg
Neg
Blood*
Neg
Neg
Neg
GaN
Neg
Neg 
Neg
Neg
 Ketones
Neg
Neg 
Neg
Neg 
Urobilinogen
 Do not use, same across this table
WBC5
0-5
0-5
0-5
0-5
RBC5
0-5
5-0
0-5
5-0
 Epithelial 
0-5/few
0-5
0-5
0-5
Cast5
 Neg/none
Neg
Neg
Neg
Cnystals 
None
None
 Ca carbonate/oxalate
None
Other
None
None
Mucus
None
* Small to trace ammount with cystocentesis or catheterization collections.
Table 23.7 Renal azotermia and predicting location of lesion.*
Glomerular
Tubular (lnterstitial)
Pelvis
Proteinuria
Casts
WBCs, bacteria urine sedirment 
Hypoalbuminemia
lsosthenuria
WBC casts, cellular casts 
Ascites
 Glucosuria, proteinuria/Active sedirment, cells, bacteria
 Polyuria 
 Anuria, oliguria 
 Polyuria, dilute urine
Chronic, thin
Acute
Chronic, acute exacerbations
Weight lo55
 Good body condition/Variable body condition 
Increased cholesterol
 Norrmal-to-small-sized kidneys 
Normal-to-enlarged 
 Normal to irregular contours.
 dilated lrregularly shaped pelvis
Biopsy
Do not biopsy
Avoid biopsy
Amyloidosis versus glornerulonephritis
Toxin5
Ascending infection 
+ This is assumming the diseases are behaving in a characteristic manner. Glomerular diseases usually present when chronic; tubular diseases are 
commonly acute but if they survive they can end up as chronic PU PD patients. Pyelonephritis is in an active phase when the infection is present. All 
these diseases wil change over time, and depending on severity (rmild, moderate, severe) and treatrent5.
339
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
· Detects nonrenal diseases
· Useful for monitoring patients
Table 23.8 Proteinuria.
● If the macroscopic and reagent strips have no abnormali-
 Pre-glomerular
Glomerular
 Post-glomerular
ties then performingthe microscopicexamination is optional;
UA should be performed in-house.
 Myeloma 
 Glomerulonephritis 
Cystitis 
 Bence Jones proteins
Amyloidosi5
Tubular disease
Collection
Physiologic: fever, exercise 
 Chronic lesions
 Fanconi syndrome
· Voided, free catchmorning sample preferred when urine
Hemoglobinemia
 Hematuria 
is usually at maximal concentration; may add contamination
Myoglobinermia
of cells and bacteria from lower urogenital tract. Lower
urethra has resident bacterial population, but upper urethra
Hyperadrenocorticism and exogenous steroids cause proteinuria with
and bladder are sterile; bacteria, leukocytes commonly in
and without cystitis. The mechanisrns when the urine sedirnent is 
prepuce; epithelial cells are added frorm genital tract and
inactive are not as clear; however, glucocorticoid therapy given to
distal urethra.
healthy dogs resulted in a mild increase in UPC (slightly greater than
1) and glormerular lesions. Others have shown that hydrocortisone will
· Catheterization—may induce a small amount of hemor-
increase the blood pressure of dogs and cause proteinuria, both of
rhage and introduces epithelial cells from urethra.
which are reversible within one mmonth of stopping the steroid.
· Cystocenfesis—preferred for culture, commonly introduces
 Microproteinuria, microalbuminuria: <30mg/dl, and albuminuria i5
small amount of hemorrhage especially in cats.
p/6u 0E<
Urinalyses are often not performed in large animals simply
due to difculty in collecting a sample. Horses often require
catheterization but placing a horse in a stall and whistling is
duction and numerous calcium carbonate crystals. Guinea
below the ventral commissure of the vulva causes micturi-
pigs may also have abundant calcium carbonate crystalluria.
tion in dairy cattle. Manually occluding the nares will cause
Cloudiness is caused by suspended solids (crystals, mucus.
sheep to urinate.
casts, cells, etc.) which do not change the specific gravity but
may interfere with reading of the line. Cloudy urine in
Timing
species other than those listed here is abnormal and should
Perform on fresh urine, ideally less than % hour after col-
be assessed microscopically for the presence of cells, bacteria.
lection, otherwise refrigerate (do not freeze) in an opaque
casts, crystals, sperm, powder, contaminants, etc.
airtight container to avoid deterioration of cellular compo-
 nents and metabolism or escape of analytes. Cells and casts
Specific gravity
will lyse if left at room temperature; glucose is metabolized;
See urine concentration and Tables 23.5 and 23.6 for the
ketones and bilirubin decrease; pH increases as urea is con-
range of possible values.
verted into ammonia; CO, escapes; bacteria proliferate.
 Specific gravity is measured with a refractometer. Refrac-
Refrigeration can encourage crystal formation, so samples
tometers require only a drop of urine, results can be predic-
must be rewarmed for 20 minutes on the benchtop and
tive of clinical problems, and it is a low-cost test. If USG is
swished gently to resuspend any settled particles.
not concentrated the measurement should be repeated at
different times of the day (especially in the first urine pro-
Expected volume in healthy dogs and cats
duced in the morning. the time of maximal concentration)
to determine if urine can be concentrated and if there is a
Dogs = 20-40 mL/kg/d (1 mL/kg/h): cats = 10-20 mL/kg/d.
pattern.
Color and clarity
Age of pup and UA
Normal urine is yellow and clear, concentrated urine is deep
Approximately 4 weeks of age is when pups are able to
amber, and dilute urine is clear to pale yellow. Red, brown.
concentrate urine comparable to other canine age groups.
and various shades inbetween are seen commonly with
Urine specific gravity is significantly lower in pups younger
hematuria, hemoglobinuria, and myoglobinuria. Uncom-
than 4 weeks of age as compared to pups 4-24 weeks of age.
mon differential diagnoses for red or brown urine include
but there are no differences in protein, blood, glucose.
porphyria and administration of phenothiazine antehelmin-
ketones, or bilirubin.
tics or aminopyrine (uncommon, given as urinary analge-
sic). See Table 23.8 for the differentiation of hematuria.
Chemical examination of urine
hemoglobinuria, and myoglobinuria, and the specific dis-
There are numerous products to help analyze urine, but it
eases that cause them. Horse and rabbit urine may be cloudy
is beyond the scope of this writing to list them all and their
in normal animals due to normal urinary tract mucus pro-
associated false negative and false positive results.
340
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
Table 23.9 Expected results to differentitate hematuria, hermoglobinuria and myoglobinuria.
Hematuria
Hemoglobinuria
Myoglobinuria
Signalment
Any
Any
Horse, exotics
History
Dysuria/obstructed
Variable
Exercise
 PCV
Normal (RI)
Decreased 
 Normal to increased 
Plasma
Clear
Pink to icteric
Clear
CPK
Normal (RI)
Normal, mild inc.
Markedly inc. 5+
AST
Normal (RI)
Normal, mild inc.
Markedly inc. 5+
Azotemia
No
 Possible
Likely
If obstructed yes
 Can be high
May be lethal
Urine
Red
Red-brown
 Red-brown-black
Blood
4+
4+
4+
RBCs
TNTC
None. few
None few
WBCs
++
None, few
None few
Casts
None
Variable, many
Variable, many
Urine color post centrifugation
Yellow, pink
Red 
 Red-brown
Ammonium
 Not performed 
 Red pellet
No pellet 
sulfate ppt.
 Supernatant clearer
 Supernatant red-brown 
Etiologies
Obstruction urolithiasis.
Red maple, copper, zinc, IHA,
 Exertional rhabdormyolysis
 trauma neoplasia, biopsy
 postparturient hemoglobinuria
capture myopathy, aortic
water intoxication, Babesia 
thrombus
 Rl, reference interval.
Semiquantitative reagent strips
The various reagents and their reactions produce different
These are commonly used and provide a semiquantitative
types of false negative and false positive results (e.g., see
analysis of the concentration of most substances of interest
glucose below). Additionally, contaminants may be present
in urine. The strips contain pads impregnated with various
that are able to participate in the chemical reaction of inter-
chemicals that, rather than detecting a specific compound,
est, producing a color change. and resulting in a false nega-
detect the product of a chemical reaction involving the spe-
tive or false positive result. If results on a strip are equivocal.
cific analyte. Formation of the product leads to a color
 there are chemical tablets available that are generally more 
change. and the degree of color change is proportional to
sensitive for each substance on the strip and that can be used
the concentration of the analyte (Fig. 23.3).
to clarify results.
 Product expiration dates should be adhered to as outdated
After immersion and blotting of the stick, the next step is
strips can give false negative results. During storage, con-
to determine if a solute is present—a qualitative assessment.
tainers must be kept tightly closed as the reagent pads are
Then, proceeding by the time indicated on the container with
sensitive to air and humidity. Additionally, reagent strips are
the color grading scheme, the pads are read and graded.
designed for human urine and some of the reactions are not
usually l+ to 4+. Refractometer USG must be considered
valid in animal urine; i.e., do not use strips to determine
when assigning the grade, because the amount of solute
white blood cells, specific gravity. urobilinogen, or nitrite
detected is dependent on how much of the solute is excreted
concentration.
in a given volume of urine. Additionally, urine volume tends
to vary inversely with urine specific gravity (i.e., with urine
Process
concentration decreases as volume increases). To illustrate
The urine sample is examined grossly for color and clarity.
this point, a l+ grade in urine with a specific gravity of 1.060
The reagent strip is immersed for the prescribed period (no
is generally considered insignificant for most analytes.
longer or false increases will occur), and then removed with
whereas a l+ grade in dilute urine may be very significant.
excess urine being drained while holding the stick laterally
A 2+ grade in urine with a specific gravity of 1.020 would be
 on a paper towel. Depending on the solute evaluated, the
1+ if that urine sample was diluted to 1.0l0 (i.e., diluted by
instructions will state how long after immersion that pad
half). A dog with a urine protein of 50mg/dL and a USG of
 should be graded. Hold the reagent strip horizontally to
aun e uim op e se p iad unaond y se suo si oio' 1
prevent intermixing of reagents, and grade each reaction.
protein of 100 mg/dL and a USG of 1.020. In dogs. a 1+
341
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Chemstrip* 9
cobas'
0
10 Reagent rips Fo Urials is
FORNWTPFOIAGNOSTIC USE
ahsis
n2g.
drye awee
FEFCaL.No.11895427160
2012-01
20100502
unsge
 Figure 23.3 Two containers of representative urinalysis reagent strips. Container on left is oriented to show text labeling with storage and use
directions and expiration date. Container on right is oriented to show a chart of reagent test pad color reactions. The patient urinalysis test strip is
compared to the color chart for recording results. Alternatively, an optical color reflectance reader device is used to determnine the urinalysis test strip
results.
proteinuria in urine with an inactive sediment and a UsG of
characterized by profound hypochloremia, increased bicar-
1.060 is less significant than trace or l+ proteinuria in urine
bonate, coupled with an acidic urine (the paradox is that,
with a specific gravity of 1.oo8 and an inactive sediment.
logically, given the severe alkalemia, they should produce
 e , an n   a u
pH
would restore a normal pH). Although there are multiple
Dogs and cats have urine that is neutral to acidic and her-
steps in the pathogenesis of this situation, the key compo-
bivores, neutral to alkaline. The pH reagent pads contain
nent is severe hypochloremia. Until that is corrected the
 dyes that change color based on the pH: red in acidic, yellow
kidneys cannot excrete bicarbonate and the urine will
in neutral, and blue-green in alkaline urine. The range
remain acidic despite profound metabolic alkalosis. Alkaline
detected is approximately 5.0-9.0. Because urine is pro-
urine in a dog with acidosis may be an indicator of "renal
duced from filtration of blood plasma, urine pH reflects
tubular acidosis," which indicates the inability to acidy urine
plasma pH. Additionally. it is a crude index of blood gas
 in face of metabolic acidosis. Urease splitting bacteria can
status. Urine pH may be compared with TCOz (bicarbonate)
cause alkalinization of urine, as will prolonged storage at
to determine if they correlate, and usually they do. Para-
room temperature and the presence of certain disinfectants
doxical aciduria is a unique situation seen most frequently
(contamination of urine collection container)
in dairy cattle with a left or right displaced abomasum.
 Normal dog and cat urine has a pH of approximately 5-7.
Affected cows commonly have a severe metabolic alkalosis
If urine pH is below 5 or above 7.5 investigate the cause.
342
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
Struvite crystals form in alkaline urine. Alkaline urine with
 Protein is also determined and scored via sulfosalicylic
  s o  tt i ti i  
of casts. It has been reported that a pH > 8 will falsely result
in a l+ protein on the reagent pad; however, recent studies
in sufficient concentrations, and is considered better than
suggest that this is no longer the case.
the reagent pad on the dipstick. If urine is cloudy, it should
be centrifuged prior to performing the SSA turbidity test.
because suspended solids can cause a false positive result.
Protein
 False positive results are also possible with certain drugs
(penicillin and sulfonamides), and radiology contrast media.
All chemical methods for protein determination are best at
False negative protein results are associated with the inabil-
detecting albumin either because of its structure or overall
ity to read through very turbid urine and in markedly alka-
high negative charge. Reagent pads on strips detect albumin
line urine. If Bence Jones proteinuria and/or multiple
up to 50 times better than globulins, but are able to detect
myeloma are suspected, then consider sending urine to a
other globulins, Bence Jones proteins (if present in suffcient
reference laboratory to request SSA, and possibly urine and
concentration). hemoglobin, and myoglobin relatively well
The concentration of protein is assigned trace to 4+ and
chains or a monoclonal gammopathy are present.
should always be correlated with USG, presence of blood in
Protein can be quantified by a spectrophotometer in a spot
the urine, results of the serum biochemical profle, and
urine sample or in a 24-hour collection. The latter is not
results of the microscopic examination of urine sediment. In
recommended as it is too labor-intensive, and there is good
dogs a trace protein reading is <0.1 g/dL (10 mg/dL; 0.1 g/L)
correlation between 24-hour collections and urine [protein]/
and a 1+ result indicates the renal loss of 0.03 g/dL (30 mg/
[Ct] ratios from spot urine samples. For further information,
dL; 0.3 g/L). Both are considered normal if urine is concen-
see section on protein abnormalities in this chapter.
trated but abnormal if urine is dilute and/or if there is a
positive blood reaction or urine sediment abnormalities.
Blood (occult blood, heme)
The reagent pad has a chromogen that changes to various
shades of blue-green after oxidation of the enzyme. Any-
tive pad result due to hemoglobin (a protein) being released 
thing that causes oxidation of the enzyme is detected and it
from lysed RBCs, as well as any plasma proteins that may
implies blood is present only because that is how the pad is
be exuded along with RBCs and inflammatory cells (WBCs)-
labeled and because iron in red blood cells (RBCs) is the
Pads are generally considered poorly reactive with proteins
most common substance that will stimulate this oxidation 
from WBCs and epithelial cells. If blood is positive on the
reaction. However, a positive blue color change is also seen
strip and red blood cells are seen microscopically, then it is
1
with iron in free hemoglobin, iron in myoglobin, peroxidase 
essential to obtain another urine sample before interpreting
in plants and bacteria, and cleaning agents. The reaction is E
the proteinuria. A generalization is that visibly pink or red
sensitive and the color intensity varies with the amount of
urine samples will be positive for protein from red blood
"heme" detected; it is more sensitive to free hemoglobin
cells and samples with only microscopic hematuria will not.
than intact RBCs.
Cystitis invariably produces proteinuria from inflammatory
proteins and hemorrhage, but these, since they arise from
the inflamed bladder, are of postglomerular origin. Protein-
Method
uria due to glomerular disease should be observed along
Immerse the stick in well-mixed noncentrifuged urine. A
with a "quiet" or "inactive" urine sediment (i.e., free of RBCs
"speckled" pattern of green dots is due to individual RBCs
and WBCs).
that contact the pad and then lyse; this pattern is associated
Reagent strips do not easily recognize Bence Jones pro-
with microscopic hematuria. A uniform color change is due
teins associated with multiple myeloma as well as albumin
to a greater amount of hemorrhage. free hemoglobin, myo-
because light chains have fewer free amino groups on light
globin, or contaminants. False negatives are uncommon but
chain immunoglobulins to react with reagents. In general.
are associated with bacteria that produce nitrites and treat-
approximately 25-50mg/dL of Bence Jones proteins are
ments with vitamin C. Ascorbic acid is a reducing substance 
required for a trace to l+ reaction on the reagent pad. If
that counteracts the oxidation reaction.
concentrations are insufficient, a false negative result will
Correlate the results with microscopic enumeration of
ensue.
RBCs in urine, PCV, muscle enzymes, USG, and urine pH.
False positive dipstick protein results have been associated
Very dilute urine, less than l.007, and alkaline urine may
with excessive urine contact time, specific antibiotics, con-
lyse red blood cells and mask hematuria. Distinction of
tamination of sample with disinfectants, and historically
hematuria, hemoglobinuria, and myoglobinuria is clinically
with highly alkaline urine.
important and is described in the section on diseases.
343
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Degrees of sensitivity of various tests to
sodium, calcium, bicarbonate, amino acids, and phosphate.
detect blood
 Primary glucosuria is seen in Scottish terriers, Norwegian
Hemastix, Labstix—hemolytic reagents in stick lyse the RBCs
ellkhounds, and dogs of mixed breeding and is marked by
glucosuria in the absence of hyperglycemia. Glucosuria
positive =1/8000 = 200 RBC/hpf
without hyperglycemia may also be seen due to a time delay
of urine collection relative to serum collection. The urine in
Occult test tablet
the bladder may be several hours old relative to the serum
 and therefore a transient hyperglycemia may have occurred.
positive =1/32,000 = 20 RBC/hpf
while the serum [glucose] has meanwhile normalized. This
Microscope
can be seen with stress, postprandially. and after fluid
therapy with glucose-enriched fluids. Glucosuria is common
positive =<l0 RBC/hpf
in cattle due to their low renal threshold for glucose and the
ease of which cattle develop stress hyperglycemia. Cattle
with CNS disease may have serum glucose values of 300 mg/
Glucose
dL or greater; pyloric obstruction can produce serum glucose
values up to 500 mg/dL or greater.
There should be no glucose in the urine of healthy animals.
Serum fructosamine is formed when sugar moieties
Reagent strips are sensitive, and detect glucose via an oxida-
become attached to plasma proteins, and its concentration
tion reaction that produces a color change. False negatives
can be used to distinguish transient from persistent hyper-
are due to vitamin C and outdated strips. False negatives can
 glycemia. The longer blood sugar has been elevated, the
occur if the glucose in urine is in low concentrations and
higher the serum fructosamine concentration. Serum fruc-
one of these substances is present: vitamin C, formaldehyde.
tosamine concentration reflects the average serum glucose
ketones, bilirubin (large amount), salicylates, or tetracy-
concentration over the past l-3 weeks (roughly the half life
clines. False positive results are observed when samples are
of albumin and globulins). and will not be increased by
contaminated with oxidizing cleaning agents and hydrogen
transient hyperglycemia.
peroxide. Cats with urethral obstruction reportedly have an
 Postprandial glucosuria lasts for approximately 1.5 hours;
unknown substance that reacts with the color indicator to
glucosuria beyond 2 hours is abnormal and should prompt
produce false positive results. In an animal with a positive
examination of serum [glucose]. Persistent hyperglycemia
urine glucose, it is important to correlate the dipstick result
and glucosuria is seen commonly with diabetes mellitus and
with serum glucose as stress can cause a transient hypergly-
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease), and less fre-
cemia that results in a transient glucosuria.
quently with pheochromcytoma, pancreatitis, acromegaly.
Tablets are available to detect glucose and do so through
progesterone administration, and some cases of sepsis. A
copper reduction. False negatives are due to outdated
urinalysis used to screen for glucosuria is an acceptable
product and low glucose concentration in urine. False posi-
screening test for diabetes mellitus and in monitoring the
tives are fairly common as any reducing substance can cause
effect of treatment for diabetes. Hyperglycemia, glucosuria.
the color change.
and ketonuria are diagnostic for diabetes mellitus.
Always correlate results of urine [glucose] with serum
Glucose increases the USG by approximately 0.004 units
[glucose]. The main clinical differential is transient (epi-
for each l g/dL of glucose in the urine. A 4+ urine glucose
nephrine, corticosteroids) versus persistent hyperglycemic
would increase USG by approximately 0.010 units. Glucos-
disorders (diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism). When
uria promotes bacterial and fungal growth.
plasma glucose exceeds certain concentrations, the ability of
the proximal tubules to reabsorb glucose is surpassed and
glucose escapes into the urine. The renal threshold for
Ketones
glucose in dogs is approximately 200mg/dL (range: 180-
220 mg/dL), cats 300mg/dL (range: 250-350mg/dL), horses
There should be no ketones in the urine of healthy animals.
150mg/dL (range: 120-200 mg/dL). and cattle 100mg/dL
Reagent strips detect ketones via a reaction with nitroprus-
(range: 80-120 mg/dL). Positive urine glucose results coupled
side that produces a purple color change proportional to the
with serum glucose concentrations below the renal thresh-
concentration of ketones present. Ketones enter the circula-
olds suggest a defect in tubular reabsorption mechanisms.
tion first and then spill into the glomerular filtrate. Ketonul-
and may be seen with nephrosis (toxic insults). tubular
ria can be detected in the absence of ketonemia. Ketogenesis
injury, primary or familial glucosuria, and Fanconi syn-
produces three kinds of ketone bodies, but only two have
drome. Fanconi syndrome is a heritable or acquired disease
the form of a true ketone and are detected by the nitroprus-
characterized by defects in proximal tubular reabsorption of
side reaction. The proportions of ketones excreted in the
various substrates that include one or more of glucose,
urine are approximately 78% beta-hydroxybutyrate, 20%
344
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
acetoacetic acid and 2% acetone. The reaction mainly detects
pink to red, any substance that imparts a red color to urine
acetoacetic acid (approximately 90%), and reacts less effi-
may interfere with interpretation. Large quantities of vitamin
ciently with acetone (volatile). Beta-hydroxybutyrate, the
C may cause false negative results. As with all substances.
most abundant product of ketogenesis, does not have
correlate results with the USG. The sensitivity of strips is
the structure of a ketone and therefore, is not detected. The
approximately 0.2-0.4mg/dL, and tablets approximately
most sensitive test for ketones in cattle is KetostixIM. Tablets
0.05-0.1 mg/dL. If interference is suspected (e.g., hemoglo-
are available, but are less sensitive than KetostixTM. Tablets
binuria or myoglobinuria) use tablets.
rely on the same nitroprusside reaction as the urine reagent
The reaction does not detect biliverdin, and conjugated
pads. Place one drop of urine (or blood, serum, plasma, or
bilirubin will hydrolyze to biliverdin in urine exposed to
milk) on the tablet and read the color change in thirty
light, so analyze fresh urine. Conjugated bilirubin is water
seconds. Lavender to deep purple is positive and the inten-
soluble and readily enters the glomerular filtrate in most
sity is proportional to the concentration of ketones present
species (cats have a higher threshold). Unconjugated biliru-
in the urine or blood. Tablets are more sensitive than strips
bin is bound to albumin and therefore should not pass
and can detect ketones in the urine at 5mg/dL, as opposed
through glomeruli.
to 10 mg/dL for strips, and 10mg/dL in blood.
Bilirubinuria indicates possible liver disease or hemolysis 
If there is a trace ketone reaction on the dipstick consider
rather than disease in the kidneys. It is most commonly
confirming their presence with KetostixIM, or the tablet
associated with cholestasis. Any positive reaction in a cat is
method. A positive test result can be due to: excessive fat
considered abnormal and warrants further investigation.
Dogs have a low renal threshold for bilirubin, and addition-
bohydrate content in the diet, cachexia, starvation, anorexia.
ally, it can be conjugated in small quantities in tubular epi-
hyperthyroidism, pregnancy toxemia, and diabetes mellitus.
thelial cells of normal dogs. In dogs. up to l+ bilirubin in
Ketonuria occurs most commonly in high production dairy
concentrated urine is considered normal and is common,
cattle, which enter a state of negative energy balance that
 especially in male dogs but the finding must correlate with
promotes formation of ketones. Diabetes mellitus is the most
other clinical abnormalities. Approximately 20-25% of
common cause of ketonuria in dogs and cats. Ketones are
normal dogs will have positive reaction for bilirubin in urine
negatively charged and force the excretion of a cation
via reagent strips, and up to 60% with tablets. Bilirubinuria
precedes bilirubinemia and icterus, and may therefore be an
This may lead to hyponatremia and hypokalemia
early indicator of hepatic disease.
The chemicals used in the pads to detect ketones are light.
humidity, heat and date sensitive therefore do not use
expired strips and keep the lid secured tightly.
Urobilinogen
 Urobilinogen is present on reagent strips used for human
 Blood
Urine
Urine
 Diagnosis
glucose
ketones
patients but it not present on reagent strips designed for
animals as it has no value. The detection of urobilinogen
High 
Positive
 Positive
Diabetes mellitus
indicates a patent bile duct and a fresh urine sample, and is 
 Positive 
 Diabetes mellitus, Cushings;
ignored.
High 
 Negative
uncommon causes
High 
 Negative 
 Negative 
 Epinephrine or corticosteroids
Nitrites
Low
Negative 
Positive
 Starvation, pregnancy
toxemia, etc.
Detection of nitrites is indirect evidence of bacteriuria as
Normal
 Positive
 Transient hyperglycemia, tirne
some bacteria produce nitrite, however, the results are unre-
Negative
delay, nephrosis, other 
liable so do not use in animals. Determination of bacteriuria
tubular diseases, Fanconia 
should be done by microscopic examination and culture of
the urine.
Bilirubin
Leukocytes
Use fresh noncentrifuged urine for analysis. Reagent strips
Reagent strips for white blood cells recognize a specific lel-
detect only conjugated bilirubin using a diazo methodology
kocyte esterase that is found in human neutrophils, eosino-
similar to Ictotest tablets. Since the color reaction is beige to
phils, basophils and monocytes but is not reliable for dogs
345
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
and cats. Determination of leukocytes in the urine of animals
plasia on wet mount preparations, use air dried, monolayer
should be done by microscopic examination.
preparations.
Always correlate results with mode of collection, USG,
and clinical findings. Examples: 2 casts/lpf in urine with a
Urine specific gravity
USG of l.o04 in an azotemic animal is very significant.
whereas 2 casts/lpf in urine with a USG of 1.044 in a well-
The reagent strip tests for urine specific gravity do not cor-
ness check is probably normal. Leukocytes in a voided
relate well with results from a refractometer therefore do
sample may be from the genital tract. Normal findings or
not use. They estimate the specific gravity indirectly based
results expected in normal patients are in Table 23.6
on pKa which uses a shift in the pH to produce a color
Casts and heavier structures tend to aggregate along the
change. Maximum concentration detected is 1.030 and this
edges of the coverslip so be sure to examine all regions of
is inadequate to detect the concentration ranges in cats and
the cover slipped area. Count in a low power field but
dogs.
proceed to high power fields to better see their morphology
and for more accurate identification.
Microscopic
Sources of technical error
Inexperience, open iris diaphragm, dirty objectives, old
It is standard to centrifuge (1500-2500 rpm for 5min)
urine, poorly mixed urine, contamination, variable amounts
5-l0mL of well mixed fresh urine; however, the exact
of urine centrifuged, too much stain added, organisms
volume is not critical: just use a consistent amount or what-
growing in contaminated stain jars, random rather than
ever is available. Pour off or aspirate and save the superna-
systematic examination of l0 fields. and confusion of
tant (for possible chemistry analysis) and resuspend the
Brownian movement of small material with bacteria.
sediment in the urine that remains (0.5 mL is ideal and the
Refer to Appendix 23.1 for color imagery related to
amount left should be consistent) by flicking the tube several
microscopic examination of urine; Appendix Figures
times with your finger until the pellet and its contents are
A23.1-A23.37.
well mixed. Place one unstained drop on a slide, add a cov-
erslip and examine at low power field (lox objective) for
casts and crystals and at a high power field (loox objective)
Red blood cells
for cells and bacteria. Reduce the light in the field by closing
the iris diaphragm (preferable to lowering the condensor)
Greater than 5 red blood cells (RBCs) per high power field
until the material in the feld is refractory. Scan the slide
(/hpf) is abnormal and is labeled hematuria; compare the
with the lox objective and then record the results as number
  s    o  oi s 
seen per low or high power field (#/lpf; #/hpf) by counting
cellular events in urine, correlate results with specific gravity.
 10 fields and averaging the results. There also are manufac-
pH and mode of collection. Red blood cells lyse in urine with
tured systems that aid in these steps and results will be based
a USG of <l.008 and in alkaline urine. At USG >l.025 they
on number seen per microliter. Change the focus during
tend to crenate (shrink and have irregular contours). At a
examination to better see the materials present as not all
USG in mid-ranges they are uniform, discoid, smoothly con-
material is in the same plane of focus in wet mount prepara-
toured, clear to light-yellow or rust-red, refractile, and have
tions. If the sample of urine is excessively turbid dilute it
no internal detail. Results are recorded as number seen/hpf.
with additional supernatant or physiologic saline (but results 
Normal is considered <5/hpf, and the phrase too numerous
per magnification are now reduced) and if red blood cells
to count (TNTC) is used when the field is crowded with
are so numerous that it is difficult to see other structures
RBCs. Cystocentesis and catheterization will induce minor
then lyse the RBCs with 2% acetic acid (vinegar). All abnor-
hemorrhage.
malities can be seen in unstained preparations however if
There are too many causes of hematuria to produce a
unusual structures are seen consider a wet-mount stain
practical list. However, the common denominator is trauma:
(follow directions) and or prepare an air dried film and stain
cystocentesis, catheterization, calculi, hit by car, obstruction,
it with a Diff-Quilk type stain just lilke a cytology specimen;
cancer, biopsy of kidney or bladder; and nonphysical trall-
the latter is preferable. If neoplasia is suspected you may
matic events such as infection, estrus, nephrosis, feline
want a fresh sample of urine obtained with a wash as urine
lower urinary tract disease (formerly known as feline uro-
is harsh on cellular features and cells sitting in urine for
logic syndrome). parasites, and bleeding disorders. Red
several hours in the bladder will be visibly altered. Better
blood cell casts are rare but localize the hemorrhage to the
yet is an ultrasound guided aspirate from the mass (see
renal tubules. Red blood cell casts are very fragile and often
neoplasia). These slides should be air dried and stained with
disintegrate with handling of urine. Red blood cells may be
 Diff-Quik type stains or Wright stains. Do not diagnose neo-
confused with fat droplets, but fat droplets are not uniform
346
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
in size, are more refractile and some will be out of the plane
ogy enough to recognize the different sources but this is
of focus.
difficult to discern and does not aid a diagnosis. In normal
urine there are only a few epithelial cells: <5/hpf. When in
large numbers they are usually accompanied by RBCs and
Leukocytes
WBCs and are associated with cystitis. If numerous and in
rafts they may be due to catheterization. Their appearance
Greater than 5 white blood cells (WBCs} per high power
has a wide range; they are approximately 2x larger than
field (#/hpfjis abnormal and is termed pyuria. The magni-
WBCs, round to polygonal, have a nucleus, and are granular
tude of wBCs/hpf is the key and as always the results should
to homogenous. These are the most common epithelial cell
be correlated with USG, the rest of the data in the UA, other
seen in lrine.
data in the case (steroids will decrease the number of WBCs
Renal tubular epithelial cells are the least common or the
in urine), mode of collection, urine pH, etc. White blood
cells lyse easily in alkaline urine and hypotonic urine (as do
of WBCs and look like WBCs. They are round, granular, and
RBCs). Voided urine could have inflammation anywhere in
have a central round nucleus. Different shapes and sizes may
the urogenital tract. Cystocentesis localizes the source of the
be localized to different regions of the kidneys but too little
inflammation to the kidneys or more likely the urinary
is known in veterinary medicine for this to be clinically
bladder; howwever, reflux is possible, e.g., prostatitis.
useful.
White blood cells are slightly larger than RBCs (l.5-2x
 Neoplastic transitional epithelial cells may be found in this 
larger), are spherical, granular, have internal structures, a
chapter, under "Diagnoses."
nucleus, and appear singular, in clumps, or in casts. White
blood cell casts localize their source to renal tubules and
indicate pyelonephritis. Although any WBC could be seen
Bacteria
they are almost always neutrophils and differentiation of the
types of WBCs is not necessary but if desired will require
The kidneys, ureters. bladder, and proximal urethra are
examination of a stained film. Neutrophils indicate inflam-
sterile therefore urine should be sterile, at least until it passes
through the distal urethra where normal flora can be added
by RBCs and bacteria should be searched for microscopically
as a contaminant. Centrifugation at speeds used for urinaly-
and via culture. Inflammation is also seen with cancer.
sis will not take bacteria out of suspension so the superna-
calculi, cystitis, prostatitis, and pyelonephritis. Eosinophils
      n  
 are rarely seen, can be associated with parasitic diseases and
detection. Use the pellet as that is what is used for every-
in dogs consider eosinophilic polypoid cystitis. The latter is
thing else in the microscopic examination and it will permit 
visualization of cells and therefore the possibility of seeing 
turia and produces a mass in the urinary bladder that resem-
bacteria inside neutrophils. This will be seen best if a film is
bles a tumor. The mass is infiltrated with eosinophils and
prepared and stained, rather than a wet mount. The key to
there is eosinophilpoiesis within the mass. It requires surgi-
seeing bacteria is the number present, the type of bacteria.
cal removal.
and the observer's ability to see them. Reduce the light consid-
erably to help outline them (decrease the iris diaphragm or
lower the condensor). The greater the numbers the more
Epithelial cells
likely they will be seen. They are usually reported as few.
moderate or many and with no reference of number/field.
These cells may be squamous (urethra, genital, or skin),
A bacterial infection should be confirmed with culture and
transitional (bladder), renal (tubules), or neoplastic (usually
preferably sensitivity. Bacteria can be seen in wet mounts 
transitional cell carcinoma). Squamous cells are huge (5x
with the lo0x objective; however, Brownian movement of
larger than WBCs, 10x larger than RBCs), have lined or
       n a
sharp edges, with nuclei often not visible, and usually are
cocci are easy to confuse with debris. If bacteria are seen but
in low numbers. If numerous squamous epithelial cells are
culture results are negative consider misinterpretation of
seen in a free catch sample from a female dog in estrus they
particulate material and Brownian movement as a possible
are genital in origin and if numerous squamous epithelial
explanation. These "false positive" observations are rela-
cells are seen in a male dog consider a sertoli cell neoplasm
tively common in clinical practice. Additional explanations
that is secreting estrogen and inducing squamous metaplasia
for visualization of bacteria but culture negative are inhibi-
of the prostate.
tion of growth by cold or frozen storage, or patient is on
Transitional epithelial cells are from the bladder, ureter, or
antibiotics. It is not due to decreased sensitivity of culture
renal pelvis and most are from the bladder. Supposedly the
technique, as culture is better to identify bacteria than is
depth of location in the urothelium changes their morphol-
visualization. It takes about lo,oo0 rods/mL urine to see
347
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
pasoddo se aun aas on tuoo ooo'ool on dn pue aul
urinary tract and E. coli is the most common pathogen cul-
to only l-l0 bacteria/mL to produce a positive culture.
tured. Commercial products are available to culture urine
Localization of the infection is critical as they could be
and or enumerate colonies in practice but they will require
from kidney, bladder, urethra, prostate, uterus, prepuce,
an incubator. Results obtained can be correlated with results
external genitalia, or the environment. If bacteria are
of UA and this is a rapid way to identify a urinary tract
detected in urine that was collected aseptically via cystocen-
infection and/or differentiate the discrepancy of brownian
tesis an infection in the kidneys or bladder is the diagnosis.
movement versus true bacteria. Urine should be placed in
Correlate results with the rest of the urinalysis and if white
the system as soon after collection as possible for best results.
blood cell casts are present (tubules involved), especially
Some systems use select media that turn different colors
with concurrent azotemia, then pyelonephritis is the source.
around different bacterial colonies. If numerous different
These patients may also have concurrent cystitis as an
colors are identified consider contamination. In these
ascending infection from the bladder is the most common
systems the colonies are enumerated or the entire culturette
cause of pyelonephritis. Catheterized and voided samples
can be sent to a referral lab for enumeration, culture, and
that are positive for bacteria because of contamination will
identification. Positive results determined in practice should
be culture positive but bacteria are usually in too low a
be confirmed, bacteria classified, and a sensitivity recom-
number to visualize. If cystocentesis is not possible then use
mended. In samples obtained by cystocentesis and enumer-
a sterile catheter and take as many precautions as possible
ated with these products >l000cfu/mL is significant,
to reduce contamination from the catheter. If a voided
100-l000 is suspect and <l00 is probably contamination.
sample is used for culture clean the genitalia and catch a
For samples obtained by catheritization these guidelines are
midstream sample. Voided samples are to be avoided to rule
increased by tenfold.
in an infection but they can be used to rule out an infection.
Quantitative bacterial culture results report the number
Most contaminants and normal flora are Gram positive.
of colonies as colony forming units per milliliter of urine:
Bacteria can replicate in urine readily therefore examine and
cfu/mL. Approximately 20% of normal female dogs will
culture soon after collection. Refrigeration and especially
have >loo,0o0 cfu/mL urine via catheterization but normal
freezing will inhibit growth and or kill bacteria and therefore
male dogs rarely have >loo0 cfu/mL via catheterization. The
may result in false negatives.
following numbers can be used as guidelines to diagnose
Bacterial infections should be accompanied by pyuria.
true infection via collection technique when correlated with
hematuria, proteinuria and various clinical signs including
all the other data.
dysuria, stranguria, etc., so correlate all the data available.
Catheterization female dog >l00,000 cfu/mL
Intracellular bacteria in neutrophils is good evidence for in
Catheterization male dog >l0o0cfu/mL
vivo infection but can happen in vitro if samples are allowed
Catheterization female and male cat >loo0 cfu/mL
to sit at room temperature. Results of urinalysis may look
Cystoscentesis cat or dog either sex >lo0 cfu/mL
similar for cystitis and pyleonephritis. Cystitis will not have
Voided urine is not reliable to rule in but can be used to rule
azotemia or casts in the urine and pyelonephritis will be
olt an infection
associated with azotemia and casts if the disease is active
and widely disseminated (great than 75% involvement or
Yeast and fungi
kidneys). Infectious cystitis is more common in females due
to their wider urethra and it is due to an ascending infection.
 an  a  s    
-uans ue ol peal Ae ll 5e Aaaissaae paieail aq pious i
commonly due to overgrowth of contaminants in old
ing pyelonephritis. Sterile cystitis can occur with uroliths
samples, or from the skin, litter box, etc.; however, if they
and neoplasia but all cases of cystitis/pyuria should be cul-
are seen in a fresh sample/cystocentesis collected, then a
tured before they are determined to have a nonbacterial
fungal infection of the kidneys and/or bladder should be
etiology. Bacterial infection may also be a secondary event,
suspected. They are colorless, often plentiful when present;
regardless it requires therapy. Bacteriuria without neutro-
appear as long hyphae or budding ovals and spheres when
phils is a paradox but is associated with contamination;
in yeast forms. They tend to occur in immune-suppressed
Cushing's disease or exogenous steroids which inhibit the
patients or patients on long-term antibiotic therapy. If noted
influx of neutrophils; dilute urine or alkaline urine which
in a feline, the feline immunodeficiency virus and feline
may lyse the neutrophils: and antibiotic therapy which
leukemia virus status should be determined.
inhibit growth but bacteria are still seen. Cushing's disease
has an increased prevalence of urinary tract infections, due
to dilute urine and decreased urinary bladder immunity.
Parasites
Microscopic absence of bacteria does not rule out an infec-
tion this requires negative cultures to be certain. Aerobic
Capillaria plica or felis, Dioctophyma renale, and D. immitis are
Gram negative rods account for most infections in the
 n ds  ssi  s no a  a is
348
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
urine has been seen but is exceedingly rare. Capillaria ova
 Casts are classified based on their microscopic appearance 
look like whipworm ova, oval-shaped, bipolar plugs. rough
surface, and colorless to light yellow-tan. Check a fecal float
a pathologic process, which has variable success. They are
for Trichuris and differentiate fecal contamination from dual
reported as the number seen/lpf (lox objective) and they
infection. Microfilaria of heartworm may be seen due to
hematuria, and a heartworm check should be performed if
iris diaphragm. Normal urine should have no casts or only
the status is not already known. Adult Dioctophyma renale, or
a few casts, and 1-2 hyaline or fine granular casts /lpf in
the kidney worm, is sometimes seen during a laparotomy
concentrated urine is considered acceptable. Correlate
and the ova are rarely seen in urine as large oval-shaped
number of casts with the USG as l-2 casts in dilute urine.
structures with an internal structure and a pitted tan to light
especially if other abnormalities are present, is abnormal.
brown surface.
Increased number of casts is termed cylindruria.
Hyaline casts
Debris
These are the most difficult to see, are clear, have rounded
or blunt ends, tend to dissolve in dilute or allkaline urine.
Spermatozoa, talc crystals from gloves, pollen, fibers, and
and are composed almost entirely of mucoprotein and
hair are some of the more common large "debris” seen
albumin with no cells or granularity. In elevated numbers.
with the 10 or 20x objectives. Brownian movement that can
they imply glomerular disease or, less likely, a preglomerular
be confused with bacteria is seen with 40, 50, or 100x
proteinuria. The albumin that leaks through glomeruli
objectives.
apparently stimulates excess secretion and precipitation of
tubular Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein leading to formation of
these casts. A few hyaline casts in concentrated urine are
Lipid
normal and a few in dilute urine are abnormal; as are many
  a e a  a  po  
Lipid droplets are clear, variable in size, refractile, round, in
possibility of glomerular disease or, less likely, multiple
different planes of focus, and common in cat urine. They
myeloma (Bence Jones proteinuria) should be pursued.
may appear gray to black at low magnification and rarely
can be seen grossly in urine from cats. Cat kidneys
Granular casts
have considerable amounts of lipid in tubular epithelium
These are clear to tan-brown, easy to see, and consist of cells
and presumably this is the source of the lipid. There is no
and mucoprotein. They are from epithelial cells that recently
correlation between lipiduria and lipemia in these
sloughed, became entrapped in the mucoprotein, and 
individuals.
formed a cast. They indicate possible nephrosis, pyelone-
phritis, or infarction. The longer the casts are in the tubules 
before they are released, the more their granular appearance
Casts
changes from rough and coarse to fine and then waxy which
is the final stage of degeneration of granular casts. Differen-
Casts are molds of tubular lumens. Their primary compo-
tiation of coarse and fine granular casts is not necessary but
nent is the Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein that is secreted by
u idi iad sisen ieinun auy oml oi auo panduane aq un
tubular epithelial cells. Casts may contain variable amounts
concentrated urine are considered normal, but the presence
of cells, lipid, and debris. When present in significant
of coarse granular and elevated numbers of fine granular
numbers they reflect active disease in renal tubules, nephro-
casts is abnormal.
sis, which usually has an acute toxic etiology. Casts are not
a reliable marker of onset, severity, or reversibility of the
Waxy casts
tubular disease but they do imply that the disease is still
Waxy casts are clear, with no internal structure, and they
active or ongoing and is in the kidneys. Tubules have excel-
have sharply defined margins and squared-off ends as they
lent regenerative capabilities if the basement membrane
are brittle and break. To the novice, they may resemble
remains intact. Casts form in the loops of Henle, distal
hyaline casts which are smoother and the ends are more
tubules and the collecting ducts. Absence of casts does not
rounded. Waxy casts imply chronicity and particularly when
rule out tubular involvement. If they are not reported but
found in large numbers indicate a pathologic process.
tubular disease is suspected then repeat the UA as they may
be shed intermittently or in showers. If casts continue to be
Cellular casts
 shed post treatment they indicate the disease is still ongoing.
These can be composed of epithelial, red, or white blood
Waxy casts are often seen in chronic progressive tubulo-
cells, and all can have a granular appearance (granular
intersititial renal disease.
casts). If red blood cells are recognized in the cast it indicates
349
SEcTloN Iv Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
hemorrhage in the tubules and if white blood cells are rec-
factors including, species, breed, pH, hydration, diet, and
ognized in the cast it indicates pyelonephritis. It can be dif-
underlying diseases. Urine pH influences precipitation of
ficult to recognize the type of cells in casts as the cells are
some crystals and changing urinary pH through diet modi-
degenerating and they are not stained well; red blood cell
fication can lead to crystal dissolution.
casts tend to be fragile.
There are expected pH ranges for different crystals but
Lipid casts
identification of the crystal. Identification is done visually by
These are composed of lipid and are seen in cats; one may
matching photos with what is seen in the urine; shape, color.
see refractile droplets in the casts. These casts are associated
size of crystal are all used. Rarely, chemical analyses or x-ray
with tubular disease (degeneration) and diabetes mellitus.
diffraction are used for crystal identification.
Confirmation of lipid content may require use of fat stains
such as Sudan black B or Oil-red-O.
Ammonium biurate
Brown, tan, yellow, greenish; spiky spheres: protrusions give
Hemoglobin and myoglobin casts
"mite-like" or "thorn-apple" appearance. These can be seen
These are seen rarely and indicate intravascular hemolysis
in normal animals, especially in Dalmatians and English
or myoglobinuria, respectively. They are yellow to pink-red
bulldogs. They may also be suggestive of liver failure, con-
to brown, homogeneous and smooth or may be granular if
 genital or acquired shunts, in which there is decreased con-
a p s an o s   a s r
version of ammonia to urea. In these cases the serum urea
tubules. Correlate their presence with the rest of the
nitrogen may be decreased while serum [ammonia] is
case data.
increased and excreted in urine where it forms urate crys-
tals, and may lead to nephrolith or urolith formation (tan
       n  
Crystals in Urine = Crystalluria (see
lower pH urine, but can form in any pH. Patients in liver
Appendix 23.1 for visual examples)
sis, decreased serum cholesterol, and variable liver-derived
Urolith = stone in bladder; nephrolith = stone in kidney
serum enzyme activity.
Crystals in the urine can be found in normal patients (inci
Bilirubin
dental finding. no trea tment needed) or sick patients wherein
Yellow, yellow-red, red; needle-lilke or granules; associated
the crystals may correlate with a known disease or they may
with bilirubinemia and bilirubinuria but these abnormalities
indicate a primary disease that was formerly unidentified.
do not have to be present to form bilirubin crystals; common
For example, calcium oxalate dihydrate may indicate a
      
hypercalcemic disorder; calcium oxalate monohydrate may
abnormal in urine of other species: pH<7: may resemble
indicate ethylene glycol toxicity: and ammonium biurate
tyrosine crystals.
may indicate liver failure. Crystals in urine are often inciden-
tal and of no diagnostic significance; struvites, carbonates.
Calcium carbonate
and oxalates can be present in urine from normal patients.
Colorless, tan, brown; large with or without radial striations;
The observation of crystalluria should be correlated with
spheres, dumbbell-shaped. Commonly seen in herbivores.
clinical and other clinical pathology data. Crystals are only
one of several risk factors for urolithiasis. For crystals to form.
or cat. Dumbbell-shaped crystals in a dog or cat are more
the urine must be supersaturated and therefore the potential
likely to be calcium oxalate monohydrate than calcium
for nephrolith or urolith formation is present, but not guar-
carbonate.
anteed. Stones must be analyzed to identify them properly as
urinary crystals may or may not be the same as the urolith.
Calcium oxalate dihydrate
Analyses of uroliths always require a send out test.
Colorless: "x" pattern through the crystal imparts "Maltese
 Urethral obstruction in most species is due to a urolith and
    nd a,  s
is almost exclusive to males. However, obstructions in male
 are common in horses and cows, associated with ingestion
cats are usually due to a plug of mucoid material and phos-
of oxalate-rich plants. May be seen in normal dogs and cats.
phate crystals rather than a stone.
 but also suggests hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria. Espe-
Crystals should be identified in fresh urine, as storage.
cially if numerous, their presence should prompt inves-
refrigeration, and preservatives may influence their forma-
tigation of a potential hypercalcemic disorder such as
tion or dissolution. Delaying examination for 6-24 hours
hyperparathyroidism or idiopathic hypercalcemia. These
can induce crystal formation especially in refrigerated
crystals are seen in conjunction with calcium oxalate mono-
samples. The formation of crystals depends on multiple
hydrate crystals in ethylene glycol toxicity.
350
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
Calcium oxalate monohydrate
 a     i 
bacteria that produce free ammonia and alkaline urine
ended picket fence" (may look like double-ended hippuric
enhance their formation; can aggregate; common to form
acid crystals). dumbbell (may look like calcium carbonate).
lroliths; can be numerous in normal dogs and cats.
spindle, sheaths, hemp seed-like; can be normal in herbi-
vores or in normal dogs and cats. However, their presence
Struvite
suggests ethylene glycol toxicity (correlate with signs and
See magnesium ammonium phosphate (above).
laboratory data); also should consider hypercalcemic dis-
eases in dogs and cats, especially if dihydrate forms are also
Tyrosine
present; associated with plants that contain oxalate; any pH
Colorless or yellow; needle-like; resemble bilirubin crystals;
possible, associated with pH <7. When observed in dilute
rare; suggest liver disease.
urine in any number from a dog or cat with acute renal
failure they indicate ethylene glycol toxicity.
Urate ammonium
See ammonium biurate (above).
Calcium phosphate
-ua pue saiauds ro sneaaae shoudoue :uei oi ssaoo
Uric acid
gated prisms, needles that may aggregate into sheaths or
Yellow, yellow-brown; diamonds, rhomboid, rosettes; imply
rosettes; can be in normal dogs: can form uroliths; usually
the same as urates. During purine degredation uric acid is
in alkaline urine.
produced and Dalmatian dogs have a genetic defect in the
gene for a uric acid transporter therefore uric acid is not
Cholestero!
metabolized resulting in increased plasma and urine concen-
Colorless transparent; large flat plates, rectangles often with
trations of uric acid. Significant disease can be present or
  a  dn  s   ao u u e
they may be incidental; correlate with clinical signs. These
polarized light are birefringent and colorful; present in
dogs have adequate uricase in hepatocytes as compared to
an absence of this enzyme in people but Dalmatians cannot
and protein losing nephropathy.
transport uric acid into hepatocytes for uricase to convert
uric acid to allantoin therefore they excrete uric acid in their
Cystine
urine. These crystals may also be seen in dogs with primary
Colorless; hexagonal; may stack on top of each other; not
hepatic disease that fail to convert uric acid to allantoin and
always abnormal; seen with rare inherited metabolic disor-
ammonia to urea.
der cystinuria; occurs in both male and female dogs. but clini-
cal signs are observed almost exclusively in male dogs. Most
Xanthine
common in Newfoundland, Australian cattle dogs, mastiffs.
Brown, tan; look identical to ammonium biurate crystals but
Scottish deerhounds, English bulldogs, and dachshunds.
  i     
Drug-associated
rinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor to prevent formation of
Dark to light brown, commonly form needles arranged in
uric acid in dogs with urate calculi; may be familial in Cava-
sheaves, bundles, fans, radiating spokes. Seen most com-
lier King Charles spaniels and dachshunds.
monly with sulfa family drugs. ampicillin, allopurinol, xan-
thine crystals, radiographic contrast media, and others.
Electrolyte abnormalities
Correlate this finding with history of drug administration.
Hippuric acid
There is a tremendous amount of information on how and
u q     
where in the tubules electrolytes, ions, and other substances
single-ended point but distinction is difficult.
are reabsorbed and excreted. This section focuses on the
abnormalities seen with renal failure and related diseases
Leucine
more than the physiology. Electrolyte abnormalities are
Yellow, brown; spheres with concentrically radiating circles:
common in renal failure and generaliza tions are predictable;
rarely to never identified in veterinary species; suggestive of
however, the severity of the renal failure and the stage of
liver disease.
compensation make accurate predictions difficult and there-
fore serum electrolytes must be measured. Hyperphospha-
Magnesium ammonium phosphatestruvite—friple
temia is expected anytime GFR is reduced. If chronic renal
phosphate (a misnomer)
failure is in a compensatory state then sodium, potassium,
and chloride will likely be within reference intervals. If
three to six sides, oblique ends; very common crystal in dogs
chronic or acute renal failure is not compensated then there
351
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
will be disturbances of these electrolytes that run the gamut
as long as there is hyperphosphatemia. Example: serum total
of increased to decreased.
calcium is 7.8 mg/dL and serum phosphorus is 16 mg/dL, the
product is 125 and soft tissue mineralization is occurring
Calcium and phosphorus in renal failure
even though there is hypocalcemia. Mineralization occurs
outside the kidneys as well and predisposed sites are blood
with renal failure will have normocalcemia and hyperphos-
vessels throughout the body. midzonal gastric mucosa.
phatemia, next most frequent is hypocalcemia and hyper
lungs. and heart. On rare occasions the mineralization in
phosphatemia; horses tend to have hypercalcemia and
blood vessels is severe enough to be seen in radiographs.
hypophosphatemia; hyperphosphatemia is a nearly constant
This metastatic calcification is very harmful and contributes
association with chronic renal failure in all species except
to mortality in animals with renal failure. Treatment of renal
the horse. As renal failure progresses from stage l to stage
failure includes dietary changes and medicinal products to
4 the serum concentrations of urea nitrogen, creatinine and
bind phosphorus and decrease GI absorption in an attempt
       
to lower serum [P].
product. At stage l (mild renal disease) hyperphosphatemia
Normophosphatemia in an azotemic patient is unusual
is observed in approximately 20% of dogs and the magni-
and should prompt consideration that there is another
tude is mild, e.g., 6-8 mg/dL. Hyperphosphatemia progresses
disease lowering the serum P such as primary hyperparathy-
to loo% of dogs in stage 4 (severe end stage) and increases
  o  l   
are severe 17-25 mg/dL. Similarly PTH increases overtime.
phosphatemia occurs in some horses with renal failure but
33% of dogs will have increased values at stage 1 and 100%
does not occur in small animals unless it is caused by treat-
at stage 4.
ment. It is estimated that approximately 66% of horses in
Approximately 80% of phosphorus entering the glomeru-
renal failure will be hypercalcemic and 50% will have hypo-
lar filtrate is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules and 20% is
phosphatemia. The mechanism is not clear. It is relatively
excreted. The most common cause of hyperphosphatemia in
easy to hypothesize on the hypercalcemia but hypophospha-
veterinary medicine is decreased GFR, pre-, renal, and post
temia is problematic; there may be increased excretion in
renal causes, acute and chronic renal failure all do this. In
the intestines. Some horses may adapt to the high calcium
dogs with chronic renal failure increases in serum phospho-
diet in alfalfa by excreting calcium and reabsorbing phos-
rus are roughly parallel to increases in UN. In a ruptured
n   s     
urinary bladder phosphorus increases in the serum because
calcium and excrete phosphorus during renal failure. This is
it is reabsorbed along its concentration gradient from a high
the opposite of normal renal physiology. Hypercalcemia and
concentration in the urine/abdominal fluid across the peri-
hypophosphatemia in a horse is most likely due to renal
toneum and into the blood. Serum phosphorus may increase
failure but in a dog hypercalcemia of malignancy is the most 
before azotemia in some patients with ethylene glycol toxic-
likely diagnosis.
ity if the antifreeze product ingested also contains a phos-
Normocalcemia is seen most frequently in animals with
phate rust inhibitor.
renal failure (50-75%); hypocalcemia is relatively common
Parathyroid hormone inhibits P reabsorption in the
proximal tubules and therefore promotes phosphaturia.
on the species, stage of compensation of the renal failure.
Increased concentrations of parathyroid hormone help
and methodology for calcium measurement. Hypocalcemia
prevent hyperphosphatemia in renal failure for sometime
can be explained via six mechanisms: decreased tubular cells
but when the GFR is decreased below 20% of normal this
to reabsorb the Ca, decreased concentrations of vitamin D.
compensatory adaptation is overwhelmed and hyperphos-
decreased albumin, soft tissue mineralization, reciprocal
phatemia develops. Hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia
decrease in serum due to increased P, and if renal failure is
are the major stimulatory factors for renal secondary
hyperparat hyroidism.
on calcium. The hypocalcemia seen with acute renal failure
Hyperphosphatemia greater than 10mg/dL is common
casued by ethylene glycol can be severe, <6 mg/dL. Hypocal-
and it can be severe, >l5mg/dL. At these concentrations
cemia is more common with chronic than acute renal failure
phosphorus may amplify renal failure via mineralization of
and usually is mild to moderate, 7-8mg/dL, and asymptom-
tubular cells and cellular organelles, direct nephrotoxicity.
atic. The rate limiting step in the synthesis of vitamin D is
and vasoconstriction. When the serum Ca x P product is
in the kidney hence chronic renal failure is associated with
>70, soft tissue mineralization is possible and if it is >l00
decreased production of vitamin D. Prolonged hypocalcemia
soft tissue mineralization is occurring. Soft tissue minerlaiza-
stimulates parathyroid hyperplasia which may lead to
tion is enhanced in renal failure due to underlying vasculits
metabolic bone disease, osteopenia, or renal fibrous osteo-
which damages tissues. Phosphorus is more important in
dystrophy, or "rubber jaw." Although the bone lesions are
mineralization than is calcium; therefore mineralization of
generalized they are best seen radigoraphically in the man-
soft tissues will be occurring even if there is hypocalcemia
dible and maxillae.
352
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
The changes seen in total serum calcium are usually the
assess calcium status. Correction formulae for calcium and
same for ionized calcium but some cases of renal failure in
albumin used in dogs were not designed to predict ionized
dogs may have decreased ionized calcium while total serum
calcium. When deciding which calcium to use for predicting
calcium is normal or increased. Rarely are there clinical signs
the Ca x P product use the total serum calcium.
in these patients referable to this change in calcium. If
Deciding if renal failure is the cause or the result of the
ionized calcium is available it is the best fraction to measure
hypercalcemia is problematic. The easiest way to decide is
to predict biologic action of calcium. If fluid therapy corrects
to look at all the data and see if a primary diagnosis is
the metabolic acidosis rapidly then these patients may
evident. For example if a dog has lymphoma, azotemia, and
develop tremors, tetany, and neuromuscular signs that could
hypercalcemia then hypercalcemia is due to lymphoma and
be due to the shift of calcium from ionized (acidosis) to
its associated paraneoplastic syndrome and the azotemia is
protein or complexed compartments (alkalosis). Use of
secondary to possible dehydration, soft tissue mineralization
calcium products to correct this possible effect is probably
and or lymphoma in the kidneys. The serum [P] in these
contraindicated as the administered calcium would combine
dogs will not be markedly increased despite azotemia due to
     a a 
the phosphaturic effect of PTH-rp. Parathyroid hormone
mineralization. Hypocalcemia is expected in cows with renal
(PTH), and parathyroid hormone related (PTH-rp) protein
failure due to the mechanisms listed above as well as the
(cancer associated hypercalcemia) stimulate urinary phos-
tendency for cattle to develop alkalosis with renal failure
phorus excretion and calcium reabsorption. If chronic renal
and the observations that many sick cattle with a variety of
failure can be established because of laboratory data, breed
diseases will have mild hypocalcemia.
disposition, biopsy, etc., then that is the most likely cause of
Hypercalcemia is seen in cases of canine and feline renal
hypercalcemia. Inability to concentrate urine can be due to
failure (10-20%) and equine renal failure (66%) and the
hypercalcemia or renal failure so USG is not a distinguishing
explanation is not clear. A likely mechanism is an acquired
feature.
defect in the calcium sensing protein receptor. This protein
If a primary diagnosis is not evident, then the rules of
is critical for the parathyroid gland to recognize the concen-
thumb are: the greater the serum [Ca] the more likely there
tration of calcium and adjust synthesis and secretion of
is a primary calcium disease, and the greater the serum [P]
parathyroid hormone appropriately to normalize serum
the more likely it is primary renal failure. The lower the
calcium. If the molecule is abnormal as in congenital and
serum [P], the more likely there is a primary disease causing
acquired disorders in humans the parathyroid cells do not
decrease their secretion of parathyroid hormone at a con-
-d      n 
centration of serum calcium that would normally signal the
phaturia and a decrease in serum phosphorus. However.
parathyroid gland to stop production and release of parathy-
only 5% of dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism have 
roid hormone. Continued secretion of parathyroid hormone
azotemia so it is much more likely they have hypercalcemia
stimulates calcium reabsorption in the proximal convoluted
of malignancy as azotemia is fairly common in these dogs.
tubules and osteolclastic osteolysis, further contributing to
If serum phosphorus is within the reference interval in an
the hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia with canine renal failure
azotemic patient with hypercalcemia, then there is a primary
calcium disease and a hormone that is stimulating phospha-
familial renal nephropathy. It is seen with other types of
turia. Additionally if the total serum calcium is increased but
renal failure as well. Dogs and cats with renal failure-
the ionized calcium is normal or decreased, then renal
failure is the more likely cause of the hypercalcemia.
the threat of soft tissue mineralization is high.
Hypercalcemia is associated with dilute urine and PU PD.
Renal failure is the second to third most common cause
There are multiple mechanisms for this including the inter-
of hypercalcemia in dogs whether total serum calcium or
ference with the action of ADH, decreasing the movement 
ionized calcium is used to assess the calcium status. Several
of AQP2 to the apical membrane and effectively preventing
studies have highlighted that total serum calcium does not
water reabsorption, blocking receptors on renal epithelial
correlate with the ionized calcium in up to one-third of the
cells, and mineralization of cells. Biochemical steps may be
cases of chronic renal failure in dogs. Approximately 4-10%
of dogs with renal failure will have increased ionized calcium
may not. Basement membranes and cellular organelles will
and 5-15% will have increased total serum calcium. Total
become mineralized and lead to death of cells further con-
serum calcium also may not reflect the ionized calcium in
tributing to both concentrating defects and renal azotemia.
cats with chronic renal failure: ionized calcium increased in
Hypercalcemia, steroids (hyperadrenocorticism), and pyo-
6% versus 20% via total calcium and ionized calcium
metra (E. coli endotoxin) are examples of diseases or sub-
decreased in 25% versus 8% with total calcium. If the
stances that interfere with the action of ADH and frequently
ionized calcium is desired then it must be measured and the
result in dilute urine and PU PD. If these patients are also
measurement of ionized calcium is preferred to accurately
azotemic it can be difficult to differentiate prerenal from
353
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
renal azotemia. This is because they will have dilute urine
phase of acute renal failure if dietary intake does not match
due to the inhibitory substance but the azotemia may actu-
reanl loss. Cattle with renal failure have hypokalemia from
ally be due to concurrent dehydration and the kidneys are
renal loss, salivary loss, anorexia, and metabloic alkalosis.
fine.
Allkalosis shifts potassium into cells in exchange for a
Calcium-oxalate urolithiasis or crystalluria are clues to
hydrogen ion to buffer excess plasma bicarbonate. Alkalosis
look for hypercalcemia in small animals. Usually they are
is due to ileus and forestomach atony secondary to uremia.
dihydrate oxalate crystals but both dihydrate and monohy-
Historically, and with commercial food formulations with
drate forms have been seen in dogs and cats with hypercal-
low potassium, approximately 30% of cats with chronic
cemia. e.g. primary hyperparathyroidism and idiopathic
hypercalcemia of cats. Hyperparathyroidism is often asymp-
tional excretion of potassium. The mechanisms were not
tomatic and it is the presence of hypercalcemia found on a
clear. When severe, the hypokalemia caused myopathy, gen-
routine chemistry panel or calcium crystalluria that is the
eralized muscle weakness, and cervical ventroflexion. Hypo-
first clue that this disease is present. Calcium-oxalate mono-
kalemia may also contribute to renal failure by causing
hydrate and dihydrate crystals can also be normal findings
degeneration of tubular cells and it also interferes with
and they also suggest ethylene glycol toxicity in dogs and
ability to concentrate urine by decreasing the responsiveness
cats, therefore their presence must be correlated with all the
of tubular epithelial cells to ADH. The condition was known
clinical and lab data. Calcium-oxalate monohydrate and
as feline kaliopenic polymyopathy-nephropathy syndrome.
dihydrate crystals are seen in normal horses, rabbits, and
Magnesium entering the glomerular filtrate is reabsorbed
guinea pigs. Horses and rabbits have cloudy urine and exces-
via active and passive routes in the proximal tubule and in
sive mucus in their urine and have reference interval serum
the thick ascending loop of Henle. The primary route of
magnesium excretion is via the kidney and therefore serum
depending on the lab and methodology.
magnesium concentrations increase with renal failure in
most species, although it is seldom measured. Horses with
Sodium and chloride
blister beetle intoxication tend to have severe hypocalcemia
Essentially loo% of sodium in the glomerular filtrate is
and hypomagnesemia. These horses have hemorrhages in
reabsorbed: 65% in proximal convoluted tubules, 25% in
     s 
the ascending loop of Henle, 5% in each distal tubules and
results in hematuria.
collecting ducts. If the fractional excretion of sodium exceeds
1% it indicates renal tubular failure. Most cases of renal
failure have normal concentrations of serum sodium and
Fractional excretion of electrolytes
chloride; however, chronic renal failure is associated with
All the electrolytes can be tested but sodium, potassium, and
hyponatremia and hypochloremia, especially in horses and
phosphorus are most clinically useful. Fractional excretion
cattle. Hyponatremia and hypochloremia can be seen in
of electrolytes is performed to determine whether there is
dogs and cats with chronic renal failure, and additionally.
renal tubular failure; in an animal that is hyponatremic or
are characteristic electrolyte abnormalities of uroabdomen
hypokalemic, they are used to determine the contribution
in all species
of the kidney to the electrolyte's decrease. Fractional excre-
tion of phosphorus is examined to determine the likelihood
Postassium and magnesium
Most potassium entering the filtrate is reabsorbed in the
proximal tubules and potassium is excreted in collecting
preferred over 24-hour urine collections for clinical assess-
tubules via aldosterone stimulation of cellular channels.
ment. Collect a serum sample close to the time of the urine
Primary hypoadrenocorticism is associated with hyperkale-
sample and submit both for measurement of the electrolyte (s)
mia because of a lack of stimulation of these ion transport-
desired and creatinine in serum and urine. The reference
ers. Potassium increases in the serum with postrenal
laboratory should calculate the result or use this formula:
azotemia and in some cases of acute renal failure, especially
if oliguria and inorganic acidemia are present. Potassium
Serum Ct
Urine electrolyte
×100 = Fx Exc of electrolyte
 s l   
Urine Ct
Serum electrolyte
in obstructed male cats. Hyperkalemia with renal failure or
postrenal diseases is due to decreased excretion of potassium
99% of the sodium entering the filtrate is normally reabsorbed.
and concurrent acidosis which shifts potassium from its
Increased FEna > 1% is consistent with tubular failure or
intracellular location to an extracellular one, in an exchange
decreased aldosterone activity; correlate with rest of data.
FEna in an azotemic patient <l% is consistent with prer-
Potassium decreases with chronic renal failure especially if
enal azotemia, and if hyponatremia is observed, is consistent
polyuria is present and it may decrease during the diuretic
with sodium loss via the GI.
354
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
FE, > reference interval indicates increased serum para-
 Paradoxical aciduria is an event that happens most com-
thyroid hormone or PTH-rp.
monly in cattle with displaced abomasum, especially right-
sided. These cows have severe metabolic alkalosis and
Reference intervals
displaced abomasum. They are also dehydrated, hypokalemic.
and hyponatremic. Sodium reabsorption is stimulated by
dehydration via activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldoste-
Fx excretion, %
Dog
Cat
rone system, which obligates potassium excretion. Addition-
unipos
<1
<1
ally, in health, potassium excretion is elevated in cattle and
Potassium 
<6-20
<6-20
it takes time for the kidneys to reach a new potassium excre-
Chloride 
<1
<1.5
tion equilibrium. Aldosterone also promotes hydrogen ion
Phosphorus
<20
<73
excretion, and this potentiates tubular formation of bicar-
bonate, which is reabsorbed. Normally, chloride would be
reabsorbed; however, it is not available because of the pro-
found hypochloridemia. The reabsorption of bicarbonate
Fractional excretion of sodium in normal horses is 0.0l-
ion further exacerbates the alkalosis, and the hydrogen ion
0.70; 0.80-10.10 in horses with renal failure, and 0.02-0.50
excretion results in acidic urine. Until the displaced aboma-
in horses with prerenal azotemia. It can also be used to
sum is replaced, and the severe hypochloremia is corrected
determine if renal failure is present in nonazotemic patients
the paradoxical aciduria with metabolic alkalosis will persist.
and to follow recovery post treatment of an azotemic patient.
Parathyroid hormone and PTH-rp stimulate phosphorus
excretion. Animals with hypercalcemia and primary hyper-
Protein abnormalities
mediated by PTH-rp) will both have increased fractional
Proteinuria
excretion of phosphorus and, therefore, measuring the frac-
Although proteinuria has preglomerular, glomerular, and
tional excretion of phosphorus does not help distinguish
postglomerular causes (Table 23.8) it is used clinically to
these two diseases. Physical examination to locate the cancer
 recognize renal disease, especially diseases affecting glom-
is the best means to distinguish these differential diagnoses
eruli. Preglomerular and postglomerular causes do not
If that is inconclusive then concurrent measurement of PTH,
produce hypoalbuminemia, only glomerular causes result in
PTH-rp and serum calcium usually is definitive with or
hypoalbuminemia. The two main glomerular diseases are
without imaging techniques of the parathyroid-thyroid
 glomerulonephritis and amyloidosis. Chronic renal disease 
region of the neck.
that involves glomeruli will also produce proteinuria and 
hypoalbuminemia. Significant proteinuria can precede azo-
Blood gas
temia and occur in animals that can still concentrate their 
Metabolic acidosis is expected with renal failure in all species;
urine. Quantification of renal proteinuria is a practical
however, it will depend on the severity of the renal failure.
means to identify renal disease, predict glomerular disease.
the presence of concurrent diseases, and compensatory
monitor renal disease, and formulate treatment plans. Excess 
mechanisms. Some cattle develop metabolic alkalosis due to
protein in the urine is detected by colorimetric dipsticks, SSA
ileus and forestomach atony secondary to uremia. The result
turbidity testing or other chemical assays.
is sequestration of acid-rich secretions in the abomasum and
rumen. These cows will also have hypochloremia, hypona-
Albumin
tremia, and hypokalemia, and an increased anion gap due
An increased concentration of serum albumin is seen only
to retained uremic acids.
with dehydration. There is no specific correlation of hyper-
Compensated renal failure patients have normal blood gas
albuminemia with renal diseases, but dehydration is often
values and uncompensated renal failure patients may have
present in patients with renal failure and the distinction of
severe acidosis. Hydrogen ion excretion is decreased in the
prerenal versus renal azotemia is made by measuring the
tubules, as is potassium excretion therefore hyperkalemia
urine specific gravity while assessing skin turgidity, PCV, and
may be present, especially with oliguria or anuria. Serum
serum albumin to assess hydration. Decreased serum
potassium will also increase due to shifting of hydrogen ions
albumin is seen with glomerular diseases and end-stage
into cells and potassium ions out of cells to maintain intra-
renal disease and is also seen with diseases in the gastroin-
cellular electroneutrality. Total CO, concentration <l 5 mEq/L
testinal, liver, and cardiovascular systems.
and an increased anion gap due to retention of uremic acids
Albumin is conserved at the level of the glomerulus and
indicate metabolic acidosis; these patients will have acidic
hypoalbuminemia suggests glomerular lesions and chronic-
urine as well.
ity. Glomeruli retain proteins larger than approximately
355
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
68,00o Da and that are negatively charged. With glomerular
 The key to differentiating postglomerular frorm glomerular
disease, albumin leaks because of its small molecular size
proteinuria is by examining the urinalysis. Glomerular pro-
(66,0oo) and negative charge. Glomeruli lose their negative
teinuria requires persistent proteinuria with inactive urine
charge because immunoglobulins (positively charged) are
sediment (free of RBCs, WBCs, etc.). Urinalyses that reveal
deposited in glomerular basement membranes as part of the
blood, RBCs, leukocytes, or other indicators of inflammation
pathogenesis of glomerulonephritis and amyloidosis. In
have active urine sediment and are classifed as postglo-
health, the small amounts of albumin that leak through are
merular proteinuria; the underlying cause should be sought.
Detection starts with positive protein reaction on the uri-
lysosomes. Although albuminuria may be due to tubular
nalysis via qualitative dipsticks or SSA. The amount of
lesions the amount of protein in the urine is small and this
protein should always be correlated with urine specific gravity. In
mechanism never results in hypoalbuminemia. If glomeru-
the dog. 1+ proteinuria coupled with concentrated urine is
lonephritis and amyloidosis are severe enough there will be
considered insignificant, whereas l+ protein in dilute urine
proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, edema, ascites, thrombi.
is considered significant, if the urine sediment is inactive (no
and hypercholesterolemia with or without azotemia-
cells, blood, etc.). The next critical step is to determine pro-
nephrotic syndrome.
teinuria is not just transient, but that it persists over time.
 Preglomerular diseases that result in marked hyperpro-
If there is persistent proteinuria of any magnitude then the
       
amount may be quantified via urine protein to creatinine
proximal tubular capacity for reabsorption, and result in
ratio (UPC) to help estimate the severity and the disease
persistent proteinuria, referred to as "overload proteinuria."
 present. A recent study correlated dipstick urine protein with
Hemoglobinemia, myoglobinemia, and paraproteins of small
urine specific gravity in an attempt to predict when quanti-
molecular weight (<45,000 Da) as seen in multiple myeloma
fication of the urine protein creatinine ratio (UPC) was indi-
will do this. Critical to the diagnosis of preglomerular pro-
cated. These results were then compared to UPC to determine
teinuria is to recognize one of those three problems. Serum
false negative and false positive as well as positive predictive
proteins in patients with multiple myeloma may exceed
       
9 g/dL and this will induce preglomerular, overload protein-
 ssn n n    
uria that is persistent. If hemoglobinemia is so severe it
overwhelms carrying proteins such as haptoglobin then
0 + (neg) at any USG = nonproteinuric, UPC not needed
excess hemoglobin will enter the glomerular filtrate. Myo-
1+ (30 mg/dl) at >1.012 = nonproteinuric, UPC not needed
globin does not have carrier proteins and it readily passes
into the glomerular filtrate producing dipstick results that
1+ (30 mg/dl) at <1.012
are positive for protein and blood. Mild, clinically insignifi-
= proteinuric * correlate with clinical presentation
cant preglomerular proteinuria is also associated with excess
exercise, seizures, fever, stress, etc., and is referred to as
2 + (100 mg/dl) at any USG
functional proteinuria. This type of proteinuria is transient
= proteinuric, UPC recommended
and is not significant. Historical and physical exam data and
UA will identify these causes. One study demonstrated that
*gray zone results = 1 + (30mg/dL) at <1.012; requires inte-
excercise did not increase the urinary excretion of albumin
gration of clinical presentation with results; if there are
in dogs.
clinical signs or suspicion of problems recommend UPC; if
 Postglomerular proteinuria is very common, is probably
there are no clinical signs or suspicions then UPC is not
the number one cause of proteinuria and is due to inflam-
indicated, consider serial UA
mation in the urogenital tract: cystitis, pyelonephritis.
These recommendations would miss cases of "micropro-
trauma, neoplasia, urolithiasis, prostatitis, etc. Hypoalbu-
teinuria." Veterinarians could use the above to screen and
minemia is not expected from these diseases and the results
 still consider testing for microproteinuria in geriatric pa tients
of urinalysis indicate active sediment. If inflammatory cells
and patients with historical features that suggest occult renal
are present in the urine then the proteinuria is most likely
disease.
due to inflammatory proteins and concurrent hemorrhage.
Determination of UPC is accomplished by collecting urine
The hemoglobin in the red blood cells will produce a positive
and serum simultaneously and requesting the laboratory
result for protein and blood. Cystitis is the most common
measure protein and creatinine chemically in both. The
cause of postglomerular proteinuria. Attention is focused on
amount of protein in the urine is divided by the amount of
the diagnosis and treatment of cystitis not proteinuria. If
creatinine in the urine and a ratio is derived, Prot:Ct. Usually
proteinuria persists after the inflammation is gone then con-
the lab reports the ratio and provides interpretative ranges.
sideration is given to causes of persistent proteinuria. Post-
Sex of dog or time of day of collection does not influence
glomerular proteinuria can also be seen in tubular resorptive
results. Creatinine excretion is relatively constant and
defects as seen in familial or acquired Fanconi syndrome.
reduces the variability due to concentration of urine (water)
356
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
therefore an increased ratio is attributed to an increased
Mean 24-hour urine protein excretion, 24-hour Prot:Ct
concentration of protein. Any cause of increased protein will
ratio, and 4-hour Prot:Ct ratios have been determined for
increase this ratio; therefore, preglomerular and postglo-
horses and ponies and the ranges are similar to those estab-
merular causes must be ruled out before an increased UPC
lished for other species. Reference interval for Prot:Ct is 0 to
is assigned to a glomerular cause or renal disease.
0.40 and there is minimal day-to-day variation in these
species.
Resutts for dogs
Microproteinuria, microalbuminuria is an extension of
UPC <0.2 = nonproteinuric, "normal"; UPC 0.2-0.5 gray
proteinuria and refers to situations where the amount of
zone, borderline proteinuia; UPC >0.5 = proteinuric, abnor-
protein in the urine is small or below the limit of detect-
mal, any renal disease.
ability of most qualitative and some routine quantitative
assays. A trace or l+ protein in concentrated urine is con-
Generalizations
sidered insignificant; however, it can imply early or occult
Prot:Ct > 5 = glomerular: Prot:Ct > 10 = glomerulonephri-
renal disease (minimal change nephropathy). The primary
tis; Prot:Ct > 20 = amyloidosis. Given the wide overlap of
protein in the urine of these patients is albumin and assays
ranges and the severity and chronicity of the diseases, the
are now available to measure microalbuminuria. Microalbul-
best means to distinguish glomerulonephritis and amyloido-
minuria is albumin <30mg/dL and albuminuria ("overt
sis is renal biopsy.
albuminuria") is urine albumin >30 mg/dL in urine normal-
The distinction of glomerulonephritis and amyloidosis
ized to specifc gravity of 1.010. The limit of detectability of
could have different treatment and prognostic implications
dipstick colorimetric pads is approximately 6-10 mg/dL and
and therefore the differentiation of these two diseases is
SSA 5mg/dL. If these trace amounts are detected in urine
sometimes desired. The correlation of renal biopsy results
with a specific gravity of 1.020 then the concentrations
with histologic sections taken at necropsy is 98%. This is
would double if the USG was 1.040. Similarly, trace amounts
because the lesions of glomerulonephritis and amyloidosis
in urine with a specific gravity of 1.020 would be undetect-
are diffuse. Essentially loo% of glomeruli have lesions, at
able with these qualitative methods in urine with a specific
least to some degree so biopsy, even if only 1-3 small pieces
gravity of 1.o10 or less, yet this may be significant. The
are obtained will adequately sample the disease process as
detection of microproteinuria may be of value in geriatric
long as the cortex is sampled. The most common complica-
patients. patients with suspected occult renal disease, moni-
tion is minor hemorrhage, resulting in hematuria; but rarely.
toring chronic renal patients, breeds with known familial
the complications are severe and life-threatening. Results of
nephropathies or sick patients with an unknown diagnosis.
biopsy that indicate severe end stage renal disease may influ-
Although its use is implied to recognize occult glomerular
ence the decision to treat.
or chronic renal disease, any cause of proteinuria, pre-.
The majority of dogs 9 years of age and older will have
glomerular and postglomerular, will be positive with these 
some form of microscopic glomerulonephritis. The majority
microalbumin assays. Therefore these other causes must be
of these cases are subclinical. The recognition of these
ruled out before steps are taken to recognize occult renal
animals with newer screening tests that detect microprotein-
disease.
uria (urine albumin <30mg/dL, correlating to l+ on the
Microalbuminuria may be a marker of early renal disease 
urine dipstick) may prove beneficial for long-term care. It is
and there is some evidence to suggest it is a mediator of
disease; therefore, there could be benefits to reducing the
and 20% have microalbuminuria. Proteins that are leaking
amount of protein entering the urine. Recognizing occult
through diseased glomeruli may cause damage to tubules
renal disease opens avenues for patient management such
via cytokines, direct toxicity, and overload of lysosomal deg-
as restricted diets and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
radation mechanisms. Therefore recognizing persistent pro-
inhibitors. It is not known if these treatments can change
teinuria and preventing its progression may have benefical
the progress of the disease or is beneficial to these patients
effects for the health of the kidney and therefore the animal.
but it may prove helpful, and the first step is to recognize
Determining UPC ratios on several samples taken 24
the problem exists.
hours or more apart is recommended for even more reliable
There are qualitative (reagent pad) and semiquantitative
results as there can be random variation in the amounts of
immunologic test strips (ELISA) available to estimate Prot:Ct
 albumin loss in any one sample. However, measuring serial
ratios but their clinical utility has not been proven.
UPC may be cost-prohibitive. In these situations, pooling
The other methodologies, protein electrophoresis and
one mL aliquots taken from three urine samples collected
immunoturbiditmetric tests are quantitative and are per-
24-48 hours apart yields results that are clinically useful and
formed in reference labs. Semiquantitative immunologic test
more cost effective. To determine the disease is progressing
strips and protein electrophoresis are less accurate than
or improving. a change of at least 40% in UPC should be
automated immunoturbiditmetric assays. Semiquantitative
observed.
immunologic test strips are easy to use. Urine is diluted to
357
SEcTloN Iv Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
a specific gravity of 1.0l0 by adding distilled water and the
Rarely a renal tumor produces erythropoietin and
strip is immersed for 3 minutes and the color intenisty com-
increases the PCV. Any tumor in the kidney can produce this
pared to various categories. The sensitivity and specificity of
paraneoplastic syndrome. The result is an absolute polycy-
the test strips are 91% and 92%, respectively. They have a
themia and it has been reported with nonneoplastic renal
false positive rate of 8%, false negative rate of 9%, and at
masses as well.
the high and very high positive categories are detecting overt
proteinuria that can be assessed with routine dipsticks.
Cholesterol
 Increased cholesterol is seen with the nephrotic syndrome.
Antithrombin
 The mechanism is not known but there are numerous pub-
Antithrombin (also known as antithrombin IIl) is a small
lications that make the association and attempt to explain
alpha globulin synthesized in the liver and lost in the urine
hypercholesterolemia: increased hepatic production of lipo-
of patients with glomerular diseases. Antithrombin (AT) has
proteins, defective lipolysis of lipoproteins, and decreased
a molecular weight just lower than albumin; hence both
conversion of cholesterol into bile acids are some of the
proteins are lost in the filtrate of patients with glomerular
hypotheses.
diseases. Antithrombin is the most potent inhibitor of the
coagulation cascade. When AT is decreased a prothrombotic
Parathyroid hormone
state exists. The most common location of thrombi is in the
Chronic renal failure patients will have parathyroid hyper-
pulmonary artery but thrombi are also located in the aortic
plasia and hypertrophy secondary to hypocalcemia and
quadrification and in many other vessels if they are exam-
hyperphosphatemia. This may result in clinically detectable
ined. The hypoalbuminemia also stimulates platelet hyper-
fibrous osteodystrophy and osteopenia due to increased
sensitivity which further contributes to the formation of
bone resorption triggered by increased serum concentrations
thrombi. In contrast, many cases of severe renal failure tend
of parathyroid hormone. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) will
to bleed due to several mechanisms: concurrent DIC, as
be increased due to decreased renal clearance and con-
uremia alters platelet function leading to prolonged bleeding
current production and release in the hyperplastic para-
times, and increased clotting associated with uremia induced
thyroid glands. These mechanisms result in increased
va sculitis.
failure progresses from stage l to stage 4 PTH concentrations
Fibrinogen
increase (along with increases in serum urea nitrogen, cre-
Cattle in renal failure tend to have marked increases in
atinine, and phosphorus): 33% of dogs will have increased
fibrinogen, 1000-2000 mg/dL.
serum PTH at stage l and 100% at stage 4. There is ample
evidence that increased serum PTH concentrations are one
of the uremic toxins that contribute to the vasculitis and
Other abnormalities
suppress bone marrow function.
Generally as the renal disease progresses from stage l to
Vitamin D
stage 4 (mild to severe) the laboratory abnormalities worsen
in their magnitude and or the percentage of patients with
with renal failure as the rate limiting step in the synthesis
each abnormality increases.
of vitamin D is in the kidneys. The decreased serum concen-
tration of vitamin D contributes to hypocalcemia and hyper-
Packed cell volume; erythroid
parathyroidism. It is not necessary to measure serum vitamin
Chronic renal failure is characterized by nonregenerative
 D concentration in patients with renal failure but knowledge
anemia in all species. Horses will have an anemia due to
of the possible consequences of reduced vitamin D may be
chronic renal failure but distinction of regenerative versus
useful.
nonregenerative is not practical in horses. Decreased pro-
duction of erythropoietin in the kidneys is the main causes;
Lipase and amylase in serum
however, other factors that contribute to anemia are decreased
These enzymes are inactivated or excreted through the
life span of erythrocytes, blood loss due to tendency of
        
uremic patients to bleed, anemia of chronic inflammatory
may result in increased serum concentrations of one or both.
disease, bone marrow suppression, hyperphosphatemia, and
The magnitude of increase is usually one to threefold. If the
increased serum parathyroid hormone concentration. The
ad e     si a  a
anemia of chronic renal failure is usually mild to moderate;
renal contribution is unlikely and pancreatitis should be
a PCV in high teens to twenties is typical. If the anemia is
  a     r s 
severe, such as low teens or single digits then search for an
pancreatitis. Prerenal azotemia can produce as great an
additional cause and or gastrointestinal bleeding.
increase in lipase or amylase as renal azotemia. Expect
358
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
amylase or lipase or both to increase in 70% of patients with
100
spontaneous renal failure. Approximately 33% of azotemic
(n).
patients will have an increase in both; 33% will have
UGGT
75
increased lipase only and 33% increased amylase only.
50
Enzymes in urine
Gamma-giutamyltransferase (GGT) and N-acetyi-glucosaminidase
24-Hour
(NAG)
25
Enzymes found in urine have two sources, fltered at
glomeruli or released from tubular epithelium. Enzymes
 n i    a o  o a ii
9.10
released from damaged tubular epithelial cells can be a
useful adjunct to determine if there is an acute tubular
4.0
lesion before azotemia develops. Two such enzymes are
gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT) and N-acetyl-beta-
rance
3.0
glucosaminidase (NAG). GGT is a membrane-bound enzyme
and NAG is a lysosomal enzyme. Although both enzymes
are produced in other tissues neither is filtered at the glom-
K
2.0
erulus, and therefore, any amount in the urine reflects a
2
tubular source. Proximal tubular epithelium contains more
reatinin
1.0
of these enzymes than other tubular cells, and most toxins
E
affect the proximal convoluted tubules preferentially due to
0.0
 their high metabolic rate. These enzymes are measured in a
6
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 910
random urine sample along with urine [Ct]. and the ratio
of enzyme:Ct is reported. Samples should be refrigerated
8.0
but not frozen as freeze thawing destroys the activity of
enzymes. Enzymes cannot accumulate in the urine because
tinine
they are voided from the bladder on urination. Therefore
6.0
the amount measured indicates the amount released since
creat
the last urination, and an increased amount implies that the
4.0
lesion is active or ongoing. These enzymes are not absorbed
E
into the circulation. GGT and NAG have proven useful in
Serum
2.0
dogs, cats, horses, sheep. and cattle, particularly in cases of
drug-induced tubular injury (e.g. gentamicin, neomycin.
0.0
NSAIDs). Urinary NAG varies with sex, being twofold greater
in male dogs, circadian rhythm, and species.
2
3
a
10
Reference values should be obtained from the laboratory
Days
and not the literature due to analytical variation in how the
Figure 23.4 Serum creatinine, 24hr endogenous creatinine clearance,
enzymes are measured. Despite the early detection of renal
ioixadau uea eaadxa ui e i aun t pe
tubular disease afforded by urinary enzymes. they are
seldom measured. This may be because the diagnosis of
acute renal failure is easily made by the time animals with
Dogs mean +SD GGT :Ct 0.39 + 0.18 IU/mg:
spontaneous renal diseases present,and use of urinary
    rd    s
24-hour 1.42 + 0.82 IU/kg/24 hr
monitor an animal placed on a nephrotoxic drug such
NAG :Ct 0.06 + 0.04 IU/mg:24-hour 0.19
as an NSAID or gentamicin, where an increase in these
+ 0.14 IU/kg/24 hr
enzymes would warrant discontinuing drug therapy. In
experimental gentamicin nephrotoxicity, increased tubular
enzymes occurs before increased fractional excretion
 Diseases/Syndromes
of electrolytes, and precedes azotemia by 7-8 days and
decreased creatinine clearance by 4-6 days (Fig. 23.4).
Ethylene glycol intoxication
Increases in C-reactive protein and retinol binding protein
Ethylene glycol is sweet tasting and is one of the most
also occur with tubular disease and may be useful disease
common lethal toxins in veterinary medicine. First it causes
ma rkers.
vomiting. ataxia, and CNS depression such that owners
359
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
might think their pet is "drunk." At this stage a Uv light may
by subtracting the calculated osmolarity from the measured
reveal fluorescence in the oral cavity. in vomitus, and in
osmolality:
urine as fluorescent dye is commonly present in commercial
antifreeze preparations (the dye helps detect leaks in a radia-
Glucose . [UN]
Calculated osmolality = l .86 ([Na + K]+ -
tor). Negative fluorescence does not rule out ethylene glycol
18
2.8
(EG) ingestion as not all antifreeze products add this dye.
Osmole gap = Measured osmolality (-) Calculated osmolarity
EG itself is not nephrotoxic but alcohol dehydrogenase con-
Osmole gap reference range is < 5;> 20 suggestive;
verts EG to toxic metabolites, principally oxalic acid. Com-
> 30 diagnostic
petitive inhibition of alcohol dehydrogenase by ethanol is
the treatment of choice for cats as 4-methylpyrazole (fomepi
d       
zole) does not work well in cats. 4-Methylpyrazole directly
practices and the blood sample must be kept cool in transit
inhibits alcohol dehydrogenase in dogs and is therefore rec-
to the referral laboratory. The technique to measure serum
ommended to treat dogs exposed to antifreeze.
osmolality is based on the freezing point depression of a
fluid. Ethylene glycol is a small molecular weight molecule
before the patient becomes azotemic. Azotemia is usually
that lowers the freezing point of serum and therefore
not present until about 24 hours post exposure, and there-
increases the measured osmolality and does so within an
fore the goal is to diagnose acute renal failure in a patient
hour of ingestion.
that is not azotemic. Five ways to accomplish this are: UV
The increased anion gap (AG) is due to the metabolites of
fluorescence, visualize calcium oxalate monohydrate crys-
EG and therefore an increased AG is seen after the increased
tals in urine (present in 3 hours post exposure in cats and
osmole gap, usually around 3-6 hours post ingestion. Most
laboratories now report the AG in a chemistry panel, but it
and increased serum osmole gap (occurs in frst hour post
can be calculated via the following equation:
ingestion), increased anion gap (first 3-6 hours), and perhaps
the easiest way is a test kit that can be run in-house. Addi-
(Na +K)-(Cl + HCO,}
tionally. the FEna will be increased in the first 3 hours post
Reference range is approximately < 9
exposure prior to the onset of azotemia.
The commercial kit detects serum EG via a color change
sans Aaa st xi Da Jo aasaans s S< 5
and takes 15 minutes to perform. The test is designed for
combine results with all the other data in the case, do not
serum and it is useful only in the first l2 hours post expo-
diagnose just on the AG.
sure as it recognizes the parent compound but not metabo-
Hypocalcemia often develops because the toxic metabo-
 lites. At North Carolina State University, the kit has been
lite, oxalate, will chelate calcium from the serum. This may
used on aqueous humor, serum, and urine up to 2 days post
produce marked hypocalcemia, e.g., 4-5 mg/dL. Many of the
exposure and positive results achieved and the diagnosis
other laboratory and clinical abnormalities present in
 confirmed with histology: however, this is too late for effec-
tive therapy to be implemented. Commercial kits: Ethylene
ity but are part of acute renal failure: oliguria to anuria.
glycol test kits (Allelic Biosystems, Kearneysville WV, and
dilute urine, casts in UA, hyperphosphatemia, etc. Azotemia
PRN Pharmacal, Pensacola, FL).
does not develop for almost 24 hours post exposure.
 n  o   s 
antifreeze product ingested also contains a phosphate rust
Diethylene glycol (DEG)
inhibitor. Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals are more
This is related to ethylene glycol; however, it is less nephro-
plentiful in EG toxicity than are dihydrate crystals. Both
toxic. It is found in a variety of industrial products: brake
types can be seen in urinalyses but they require careful
fluid, dyes, oils, ink, glue, lubricants, and heating/cooking
searching with increased contrast as there may only be low
fuel, as well as personal care products such as skin creams.
numbers.
deodorants, and toothpastes, and as an adulterant to create
sweet wine or sweeten cough syrups. It is metabolized
in the liver into various aldehydes and the acid 2-
Osmole gap
hydroxyethoxyacetic acid (HEAA) which is believed to be
Markedly increased osmole gap is diagnostic for EG. The
the nephrotoxic metabolite. Much like EG toxicity the first
increased osmolality and the gap are due to the parent com-
phases of DEG toxicity affect the GI and central nervous
pound ethylene glycol and both are increased within one
systems producing inebriation-like state that is followed by
hour of ingestion. Osmolality is measured in serum by
renal failure. Similar to EG toxicity both ethanol and fomepi-
freezing-point depression. Serum osmolarity is calculated
zole are used in the treatment (to prevent the formation of
using the following formula, and osmole gap is calculated
HEAA) but unlike EG there are no calcium oxalate crystals
09E
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
in the kidneys. Scattered cases in pets have been observed
Substances that are excreted into the urine in high con-
The LD 50 for small mammals is between 2 and 25 g/kg
centration are now greater in the abdominal fluid than the
blood and diffuse from the abdominal fluid into the blood.
following their concentration gradient and gradually increas-
Uroabdomen
ing the serum concentration of these substances: UN, Ct, K,
Abdominal ftuid Ct>serum Ct inconcurrent samples; hyponatre-
P. Substances that are excreted into the urine in low con-
mia,hyperkalemia,hypochioremia,hyperphosphatemia;hole is
centration are lower in the abdominal fluid than the blood
usually located dorsaly in the bladder; some animals can urinate
and therefore diffuse from the blood into the abdominal
and retain contrast dye; more common in males.
fluid; gradually decreasing the serum concentration of these
The best method to confirm uroabdomen is to measure
substances: Na, Cl. Additionally fluid will flow into the
creatinine in the abdominal fluid and serum concurrently.
abdominal cavity due to the irritation and increased osmolal-
Abdominal fluid creatinine greater than serum creatinine is
ity from the urine mixing with the peritoneal fluid producing
diagnostic. The slower diffusion of creatinine as opposed to
a third space and dilution effect on multiple analytes.
UN (4hr vs. 90 min) is why creatinine is measured prefer-
 Differential diagnoses for hyponatremia, hyperkalemia.
ential to UN in the diagnosis of uroabdomen but either can
and hypochloremia are: uroabdomen, Addison's, renal
be used. This difference in diffusion rates may be due to the
failure, GI disease (whipworms, salmonella, colibacillosis),
difference in sizes of these molecules (urea nitrogen is 60
Akita and other dog and sheep breeds with potassium-rich
Da and creatinine 1l3 Da) or their shape (urea is a simple
red blood cells, chylothorax with drainage. and others (see 
chain and creatinine a ring structure). If the serum creati-
Addison's disease in this book).
nine is increased in a patient with uroabdomen then the
 Patients in renal failure and with an intact urinary bladder
abdominal fluid creatinine will always be greater than the
will have increased concentrations of Ct and UN in all body
serum Ct concentration. The greater the difference between
fluids due to diffusion of Ct and UN from the blood. There-
the serum and abdominal Ct values the greater the level of
fore Ct is increased in comparable amounts in abdominal
confidence of the diagnosis. The abdominal fluid creatinine
fluid, thoracic fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, aqueous and blood;
does not have to be twice as high as the serum creatinine
however, the increase in these fluids will be less or nearly
to confirm the diagnosis. Do not wait for a threefold or
the same as the increased serum Ct concentration. The dif-
 greater difference as the patient will benefit from surgical
fusion of Ct into other fluids is the basis of peritoneal dialysis
correction as early as possible. The hole in the bladder is
in patients with renal failure.
almost always located dorsally and therefore the patient may
still be able to urinate and retain radiopaque dye in the
Examples:
bladder. Cytologic examination of the abdominal fluid is not 
Serum Ct mg/dL
8.1
4.5
5
6.3
11
1.2
useful to establish the diagnosis. On rare occasions urinary
Abdominal Ct mg/dL
13.4
6.2
15
6.1
10
0.9
crystals and or sperm may be seen in the abdominal fluid
which does confirm the diagnosis of uroabdomen. Classi-
The first three examples are all characteristic of uroabdo-
cally uroabdomen is a disease of males due to their narrow
men; the next two examples are azotemia with an intact
urethra which is more easily obstructed than the wider
bladder; and the last a "normal" or at least nonazotemic
urethra of females. In horses uroabdomen occurs most fre-
patient. The patients with an intact bladder and azotemia
quently in male foals less than 7 days old that were fine for
may benefit from peritoneal dialysis: remove the abdominal
 several days post birth and now are lethargic and anorectic.
fluid, inject warm saline into the abdomen, and allow time
The urinary bladder ruptured during birth and there are no
for Ct to diffuse from the blood into the saline and repeat
calculi. Uroabdomen in sheep. goats, cattle, and cats occur
until serum creatinine is reduced to an acceptable concen-
in males that have a calculus or mucus plug (cats) lodged in
tration. In acute renal failure, peritoneal dialysis may, along
the most narrow portion of the urethra: sheep and
with other treatments, permit the patient to survive long
goats, urethral appendage; cattle, sigmoid flexure. In steers
enough for tubules to regenerate.
the rupture may also occur in the urethra; the bladder is
Azostick determination of abdominal versus blood UN has
intact and these individuals tend to have less severe clinical
been used to diagnose uroabdomen and may be beneficial
pathology abnormalities and a better surgical prognosis. In
if after-hour chemical measurements are not available.
 dogs uroabdomen is most typically seen post trauma, e.g.
However, the color differences should be obvious and the
 hit by car. The following serum electrolyte abnormalities are
qualitative results confirmed with chemical measurements 
characteristic: hyponatremia, hyperlkalemia, and hypochlo-
and or all the data should correlate superbly: e.g., male
remia, along with hyperphosphatemia. In the experimental
animal that cannot urinate or does so in small volumes,
induction of uroabdomen in dogs these electrolyte abnor-
bladder is small or collapsed, excess fluid in abdomen, azo-
malities develop slowly over a 48-hour period.
temia, and characteristic electrolyte abnormalities.
361
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Medullary washout
have peripheral edema and some develop thrombi due to a
Primary diseases: Psychogenic polydipsia, liver failure, and
decrease in antithrombin II (AT II). This is a common syn-
hypoadrenocorticism.
drome in veterinary medicine because glomerulonephritis is
Urea and sodium chloride are the main solutes that satu-
so common in older dogs.
rate the renal medullary interstitium. This hypertonic med.
Proteinuria will precede azotemia in most cases. The more
ullary intersitium combined with the vasa recta form the
severe the lesions the more likely azotemia will be present;
counter current multiplier system. This system is responsible for
approximately half of the dogs with glomerulonephritis will
the passive absorption of water from the proximal convo-
be azotemic and 75% of the dogs with amyloidosis will be
luted tubules and is the first step in the process of concen-
azotemic. Dogs that are azotemic at initial diagnosis have the
trating the glomerular filtrate. If either or both urea and
shortest survivals. Dilute urine will be seen in 50-60% of
sodium are decreased in the interstitium of the medulla then
the cases; casts are often present and they can be hyaline
passive absorption of water from the tubules is compromised
(protein-rich) or of other types. Amyloidosis may account
and the filtrate cannot be concentrated. Two syndromes that
for more cases simply because the glomerular lesions are
do this are chronic liver failure, such as acquired and con-
more severe and therefore there is greater proteinuria. There
genital shunts (decreased urea) and hypoadrenocorticism
is no effective treatment for amyloidosis. Glomeruli cannot
(chronic hyponatremia). Liver failure caused by congenital
regenerate but if the lesions are mild and or the underlying
shunts will have decreased serum concentrations of other
cause of inflammation predisposing to glomerulonephritis
substances produced by the liver such as albumin and cho-
   l 5 a   aq u
lesterol, and may have microcytosis as clues that this disease
several years.
is present. Addison's patients will have azotemia, Na : K ratio
<23 and basal cortisol <2μg/dL.
Progressive familial renal nephropathy/dysplasia
Psychogenic polydipsia will "wash out" the medullary
Chronic progressive familial nephropathy (renal dysplasia)
interstitium via marked diuresis which provides insufficient
is one of the most common causes of renal failure in young
time for urea and sodium reabsorption.
dogs, some presenting as early as 8 weeks of age. This is not
hypoplasia as the kidneys start with a normal number of
Fanconi syndrome
 ao s  sd   s
This is a heritable or acquired disease characterized by
In severe cases the kidneys are shrunken and fibrotic but
defects in proximal tubular reabsorption of various sub-
there often are regions of embryonic glomeruli, tubules.
strates that include one or more of glucose, sodium, calcium,
and interstitium. There also are other familial glomerulopa-
bicarbonate, amino acids, and phosphate. Abnormal lab data
thies that look similar clinically and histologically. Regard-
includes: dilute urine, glucosuria, and proteinuria, increased
less of nomenclature there are several diseases of high
 fractional excretion of electrolytes, cystinuria, and aminoac-
prevalence in many purebred animals that present at a
iduria. Clinical signs range from asymptomatic to marked
young age. Amyolidosis has breed predlictions as well. The
 clinical alterations and death from renal failure. The disease
lesions vary in severity as do the laboratory findings. Clinical
is heritable and is present in 10-33% of Basenjis and is seen
pathology results look like chronic renal failure, the kidneys
in Norwegian ellhounds, Shetland sheepdogs. and schnal-
appear shrunken on imaging but the patient is a young
Zers. It is recognized by breed susceptibility, clinical signs.
or middle aged purebred dog. Of all the causes of renal
and UA.
failure these diseases probably have the highest incidence of
Nephrotic syndrome
pany the azotemia and therefore soft tissue mineralization
Proteinuria,hypoproteinemia,hypoalbuminemia,ascites,and
is prominent.
hypercholesterolemia,with or without azotemia,defne fhis
·● Progressive familial renal nephropathy is observed in
syndrome.
the Lhasa Apso, Shih Tzu, soft-coated Wheaten terrier, stan-
The combination of proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, edema.
dard poodle, miniature schnauzer, Alaskan malamute.
ascites, and hypercholesterolemia are the classical features
golden retriever, Norwegian elkhound, and Doberman
of the nephrotic syndrome but not all are present in
breeds.
every case, or are not detected. Ascites and edema may
· Inherited glomerulopathies have been documented in the
not always be present but if the rest of the features are
Samoyed, Bernese mountain dog. bull terrier, chow chow.
present that is adequate to use this term (see section on
English cocker spaniel, and Rottweiler breeds.
"Protein Abnormalities" and tables and figures in this
· Amyloidosis is noted in cats: Abyssinian, Siamese, and
chapter). The nephrotic syndrome implies a lesion is present
Oriental shorthair, and in dog breeds: Shar Pei, beagle.
in glomeruli, either amyloidosis or glomerulonephritis. End-
English foxhound.
stage kidneys from any cause could present with similar
● Polycystic kidney disease is observed in the Persian cat,
features. If the lesion is severe and chronic the dogs usually
West Highland white and Cairn terrier, and bull terrier.
362
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
Hematuria hemoglobinuria myoglobinuria—red,
relatively common in horses and captured wild animals. Of
red-brown urine
the many types of equine myopathies the most common
The main differential diagnoses for urine discolored red to
form associated with myoglobinuria is exertional rhabdomy-
red-brown are hematuria, hemoglobinuria, and myoglobin-
olysis, which has various common names: azoturia, Monday
morning disease, tying up syndrome, and capture myopathy.
sic). porphyria, and phenothiazine antehelmintics. When all
In these situations there is massive muscle necrosis and
the data are considered distinguishing the common causes
release of myoglobin. Myoglobin is of a small molecular
of red urine is straightforward (Table 23.9). One of the
weight compared to hemoglobin (18,000 vs. 68,000 daltons)
easiest procedures is to simply look at the urine before and
such that it readily overflows into the glomerular filtrate
after centrifugation. If the color is cleared or greatly reduced
discoloring the urine but the plasma remains clear. In horses
by centrifugation then the diagnosis is hematuria; if the
the plasma and the patient may turn icteric due to concur-
color persists after centrifugation then hemoglobinuria or
rent anorexia. The PCV will be in reference interval or
myoglobinuria is present. If the color remains post centrifu-
increased due to concurrent dehydration and or splenic con-
gation look at all the data to distinguish these two differen-
traction secondary to pain. Muscle enzymes will be mark-
tials and if it is still not obvious then ask a lab to perform
edly increased. The serum CPK can be as high as l,0oo,000
an ammonium sulfate precipitation test on the supernatant.
IU/mL in horses with this disease. An increased CPK means
This will precipitate hemoglobin such that after centrifuga-
the muscle necrosis is still active. CPK increases first, it is
tion a red pellet forms and all or the majority of the super-
cleared rapidly once the muscle necrosis stops and is fol-
natant is cleared and is now yellow or semiclear to light
lowed by increases in AST within hours to days of the onset
pink. An 80% saturated solution of ammonium sulfate will
of the disease. This disease can be lethal and requires imme-
not precipitate myoglobin and the supernatant remains red-
diate treatment. It is typically seen in horses that are over
brown. If there is still doubt there are additional tests that
exercised following periods of rest and full feed ("couch
     
potatoes"). large breed horses undergoing prolonged anes-
precipitation, and ultrafltration. Hematuria, hemoglobin-
thetic procedures (pressure necrosis and ischemia of
uria, and myoglobinuria will all produce positive reactions
muscles), and wild animals that are chased for prolonged
to blood and protein on urine strips.
periods, equidae, ruminants, etc. It is rarely seen in domestic
Hematuria will have numerous red blood cells in the urine
ruminants even with severe vitamin E Se responsive disease
(TNTC) and will likely have numerous white blood cells due
but can be seen in young ruminants chased excessively.
to inflammation triggered by the cause of the hematuria:
similar to capture myopathy of exotics.
infection, cystitis, urolithiasis, trauma, neoplasia, etc. Depend-
Hematuria is not associated with azotemia unless the
ing on the amount of hemorrhage the PCV will be normal or
cause of the hematuria is obstruction of urine outflow. Azo-
 decreased; a normal or reference interval Pcv is most likely.
temia is expected with myoglobinuria and often occurs with
If the urine has a pink hue post centrifugation it is due to
severe cases of hemoglobinuria. Neither hemoglobin nor
hemolysis in vitro which can be due to allkaline urine, USG
myoglobin is the nephrotoxin; apparently small molecular 
<1.008, prolonged storage, and or rough handling.
weight substances released concurrently are the toxic sub-
Hemoglobinuria is due to intravascular hemolysis (not
stances. Regardless azotemia is possible and intravenous
extravascular) of such magnitude that the buffering mecha-
nisms are overloaded and free hemoglobin spills into the
binuric nephrosis" is warranted. Interestingly, some cases of
glomerular filtrate. Plasma during the hemolytic event will
severe myoglobinuria do not develop azotemia even when
be pink, the MCHC will be increased (artifact of free hemo-
the muscle enzymes are markedly increased (>50o,000 IU/
globin). and gradually the plasma and the patient will
mL) and the urine is brown-black. These cases have a better
become icteric. Heinz bodies should be searched for in all
prognosis and the absence of azotemia may be due to the
species with this problem. The PCV is decreased to variable
absence of the nephrotoxic substance in the muscles of these
degrees depending on the severity of the hemolysis. Etiolo-
horses. Casts are anticipated with hemoglobinuria and myo-
gies to consider are those that cause intravascular hemolysis:
globinuria and should not be present with hematuria. The
most cases of IHA are actually extravascular but intravascular
hemolysis can occur; parasites that are in the red blood cells
may be characteristic for the diseases: myoglobin or hemo-
(Babesia) as opposed to on the surface (Mycoplasma): metals
globin casts.
such as zinc or copper; water intoxication in cattle (osmotic
lysis): Clostridium hemolyficum; post parturient hemoglobin-
uria in cattle; Heinz body anemias; and acetaminophen,
Neoplasms
onions, garlic, baby food, red maple in horses, etc.
Myoglobinuria is rarely seen in dogs (racing. crush inju-
Lymphoma is the most common tumor in the kidneys: tran-
ries), cats (aortic thrombus, crush injury), or cattle but it is
sitional cell carcinoma (TcC) is the most common tumor in
363
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
the urinary tract from the renal pelvis to the distal urethra
cytologic examination, 75% from urethral or prostatic
and it is highly malignant; 30% of TCC can be diagnosed via
washes, and 90% from ultrasound guided guided fine needle
urine cytology. 75% via washes, and 90% via aspiration
aspirational cytology.
cytology.
The best method to diagnose TCC in urine is to collect a
 Rarely is a renal tumor diagnosed from examination of
fresh sample, prepare a concentrated preparation, make a
cells in the urine; most of these will be diagnosed from
film of the sediment, and stain with a Romanowsky stain
ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration into the renal
(do not diagnose from a wet mount, sedi-stain preparation).
mass. Primary renal tumors are tubular adenomas and car-
Additionally a diagnostic laboratory can prepare a cellblock
cinomas, nephroblastomas in young animals, fibromas, and
of the sediment and prepare a histologic section. Tumor cells
hemangiosarcomas.
will be in clusters or individual, neoplastic cells will be
extremely large (>40 microns diameter). and will have
Renal lymphoma
marked cytologic and nuclear atypia (various sizes and
Neoplastic lymphoid cells appear as they do in lymph nodes
shapes of cells, nuclei, and nucleoli) and some cells will
and other organs infiltrated with lymphomatous cells.
contain large cytoplasmic vacuoles (Figs. A23.5 and A23.6).
Sometimes tubules are aspirated concurrently (Fig. A23.7).
The more numerous these abnormalities and the less inflam-
If lymphoma is in the kidneys it will also be located else-
mation present, the more likely the cells are neoplastic. If
where. The only unusual feature of lymphoma in the
only a few of these cytologic abnormalities are identified and
kidneys is the occasional tumor that stimulates erythropoi-
there is inflammation, then the cellular atypia is more likely
etin production resulting in polycythemia. This is not unique
due to dysplasia or hyperplasia than to neoplasia. Correlate
to lymphoma and has been seen with other neoplasms and
results with other data, such as a mass in the trigone region
nonneoplastic renal masses. More typical is a nonregenen-
of the bladder, unresponsive hematuria and age of patient.
erative anemia due to decreased erythropoietin production
TCC can seed and grow in the abdominal incision site used
combined with anemia of chronic inflammatory disease.
for surgical removal of the tumor. A few reports exist of
Transitional cell carcinoma is by far the most common
seeding from fine needle aspiration cytology. but this should
tumor of the urinary bladder and urinary excretory system
not prevent attempts to diagnose the tumor via this means.
of animals, and it can be diagnosed by finding neoplastic
Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) is a proangiogenic
cells in the urine (Figs. A23.4-23.6). Most cases of bladder
peptide used as a marker for urologic and nonurologic
cancer are recognized when the tumor is advanced. and
tumors in humans and has been detected in high concentra-
therefore the prognosis is uniformly poor. Approximately
tions in the urine of dogs with bladder cancer. Although the
20% of dogs have clinically detectable metastases at the time
numbers of dogs were small, one study demonstrated sig-
of clinical diagnosis, 50% actually have metastases and 90%
nificantly higher concentrations of bFGF in dogs with bladder
are expected to develop metastases if the tumor is allowed
t0 progress. Clinical signs include weight loss, wealkness,
tion (UTI). Results are expressed as ng/g creatinine, and the
dysuria (85%), pollakiuria (40%), and incontinence (10%).
median concentration of bFGF was 2.23 in normal dogs. 2.45
Approximately 90% of dogs with epithelial or mesenchymal
in dogs with UTI, and 9.86 in dogs with bladder cancer. Of
tumors of the urinary bladder or urethra have one or more
dogs with cancer 86% could be correctly identified by
abnormalities detected on urinalysis: hematuria (76%).
increased concentrations of bFGF and 90% of dogs with UTI
pyuria (50%), and bacteriuria (28 %). Hematuria is due to
did not have increased concentrations. The commercially
physical disruption of blood vessels, either in the tumor or
available ELISA test kit uses a monoclonal antibody to rec-
from contact and/or invasion of the tumor into adjacent
ognize natural and recombinant human bFGF.
parenchyma.
Another commercially available test is the bladder tumor
Hypercalcemia has been reported with a few tumors of
associated antigen (BTA). The assay detects a glycoprotein
the lower urinary tract. Azotemia is present in only 15% of
antigen complex that is of host basement origin and partly
dogs with bladder or urethral tumors and is most likely due
of tumor origin. The dipstick test was used on 65 dogs. 20
to obstruction of the outflow of urine (postrenal azotemia).
with TCC, 19 healthy controls, and 26 controls. Test sensitiv-
Invasion through the wall of the bladder by the tumor or
rupture of the bladder and production of uroabdomen is
 be 78% and the specificity (dogs without cancer have nega
extremely rare.
tive results) 90%: results are not quantified: they are either
Cytological diagnosis of neoplastic cells in the urine seems
positive or negative. False positive results can be seen with
a logical diagnostic aid but must be interpreted cautiously as
pyuria, hematuria, proteinuria, and glucosuria. When these
inflammation of the urinary tract stimulates hyperplasia and
abnormalities are present the utility of the dipstick test is
dysplasia of transitional epithelium, making the distinction
greatly limited, and if used, the test should be performed in
of hyperplasia from dysplasia or neoplasia difficult. In dogs.
conjunction with cytology and other ancillary tests. The
approximately 30% of TCC can be diagnosed from urine
364
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
ing test in older dogs for bladder cancer; however, cost and
vomiting. electrolyte and fluid imbalances, and hormone
index of suspicion may limit utility.
deficits and or increases. This is caused by accumulation of
Second-generation BTA statistical tests use a monoclonal
nitrogenous waste products and uremic toxins in blood.
antibody to recognize a human complement complex that
is secreted into the urine of humans with bladder cancer.
Prerenal azotemia
When applied to dogs with TCC the results have been nega-
This is recognized when azotemia is noted in blood and
tive, and they were attributed to the lack of crossreactivity
urine specific gravity (USG) is concentrated. To be consid-
of the monoclonal antibody to canine TCC generated
ered concentrated, USG should be greater than 1.030 in
antigens.
dogs, 1.035 in cats, and 1.025 in horses and cattle. Causes 
of prerenal azotemia include any state that results in a
 decreased renal plasma flow: hypovolemia due to dehydra-
Definitions, glossary, and principles
tion, shock, and cardiac insufficiency. Prerenal conditions
are a common cause of azotemia, and if these conditions
Definitions
persist. they can lead to kidney damage and renal
Urea nitrogen (UN)
azotemia.
This is produced in the liver from ammonium and bicar-
bonate, and is excreted from the body via glomerular filtra-
Renal azotemia
tion through the kidneys. Approximately half of the UN
This is recognized when azotemia is coupled with inability
excreted into the tubules is reabsorbed passively in the
to concentrate urine, especially isosthenuric urine, as indi-
proximal tubule and actively by the cells of the collecting
cated by a USG between 1.007 and 1.013. Isosthenuria
ducts. Urea is held in the medullary interstitium. The units
implies that the kidneys are damaged to such an extent that
of serum or plasma [UN] are reported in mg/dL, and as
they are no longer able to concentrate nor dilute urine.
μmol/L, internationally. The conversion factor between
Renal azotemia can be due to acute or chronic renal failure.
these units is: 1 mg/dL × 0.7140 = μmol/L (e.g., 10mg/dL
The defect in renal function may arise from one of several
UN is 7.l μmol/L).
diseases of the glomeruli, tubules, interstitium, renal pelvis.
and, least likely, from within renal blood vessels.
Creatinine (Ct)
This is a breakdown product of muscle creatine and creatine
Postrenal azotemia
phosphate that is excreted via glomerular filtration in the
This is associated with any obstruction to the outflow of
kidneys. Serum or plasma Ct concentration ([Ct]) is not
urine or rupture of urinary bladder. Oliguria or anuria will
increased until approximately 75% of nephons are not fil-
be observed, and any urine specific gravity is possible.
tering adequately. Creatinine concentration is reported in
mg/dL and as μmol/L internationally. The conversion factor
between these units is: 1 mg/dL × 88.4 = μmol/L (e.g., 1 mg/
Nephrons
dL Ct is 88.4 μmol/L). Noncreatinine chromogens, such as
These are the smallest individual anatomic units in the
kidney, and are composed of a glomerulus, tubule, and col-
glucose, ketones, vitamins A and C, carotenes, oxyglobin,
lecting tubule. There are approximately one million glom-
pyruvate, and uric acid, may falsely increase measured cre-
atinine. This occurs most frequently in cows and horses.
eruli per kidney.
Azotemia
Renat disease
This is the most commonly used laboratory indicator of renal
This is classifed as a structural or biochemical lesion in
dysfunction and occurs when the serum concentration of
kidney. If the lesion is focal, it may never produce clinical
lrea nitrogen and/or creatinine concentrations are increased.
problems (such as with the interstitial nephritis caused by
Serum or plasma UN or Ct concentration are not increased
ascarid migration). Renal disease is a continuum that begins
until approximately 75% of nephrons are not filtering ade-
with renal insufficiency and finishes with end-stage renal
quately. Azotemia can be caused by prerenal, renal (glo-
disease.
merular, tubular, interstitial, pelvis), or postrenal problems.
Patietns may be azotemic but are not yet uremic.
Renal insuffciency
This is a state in which nephrons are functionally impaired.
Uremia
but not yet suffciently damaged as to result in clinically
This is the term used when clinical signs are attributed to
apparent disease. Unaffected individual nephrons compen-
azotemia. With progression of renal disease, a clinical state
sate for these losses by hypertrophy, but with progression of
known as "uremia" can develop. Among other things.
disease, enough nephrons become impaired so that they are
uremia results in anorexia, weight loss, depression, stupor.
unable to maintain the health of the animal.
365
SEcTloN Iv Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Renat faiture
with a quiescent urine analysis suggests a glomerular lesion.
This exists when roughly two-thirds of functional renal mass
such as amyloidosis or glomerulonephritis.
is impaired; urine cannot be concentrated adequately and
Stranguria: Refers to straining to urinate.
polyuria, oliguria, or anuria results. When three-quarters of
nephrons are dysfunctional, remaining nephrons cannot
compensate and azotemia is detected.
Principles
Clinical signs associated with renal failure are attributable
The ability of the kidneys to concentrate urine is a good
to a loss of functional renal tissue, and accumulation of
indicator of renal function, loss of this capability is one of
nitrogenous and other waste products in blood. Signs may
the earliest signs of renal failure, preceding azotemia in all
include anemia, vomiting, lethargy. anorexia, weight loss.
species except cats.
vasculitis, glossal and oral ulcers, gastric erosions or ulcers,
Normal urine specific gravity: 1.o0l-l.080 and is
bleeding diatheses, petechiae, thrombosis. gastrointestinal 
 dependent on the hydration status of animal.
tract bleeding. parathyroid hyperplasia, mineralization of
The expected USG of a random urine sample from a
soft tissues, and fibrous osteodystrophy.
healthy animal is: dog 1.020-1.045; cat 1.025-1.050; horse
and bovine 1.020-1.045. The USG must always be consid-
Glossary
ered in conjunction with the hydration status.
Anuria: Refers to a state wherein there is no urine output.
On any random urine sample, an adequate UsG is con-
sidered to be >l.030 in the dog: >l.035 in cat; and >l.025
Dysuria: Describes painful or difficult urination.
in horse and bovine.
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR): The volume of plasma
Dogs are not born with an adult's level of concentrating
filtered by the glomerular capillaries into Bowmans space
e p saa t oi dn iax si au ai ue 
per unit of time. A GFR of 3-6mL/min/kg is normal for
There are no differences in protein, blood, glucose, ketones.
dogs and 2-4mL/min/kg is considered normal in cats. A
or bilirubin based on age.
decrease in GFR can occur due to prerenal, renal or postre-
Hyposthenuria occurs when the kidneys actively
nal causes.
produce urine with a USG <l .007, or with an osmolality less
than that of plasma, e.g., <300 mOsm/kg. Hyposthenuria has
Microalbuminuria: Describes a state in which small quan-
several renal and nonrenal causes, and indicates that the
tities of protein are lost in urine, but are below the limit of
kidneys are healthy enough to actively dilute the plasma
detection of reagent sticks. Microalbuminuria is urinary
ultrafiltrate.
albumin 1-30 mg/dL and albuminuria ("overt albuminuria")
Isosthenuria indicates a USG similar to the specific
 is urine albumin >30mg/dL in urine normalized to a USG
gravity of plasma, i.e., 1.008-1.012 and 1.007-1.013 are
 of 1.0lo. Persistent microalbuminuria may indicate early or
reported in different sources. This USG implies that the
 mild renal disease.
Oliguria: Indicates reduced urine output.
plasma ultrafltrate. Isosthenuric urine and azotemia are
indicative of renal failure and the lesion may be in or involve
Pollakiuria: A term indicating an increased frequency of
the tubules or the medulla.
urination; however, the total volume of urine produced may
Hypersthenuria, or baruria, are two rarely used terms
not be increased. Among other conditions, pollakiuria may
that describe urine with a specific gravity greater than l.013.
be seen with cystitis.
        
Polydipsia (PD): A term denoting an increased volume of
greater than the isosthenuric range.
water is consumed within a 24-hour period; associated with
Differential diagnoses for polyuria and polydipsia
renal failure; multiple other causes. This usually occurs sec-
   i    )
ondary to polyuria caused by the loss of urinary concentrat-
diabetes mellitus, primary or secondary diabetes insipidus.
ing ability. In dogs. polydypsia is considered as drinking
hyperadrenocorticism, hypercalcemia, pyometra, psycho-
>90 mL/kg/day, and in cats >45 mL/kg/day.
adrenocorticism or liver failure). A complete list is in
Polyuria (PU): A term denoting an increased total volume
of urine produced wthin 24 hours. The normal range in dogs
Table 23.4.
Water reabsorption occurs passively/osmotically in the
is 20-40mL/kg/day (1 mL/kg/hr). and in cats. 10-20 mL/
proximal convoluted tubules and descending loop of Henle.
kg/day.
but is actively reabsorbed in the collecting tubules through
Proteinuria: Refers to protein in the urine as detected by
the actions of antidiuretic hormone (ADH).
reagent sticks or sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) protein pre-
Medullary washout—this occurs when the solutes urea
cipitation methods. It is caused by preglomerular, glomeru-
and sodium chloride, located in the interstitium of the renal
lar, or postglomerular casues. Persistent proteinuria coupled
medulla, are decreased. This loss of hypertonicity in the
366
CHAPTER 23 Laboratory Evaluation of Renal Function
medulla results in production of a dilute urine, and the clini-
edema. There may or may not be an azotemia. With
cal signs of PU PD.
nephrotic syndrome, the lesion is in glomeruli, e.g., amyloi-
Creatinine clearance is the volume of plasma that is
dosis or glomerulonephritis.
cleared of creatinine per unit time and can be used to esti-
mate GFR. In dogs essentially loo% of creatinine entering
Other terms, disease conditions, and methods of
the filtrate is excreted (male dogs also secrete a small amount
analyzing renal function
of Ct via the proximal tubules). However, 40-60% of UN is
Chronic progressive familial nephropathy (renal dys-
reabsorbed from the filtrate and the amount reabsorbed
plasia) is one of the most common causes of renal failure
varies with hydration status. Therefore creatinine clearance
-and Aue ui auaaand yany e seu l pue 'saop bunoa u
is an acceptable means to estimate GFR and UN clearance
bred breeds. In severe cases, kidneys are shrunken and
is not.
fibrotic and look like any end-stage kidney disease but they
Acute renal failure (ARF) is generally accompanied by
retain regions of embryonic glomeruli, tubules, and
anuria or oliguria. The onset of acute renal failure is swift.
interstitium.
commonly due to a nephrotoxin that causes necrosis of
Uroabdomen or uroperitoneum is typifed by hypona-
tubules (nephrosis). Acute renal failure is typified by azote-
tremia, hypochloremia, and hyperkalemia. Serum [Ct] and
mia and inability to concentrate urine coupled with hyper-
[UN] are variable, but abdominal fluid [Ct]:serum [Ct]
phosphatemia, variable changes in potassium, a normal to
is ≥ l.5-2:l. This commonly occurs in males due to their
increased PCV, and good body condition. Potassium increased
narrow urethra that becomes obstructed, or in male foals in
 >8 mEq/L can be life-threatening.
which the dorsal bladder wall ruptures during birth or from
Chronic renal failure (CRF) can be due to chronic glo-
being stepped on.
merulonephritis, amyloidoss, chronic interstitial nephritis.
Paradoxical aciduria is a unique situation seen in dairy
chronic pyelonephritis, progressive familial renal dysplasia.
cattle with displaced abomasums, or other animals with
etc. Lab data include azotemia, inability to concentrate
proximal duodenal blockage, and is typifed by profound
urine, and mild nonregenerative anemia, and if the disease
hypochloremia, severe metabolic alkalosis, and acidic urine.
process involves the glomeruli, there may be hypoalbumin-
Transitional cell carcinoma (TcC) is a highly malig-
emia. The onset of CRF is chronic. progressing over months
nant tumor of transitional epithelium and is the most
to years, and the patient has poor to thin body condition.
common tumor of the urinary bladder and the urinary
The etiology is often unknown as the primary event was
excretory system.
months to years ago.
Monitoring renal disease patients over time is advis-
able for purposes of prognostication and for monitoring
Formed elements in urine
Casts may be observed during microscopic examination of
weight of the patient, water intake and urine volume mea-
urine, and suggest tubular disease. They are formed in the
o  [ol u [nn  oad ue n 'aas
loop of Henle and in the distal and convoluted tubules. Rare
monitoring is desired, then specialized studies such as ultra-
hyaline and fine granular casts (1-2/low power field) may
be observed in concentrated urine and are considered
fractional excretion of sodium, monitoring of microprotein-
 normal; however, casts found in dilute urine are considered
uria, clearance studies of inulin, iohexol, radioisotopes, and
abnormal.
renal scintigraphy can be undertaken.
Crystalluria refers to crystals in urine. Nephroliths are
Essentially 1o0% of sodium is reabsorbed from the glo-
stones found in the kidney, while the term urolith indicates
merular ultrafiltrate and therefore less than l% is excreted
the presence of stones in the bladder.
in the urine of animals with normal renal function. If there
Staging renal disease
in the urinary fractional excretion of sodium (>l%) it indi-
The severity of renal disease is graded as 1, 2, 3, or 4 based
cates renal insufficiency or failure. If the fractional excretion
on severity of clinical signs, physical examination results.
of sodium is <l% then prerenal azotemia is indicated.
and laboratory abnormalities. As the stage of renal disease
progresses so does the severity of the laboratory abnor-
Urinary [Protein]:[Ct] Ratio (UPC)
malities and the percentage of animals that have an abnor-
The concentration of protein and creatinine are measured
mality. For example, 20% of azotemic dogs also have mild
in a random urine sample, and urine [protein] is divided by
sud s i is u (ig) udsoyd
urine [Ct]. This is used to quantify the degree of proteinuria,
increases to loo% of dogs in stage 4 renal failure, where the
and to identify what the most likely disease process affecting
serum phosphorus will be markedly increased (>20 mg/dL).
the kidneys is.
The nephrotic syndrome is characterized by protein-
In dogs. a UPC <0.5 is considered normal, 0.5-1 is incon-
uria, hypoproteinemia, hypercholesterolemia, ascites, and
clusive, and >l is considered abnormal.
367
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Urine [Cortisol]:[Ct] Ratio (UCCR)
LeVine D er al. (20l0) The use of pooled vs serial urine samples
Urinary [cortisol] is a good estimate of cortisol production
to measure urine protein:creatinine ratios. Ver Clin Pathol 39:
over the preceding 24 hours, and the UCCR is used to rule
53-6.
out hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease). Of dogs with
Murgier P, Jakins A er al. (2009) Comparison of semiquantitative
-lqnin e pe 'ssaondonaa uaiod an'sds ii
normal UCCR 90% do not have hyperadrenocorticism; 95%
  so u  s o sse on
of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism have increased UCCR;
Patho1 38: 485-92.
but 80% of dogs with nonadrenal disease have increased
Cortadellas O er al. (20l0) Calcium and phosphorus homeostasis in
UCCR. The latter animals are generally sick and stressed, and
 dogs with spontaneous chronic kidney disease at different stages
the finding of an increased UCCR in these individuals is
of severity. J Ver Intern Med 24: 73-9.
considered a false positive result. Creatinine and cortisol are
 Schellenberg S et al. (2008) The effects of hydorocortisone on sys-
measured in a sample of urine collected at home first thing
temic arterial blood pressure and urinary protein excretion in
in the morning.
dogs. J Ver Intern Med 22: 273-81.
Smart L er al. (2009) The effect of hetastarch (670/0.75) on urine
specific gravity and osmolality in the dog. J Ver Intern Med 23:
Urine [Bile Acid]:[Ct] Ratio
388-91.
With increased production, bile acids are excreted in the
Uberti B er al. (2009) Determination of and correlation between
urine. Increased urine [bile acid]:[Ct] ratios have the same
urine protein excretion and urine protein-to-creatinine ratio
diagnostic value as measuring serum [bile acid]. Creatinine
 e su  u d  e  s
and total bile acids, or bile acid components, are measured
AIVR 2009:70:1551-1556
in a random urine sample from a nonfasted dog or cat, a
 Zatelli A er al. (20l0) Evaluation of a urine dipstick test for confir-
ratio is calculated and compared to published data or the
mation or exclusion of proteinuira in dogs. A)VR 7l: 235-40.
reference laboratory's reference interval.
Enzyines
Brobst DF, Carroll RJ, Bayly WM (1 986) Urinary enzyme concentra-
tions in healthy horses. Cormell Ver 76: 299-305.
Acknowledgments
Brunker JD et al. {2009) Indices of urine N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosa-
minidase and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase activities in clini-
cally normal adult dogs. Am J Ver Res 70(2): 297-301.
The author acknowledges the assistance of Drs. Janet Beeler,
Lora-Michiels M er al. (200l) Quantitative and qualitative scinti-
     o 
graphic measurement of renal function in dogs exposed to toxic
Sibley, PHP Department, North Carolina State University, for
doses of gentamicin. Ver Radiol Ultrasound 42: 553-61.
manuscript review and editing: and of Dr. Taryn Sibley. PHP
Raekallio MR er al. (20l0) Early detection of ketoprofen-induced
 Department, North Carolina State University, for compiling
acute kidney injury in sheep as determined by evaluation of
the imagery appendix.
urinary enzyme activities. AJVR 7l: 1246-52.
Sato R er al. (l999) N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase activity in
urine of cows with renal parenchymal lesions. Am J Ver Res 60(4):
410-13.
Suggested Reading
 Smets PMY er al. (2010) Urinary markers in healthy young and aged
dogs and dogs with chronic kidney disease. J Ver Intern Med 24:
Garmer BC, Wiedmeyeer CE (2007) Comparison of a semiquantita-
65-72.
tive point of care assay for the detection of canine microalbumin-
Clin Pathol 36: 240-4.
Grauer GF (2007) Measurement, interpretation and implications of
proteinuria and albuminuria. Ver Clin North Am Sm An Pracr 37:
283-95.
Appendix 23.1
Gray AT, Cohn LA, er al. (2004) The effect of exercise on urinary
albumin excertion in dogs. J Ver Intern Med 18: 52-5.
Aabewi wansAs Aeuun pue sisAeuun
368
CDOO
O
00
80
600
000
00
00
Figure A23.1 Urine sedirment, unstained. There are numerous leukocytes 
Figure A23.4 Urine sedimment, unstained. Note the large cluster of
(small arrow), fewer erythrocytes (large arrow), and two epithelial cells
many pleomorphic epithelial cells on a background of erythrocytes. This 
(arrowhead). Despite the number of white cells, there are no bacteria visible.
dog had a lesion in the trigone of the urinary bladder confirmed a5
A culture of the urine is required to verify there are no bacteria. x400.
transitional cell carcinoma. x400.
8.
8
8
Figure A23.2 The numerous lipid droplets present are frequently noted 
Figure A23.5 Urine sediment, Wright-Giemsa stain. There are many
in feline urine and are suspected to come from renal tubular epithelium 
pleomorphic epithelial cells without any inflammation consistent with
poa pau noy uarsiu ag Aeu aul aueuiis umauun aey ig 
transitional cell carcinorma. Key to the diagnosis is the overall number of
cells, but lipid droplets are variably sized and are in a different plane of
epithelial cells, the variability in sizes and shapes of these cells, and the
focus from cellular elements in the urine due to their lower density. x100.
absence of inflammation. x1000.
89
Figure A23.3 Urine sedimment, unstained. There are numerous
leukocytes and rod-shaped bacteria present, indicating bacterial urinary
tract infection. x400.
369
Figure A23.6 Urine sedirment, Wright-Giemmsa stain. These pleomorphic
Figure A23.8 Urine sediment, unstained. Leukocyte casts (arrow) are
epithelial cells, seen in the absence of inflarmmation, occasionally have 
 quite fragile, seen infrequently, indicate inflarnmation is in renal tubules
large cytoplasmic vacuoles containing pink material characteristic of
and therefore suggests pyelonephritis. x400.
 transitional cell carcinoma5. x1000.
Figure A23.7 Kidney aspirate, Wright-Giermsa stain. A renal tubule i5
Figure A23.9 Urine sedirnent, unstained. Erythrocyte casts (arrow) are
surrounded by numerous intermediate to large lymmphoid cells with one 
fragile and infrequently seen. When present, they indicate hemorrhage
mitotic figure (arrow); diagnosis is renal lymphoma. x500.
within the renal tubules. x400.
370
Figure A23.10 Urine sediment, unstained. Note the cellular casts and
Figure A23.12 Urine sedirment, unstained. The granular cast i5
bilirubin crystal (arrow) present. x400.
progressing from coarse to finely granular; the distinction is not imnportant,
the critical factor is that these type of casts indicate an active tubular
lesion when they are numerous and if urine is not concentrated. x400.
Figure A23.11 Urine sediment, unstained. The coarse granular cast
Figure A23.13 Urine sedirment, unstained. These fine granular casts
(arrow) shown here is seen most frequently with a toxic insult (nephrosis)
(arrows) occur under the sarme circumstances as coarse granular cast5.
and can be caused by renal ischemmia. x400.
x100
Figure A23.14 Urine sedirment, sedi-stain. The mnultiple granular casts present at (a) low power (x100) and (b) at high power (x400) were found in
urine with a specific gravity of 1 .008, indicating hyposthenuria and active tubular disease (nephrosis).
371
Figure A23.15 Unstained urine sediment with a hyaline cast (arrow).
Figure A23.17 Urine sediment, unstained. The waxy cast (arrow)
These casts can be seen in low numbers in healthy patients that have 
depicted here has sharp. linear edges with blunt ends and has a brittle 
concentrated urine; they also are associated with proteinuria (particularly
 appearance. When seen, waxy casts indicate prolonged periods of
the nephrotic syndrorme). x400.
 decreased tubular flow, most likely due to chronic renal lesions. x400.
Figure A23.16 Urine sediment, unstained. Note the lipid (fatty) cast.
Figure A23.18 Note the many crystals with a thorn-apple appearance
X400.
typical of arnmonium biurate, which can be seen in health in English 
bulldogs and Dalmations and are also associated with portosystemic
 shunts and severe liver failure. Clinical chernistry should be performed to 
identify low BUN, glucose, cholesterol, and albumin confirming decreased 
 5ynthesis of these substances by the liver
372
Figure A23.19 These variably sized green calculi located in the renal
 pelvis are nephroliths. This dog had a portosystemic shunt as well as the
of mmany rod bacteria indicate bacterial overgrowth, as evidenced by the
 arnmonium biurate crystals seen on sediment analysis in Figure A23.18.
lack of leukocytes. x400.
9
Figure A23.20 Urine sediment, unstained. Note the magnesium
Figure A23.22 Urine sediment, unstained. The many crystals
arnmonium phosphate crystals (arrows) and the prisr-like appearance.
(arrowhead) depicted here have a Maltese cross appearance typical of
These are the most cormmon crystals seen in cats and dogs. In clogs, they
calcium oxalate dihydrate. These crystals are seen in neutral to acidic
 are associated with bacterial urinary tract infection. x400.
urine. They can occasionally be seen in normal urine although when seen
persistently are a clue to investigate hypercalcermic disorders. These 
crystals can be seen alone or with calciur oxalate monohydrate in
ethylene glycol toxicity. There are also occasional sperr (arrow) present.
x100.
373
Figure A23.23 Urine sedirment, unstained. Note the calcium oxalate
Figure A23.25 Urine sediment, unstained under polarized light. Note
dlihydlrate crystal at high power. x400.
the many "picket-fence" calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals seen with
ethylene glycol toxicity.
Figure A23.24 Urine sedirnent, unstained. These calcium oxalate 
Figure A23.26 Urine sediment, unstained. This cluster of crystals is 
monohydrate crystals shown here are present individually and in 
bilirubin, which can be seen with hermolysis, hepatocellular disease, or 
 aggregate. If these crystals are found in a patient with acute renal failure.
intra or extra-hepatic cholestasis. The cellular elerments present are also
they are diagnostic for ethylene glycol intoxication. Intoxication can be 
 stained with bilirubin. x400.
 pue neloso pae e io 'ly isat lon auaya aun ym pauon
anion gap. x400.
374
Figure A23.27 Urine sedirment, unstained. Numerous tyrosine crystals 
Figure A23.29 Urine sediment, unstained. Note the sulfonamide
(arrow) are present. These crystals are associated with hepatic disease.
 crystals (arrow). Nephrotoxic drugs mmay lead to the appearance of bizarre
crystals in urine. x400.
188.
Figure A23.30 Urine sediment, unstained. Note the calcium carbonate
 contrast crystal. These can be seen after intravenous contrast studies are
crystals seen commonly in horses, rabbits and guinea pigs. predominantly
performed. x400.
in the spherical forms. x400.
375
Figure A23.31 Urine sedirnent, unstained. The cystine crystals (arrow)
Figure A23.33 Urine sedimment, unstained. Note the pseudohyphae and
seen here are always an abnormal finding and indicate cystinuria, which 
budding yeast forms in a pet with confirmed Candida albicans cystitis.
is due to a tubular defect heritable in English bulldogs, Mastiffs,
 These can also be contarminants; therefore, correlate presence of
chihuahuas, dachshunds, Newfoundlands, Australian cattle dogs, and 
 organisms with presence or absence of inflarnmation and clinical findings.
 Ammerican Staffordshire terriers. x400.
x500.
Figure A23.32 Urine sedirnent, unstained. The large, cylindrical shaped 
Figure A23.34 Urine sediment, unstained. Note the pseudohyphae and 
budding yeast structure here is typical of Cynicfomyces guttulatus. The
budding yeast forms in a young golden retriever with an incompetent
 sil uoeuueuon jeaat on anp auun ui uaas ag uen isea sanwoiu
 urethral sphincter treated chronically with antibiotics and subsequently
yeast is seen uncomnmonly, is regarded as non-pathogenic, and can be
dliagnosed with Candida albicans cystitis. x500.
juasaid osle ane eaineg pou Auen sanay lggen jo uosanui ot anp uaas
within the background. x1000.
376
Figure A23.35 Urine sediment, Wright-Giemnsa stain. There are
Figure A23.37 Urine sedirment, unstained. The pine pollen (arrow)
numerous budding yeast present confirmed on culture as Candida
 shown here can be commonly seen in free-catch urine specimens. x400.
albicans. These organisms are larger than bacteria and smaller than red 
blood cells, despite the lack of cells in this field for size comparison. This
feline patient was a newly dliagnosed dliabetic with a history of mmultiple 
Figure A23.36 Urine sediment, unstained. The glass fragment (arrow) seen here may be from urine specimen containers or environmental
 contamination. It is irnportant that this and other debris not be mistaken for crystals of pathologic significance. x400.
377
24
Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes
Andrea A. Bohn
Colorado State University
Electrolytes are present in all intracellular and extracellular
body weight, with about two-thirds in ICF and one-third in
body fluids, but we typically measure their concentration in
ECF. Approximately one-quarter of ECF is within the vas-
blood, plasma, or serum. The serum electrolyte concentra
culature while three-quarters is present in the interstitium.
tion may not accurately reflect the balance of that particular
Water balance between different compartments is depen-
electrolyte within the whole body, especially for electrolytes
dent on osmotic pressures. As the most abundant cation of
that are predominantly intracellular. Sodium and chloride
plasma, sodium, along with its associated anions, is the
are the electrolytes whose concentrations are greatest in
major determinant of extracellular osmolality. (For further
extracellular fluid (ECF). The concentration of potassium,
information on osmolality, see Box 24.1.) Sodium pumps
calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium are highest in intra-
maintain concentration differences across cell membranes.
cellular fluid (ICF). Maintaining the intra- and extracellular
but sodium can freely cross vascular walls, equilibrating
concentration of each electrolyte within narrow limits is
between interstitial and vascular spaces. Serum concentra-
essential to life.
q ao  ass o   n 
 Intake of all of the electrolytes is via the oral route. The
sodium content.
Water and sodium regulation is associated with maintain-
electrolyte levels are the gastrointestinal (Gl) system and the
ing normal blood volume and osmolality. Sensors of osmo-
kidneys. Additional regulatory mechanisms as well as the
lality and vascular pressure result in changes of sodium and/
consequences and causes of imbalances for each individual
or water handling by the kidney. As little as a 1-2% increase
electrolyte will be covered when each electrolyte is discussed
 in plasma osmolality will be detected by osmoreceptors in
in more detail.
the hypothalamus, resulting in vasopressin (antidiuretic
hormone) secretion from the posterior pituitary. Alterna-
tively, a perceived deficit in blood volume of l0% will result
Sodium
 in vasopressin release regardless of osmolality. Vasopressin
enhances water reabsorption in the renal collecting duct to
Sodium has many important functions, including maintain-
replenish vascular water. Osmoreceptor cells are also
ing normal blood pressure and volume and maintaining
involved in the sensation of thirst.
normal function of muscles and nerves. These functions are
If arterial and atrial baroreceptors sense elevated blood
dependent on keeping plasma sodium concentrations within
a narrow range. The concentration of sodium in the blood
thalamus to inhibit vasopressin release. They also act to
is predominantly a balance between what is consumed in
decrease sodium reabsorption in the distal nephron. The
food and drink and what is excreted in urine. Only a small
juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney are baroreceptors that
amount is normally lost through stool and sweat, but these
detect low blood pressure. These cells activate the renin-
routes can become more important in certain disease or
angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) by secreting renin.
physiological states, depending on species.
Renin cleaves angiotensinogen to angiotensin I which is
The regulation of sodium cannot be discussed without also
then converted to angiotensinogen II by angiotenin convert-
discussing water balance since these substances are intri-
ing enzyme. Angiotensinogen II causes the release of aldo-
cately tied together. Water comprises approximately 60% of
sterone from the adrenal glands, increases secretion of
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
378
CHAPTER 24 Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes
Box 24.1 Explanation of osmolality.
Box 24.2 Physical and biochemical
parameters used in the assessment of
Osmolality
hydration status.
 Solutes = substances that are dissolved in plasma (electrolytes,
proteins, etc.)
Assessment of body water content
 Osmolality = the concentration of solutes in plasma (only the
Physical exam:
number matters, not size or weight)
 Skin turgor = interstitial tissue consistency 
 osmolality = concentration of osmotically active particles per
Capillary Refill Time = peripheral vascular blood flow
kilogr am solvent
Change in body weight
- osmolarity = concentration of osmotically active particles in one 
Biochemically:
liter of solution
 PCV and plasma protein concentration
In plasma, osmolality and osmolarity are nearly equal and can
Serum urea concentration
 be used interchangeably.
Serum sodium concentration 
Water will flow from low to high osmolar solutions
Osmolality is measured by determining either the freezing
point depression or vapor-point elevation of a solution compared
to water.
 Osmolality can be estimated by a calculation:
2[Na] + [glucose mg/d]/18 + [urea mg/dl]/2.8 = osm 
Calculated osmolality is typically about 300-310 mOsm/liter,
Box 24.3 Assessment of dehydration.
approximately 10mOsm less than the measured value in a
healthy state.
Isontonic dehydration: Proportional loss of NaCl and water-
some diarrheas and renal diseases 
Osmolar Gap =Measured Osm - Calculated Osm;
[Na] and [Cl] do not change 
normally ~ 10 m0sm
PCV and [Plasma protein] increase
No change in osmolality: water does not shift between ICF and 
 An increase in the osmolar gap indicates the presence of osmolar
ECF, therefore ECF volume decreases
substances not included in the calculation (mannitol, ethylene 
Hypertonic dehydration: (ECF becomes hypertonic)
glycol, etc.)
Water loss > NaCl loss 
 Diabetes insipidus
Water deprivation/hypodypsia
Respiratory loss with high temperature/panting
vasopressin, and stimulates thirst centers. Aldosterone
Osmotic diuresis
acts on the renal cortical collecting tubules to reabsorb
Diarrhea
sodium. The reabsorption of sodium is coupled with either
[Na] and [Cl] increase 
the secretion of potassium (another very important function
PCV and [Plasma protein] increase
of aldosterone) or the absorption of chloride to maintain
Osmmolality increases; water shifts from ICF to ECF to maintain 
electroneutrality.
ECF volume
When evaluating serum sodium concentration, the ani-
mal's total body water must be taken into consideration. Is
Hypotonic dehydration: (ECF is hypotonic)
there clinical or biochemical evidence of low body water
NaCI loss > water loss
(dehydration, Boxes 24.2 and 24.3) or does it appear normal
 Secretory diarrhea
Vomiting
or, possibly, increased? An increase in serum sodium con-
centration can be due to more sodium, less water, or a
 Third-space loss 
combination of causes. A decrease in serum sodium concen-
Equine sweat
tration can be due to less sodium, more water, or a combina-
[Na] and [Cl] decrease
 PCV and [Plasma protein] increase 
tion of causes.
Osmmolality decreases; water shifts from ECF to ICF leading to
Hypernatremia
volume depletion 
Hypernatremia (Fig. 24.1) is most commonly associated with
an imbalance in body water. This can be due to decreased
concurrent protein loss and/or anemia.
intake or loss of water that exceeds the loss of electrolytes.
379
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Serum Na+
Excess
Water Deficit
Did the
Was the
 animal get
Decreased Intake
animal
Water Loss > Na
into
given
something
hypertonic
salty?
fuids I.V.?
Frozen
Renal
15
or
 Spilled
Monitor water
Water
intake
Fever
Hyperaldosteronism
Source
(Neurological
Panting
(Rare)
Deficit,
Hyperventilation
Weakness)
Decreased intake can be due to water deprivation, defective
Pseudohyponatremia can occur when sodium concentra-
thirst response, or a physical inability to drink. Loss of water
tion is measured in whole plasma and not just plasma water
can occur through insensible losses (respiratory or skin
because sodium is only dissolved in the water component of
losses) or loss from the kidney or gastrointestinal systems.
plasma. Marked hyperlipidemia or hyperproteinemia cause
  s  o o   m
volume displacement and decrease the percent of serum or
lost than electrolytes. Pure water loss occurs when there is
plasma that is water. If the method used to measure sodium
an increase in insensible fluid losses, heat stroke as an
lses whole plasma, an artifactually low sodium concentration
example, or when the kidney cannot conserve water, as
may be obtained, although measured plasma osmolality is
with central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. In many
normal. Ion-selective electrodes measure sodium concentra-
instances of water loss, electrolytes are also lost, as with
tion in just the water component of plasma and pseudohypo-
vomiting. diarrhea (osmotic diarrhea, ruminal acidosis), or
natremia will not occur using this method of measurement.
diuresis. Animals that lose electrolytes with water will
Translocational hyponatremia is due to the presence of
become hypovolemic. With pure water loss or inadequate
other substances in the plasma causing hyperosmolality.
intake of water, the total body sodium content is normal,
Substances that readily cross cell membranes, like urea, will
and intracellular water is drawn into the extracellular spaces.
not cause translocational hyponatremia. Tonic substances.
maintaining plasma volume (isovolemic hypernatremia).
osmolar substances that cannot easily cross cell membranes.
Sodium excess is an uncommon cause of hypernatremia
will draw water from the ICF to the higher osmolality of the
and concurrent water restriction or lack of urine concentra-
ECF, diluting out the sodium that is present. If glucose
tion is usually present. Hypernatremia can occur either by
cannot enter cells due to the lack of insulin or its actions.
ingesting excess salt or iatrogenically with the administration
hyperglycemia can result in translocational hyponatremia.
of hypertonic fluids. Decreased excretion of sodium can also
 In this case, measured and calculated osmolality will be
lead to sodium excess; this can occur with the rare condition
similar. Exogenous substances (mannitol, ethylene glycol)
of hyperaldosteronism. These animals will become hypervol-
 that cause translocational hyponatremia will result in an
emic. If excess sodium is present in ECF intracellular water
increase in osmolar gap.
will shift to the ECF and cells will become dehydrated.
Hypoosmolar hyponatremia occurs because of either
increased water content or decreased sodium content.
Hyponatremia
Increased water content occurs if there is impaired renal
Hyponatremia (Fig. 24.2) may be either due to sodium loss
excretion of free water or dilute urine or if water intake
that exceeds water loss or an increase in body water. Hypo-
exceeds the maximal renal excretory capacity. Excess water
natremia is associated with hypoosmolality except in cases
intake is rare, but can occur with psychogenic polydipsia.
of pseudohyponatremia or in translocational hyponatremia
With excess intake, urine osmolality as well as plasma osmo-
in which high numbers of alternative osmoles are present.
lality will be low.
380
CHAPTER 24 Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes
Serum Na+
Excess Water?
Sodium Deficit
(Water Retention > Na)
Endogenous
(Na Loss > Water)
Shifts
Inappropriate
Excess
Renal
GI
Secretion of
Sodium-
-p4
Loss
Loss
ADH
Poor Fluids
Spacing of
(Rare)
Z'AT
Sweating
Body Fluids
in Horses
Plasma
Hypovolemia/Edema
 Hyperosmolality
-Congestive Heart Failure
from Substance
Hepatic Fibrosis
 Other Than Na
-Nephrotic Syndrome
(Water shifts from
iCF to ECF}
Figure 24.2 Diagnostic pathways for determining the cause of hyponatremia.
Decreased renal excretion of free water in response to
Box 24.4 The sodium potassium ratio. A
perceived hypovolemia can lead to an increase in total body
decrease in the ratio is associated with
water. This occurs due to third-spacing (accumulation of
hypoadrenocorticism, as well as several
fluid within body cavities) of fluid associated with congestive
heart failure, cirrhosis of the liver, or nephrotic syndrome.
other diseases.
Sodium Potassium Ratio (Reference: 27:1 to 40:1)
mia, resulting in increased reabsorption of water. Impaired
The sodium potassium ratio is often reported and has been used
renal excretion of water due to renal failure can also lead to
in the diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism, but is not specific for
hyponatremia with hypervolemia
any disease process. Decreases in the ratio <27: 1 can be due to
Hypovolemia typically accompanies loss of sodium from
the body. Sodium is rarely lost from the body without some
sodium, or a combination of these changes; elevated potassium
water, but to become hyponatremic there either has to be
is the most common reason
loss of hypertonic fluid (more sodium lost than water) or
Hypoadrenocorticism should always be a differential with a
isotonic or hypotonic fluid loss resulting in volume depletion
decreased Na: K ratio BUT not the only one.
which stimulates drinking and renal water retention, dilut-
Other diseases/conditions commonly associated with low Na : K
ing the remaining body fluids. Hypovolemic, hypoosmolar.
ratios include:
hyponatremia can result from gastrointestinal loss (vomit-
● Renal/urinary tract disease.
ing. diarrhea), renal loss (hypoadrenocorticism, prolonged
· Gastrointestinal disease; parasitism in dogs.
diuresis), third-space loss (body cavity effusions), or sweat-
◆Body cavity effusions.
ing in horses. Primary hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's
 Low Na : K ratios have also been reported with:
disease) is associated with aldosterone deficiency, resulting
Diabetes, pancreatitis, cardiorespiratory disease, pyometra,
in decreased renal reabsorption of sodium and increased
disseminated neoplasia, grade Ill patellar luxation, mushroom
retention of potassium in cortical collecting tubules (Box
poisoning. behavior problem, ocular disease, skin disease.
24.4).
Na : K ratios <15 are more commonly associated with
 It is important to keep in mind that an animal may be
hypoadrenocorticism in dogs.
normonatremic in many of the conditions listed above
A small percentage of dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism
 despite being dehydrated or hypervolemic if there is a net
have a normal ratio.
loss or gain of isotonic fluids or if an equilibrium has been
 The ratio is often normal in dogs with secondary
reached. Hypovolemia not only stimulates vasopressin
hypoadrenocorticism (low ACTH).
release, but triggers the RAAS which leads to sodium
Sources: 12-18.
retention.
381
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
sodium concentration, bicarbonate concentration should
Chloride
be evaluated and a blood gas analysis may be indicated
(Chapter 23).
Chloride is the major anion in the ECF and, similar to
sodium, chloride is important in the transport of electrolytes
Hyperchloremia
and water. Chloride also serves as a conjugate anion in acid
If the degree of hyperchloremia is proportional to concur-
base metabolism. To maintain electroneutrality chloride
rent hypernatremia. (
consider the same differentials as
either moves in the same direction of the positively charged
hypernatremia. Hyperchloremia is usually associated with a
sodium or exchanges with the negatively charged bicarbon-
wa ter deficit.
ate ions. When evaluating an abnormality in serum chloride
Alternatively. hyperchloremia can be related to hypobi-
concentration, it is important to compare chloride levels
carbonatemia. Loss of bicarbonate can occur from the GI
with sodium levels and to the animal's acid base status. If
tract with diarrhea, loss of saliva in cattle which contains a
abnormalities in chloride concentration appear to be in pro-
high bicarbonate concentration, or vomiting intestinal con-
portion to abnormalities in sodium concentration (Box
tents as can occur with intestinal obstruction. Renal loss of
24.5), differentials to consider are similar to those given for
bicarbonate occurs with proximal or distal tubular acidosis.
hyponatremia or hypernatremia above. If the change in
 In response to a respiratory alkalosis, there is decreased renal
chloride concentration appears greater than a change in
conservation of bicarbonate, resulting in retention of
chloride.
Artifactual increases in serum chloride concentration can
 Box 24.5 Using sodium to correct chloride
Ion selective electrodes are not specific for chloride and, if
concentration in the analysis of chloride
bromide or iodide is present, they will be measured as chlo-
abnormalities.
ride, causing a false elevation in chloride concentration.
Correction of chloride for water imbalance
Hypochloremia
Can the abnormality in chloride be attributed to the water
 If the degree of hypochloremia is proportional to the degree
imbalance that is affecting sodium concentration?
of hyponatremia (Box 24.5), the same differentials listed for
This can be estimated by correcting chloride proportionally
hyponatremia apply.
with the sodium concentration. The middle of the reference 
If chloride is decreased to a greater degree than sodium,
interval can be used as the "normal" sodium value. Divide this
differentials related to metabolic alkalosis must be consid-
value by the measured sodium concentration to arrive at the
ered. In the process of secreting HCl into the stomach, serum
factor with which to multiply the measured chloride
chloride is decreased and serum bicarbonate is increased.
concentration. The corrected chloride concentration can then be
These changes are normally reversed when hydrogen and
comp ared to the reference interval for chloride.
chloride ions and water are reabsorbed in the intestines. If
gastric fluid is lost due to vomiting or sequestered due to a
 Normal sodium/Measured sodium ×Measured chloride
displaced abomasum, pyloric obstruction, or functional
= Corrected chloride
obstruction, serum chloride will remain low and bicarbonate
Examples:
Na = 164mEq/L
(reference
will remain elevated
134-144mEg/L:
Serum chloride levels decrease when bicarbonate concen-
middle = 139)
trations increase in the compensatory response to chronic
Cl = 136mEq/L
(reference
 respiratory acidosis.
105-125mEq/L)
139/164 x 136 = 115
Therefore, Cl shifts are due to same 
 process as Na shifts.
Potassium
Na = 124mEq/L
(reference
 Potassium is a major intracellular cation that plays an impor-
134-144mEq/L:
middle = 139)
tant role in resting cell membrane potential. Clinical signs
Cl = 75mEq/L
associated with abnormal serum potassium concentrations
(reference
105-125mEq/L)
manifest as cardiac and skeletal muscle dysfunction and
hyperkalemia can have life-threatening effects on cardiac
139/124 x 75 = 84
The corrected chloride concentration is
conduction. Therefore, it is important to maintain serum
 still markedly outside of the reference
potassium concentrations within narrow limits. Total body
interval. Bicarbonate is expected to be
increased.
potassium is a balance between what is ingested (loo%) and
what is excreted from the kidneys (normally ~90-95%) and
382
CHAPTER 24 Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes
Serum K+
Translocation
Increased K+ Load
between ICF & ECF
Decreased Renal
-Metabolic Acidosis
Excretion
-Insulin Deficiency
Oliguric / Anuric Renal Failure
-Severe Tissue Injury
Urethral Obstruction
Ruptured Urinary Bladder
Hypoadrenocorticism
Decreased Renal Tubular
Flow from Hypovolemia
 In vitro artifacts
-Gastrointestinal Disease
-Hemolysis
-Body Cavity Effusions
-Thrombocytosis
-Delayed Serum Removal
-EDTA Contamination
Figure 24.3 Diagnostic pathways for determining the cause of hyperkalemia
colon (normally ~5-10%). The concentration of ECF (serum)
is thought to be the reason for elevated serum potassium
potassium is also reliant on the translocation of potassium
    i os 
between the ECF and ICF. Less than 5% of total body potas-
gastrointestinal disease. Hypovolemia and hyponatremia
sium is present in the ECF; therefore serum potassium con-
become more severe with repeated drainage of body cavity
centration is an unpredictable representation of total body
effusions, and hyperkalemia is more commonly seen with
potassium content.
effusions that have been repeatedly drained. The gastroin-
testinal disease that is most commonly associated with
Hyperkalemia
hyperkalemia is severe whipworm infestation.
Hyperkalemia (Fig. 24.3) occurs if there is an increased
Translocation between ECF and ICF plays a large role in
potassium load, a decrease in potassium excretion, or a shift
maintaining serum potassium concentrations. A condition
of potassium from ICF to ECF. Increased ingestion of potas-
that moves potassium from the ICF to ECF causing hyper-
 sium is unlikely to result in hyperkalemia unless there is a
kalemia is the movement of acid into cells with metabolic
concurrent decrease in renal excretion. An increase in potas-
acidosis. Experimentally, this has been reproduced only with
sium load can occur iatrogenically and can result in death
nonanion gap metabolic acidosis. Since insulin is important
when fluids containing high concentrations of potassium are
in normal movement of potassium from the ECF to ICF
mistakenly given.
insulin deficiency can result in hyperkalemia. Given the
Decreased renal excretion of potassium is a common cause
high concentration of intracellular potassium, potassium
of hyperkalemia and can result from renal or postrenal dis-
released from injured cells can increase its concentration in
eases of the urinary tract. In anuric or oliguric renal failure
the ECF, especially if there is also decreased renal excretion.
the kidney itself does not have the capacity to remove excess
A large degree of tissue injury is typically necessary to result
potassium from the body. Postrenal processes that result in
in hyperkalemia, which can occur with tumor lysis syn-
decreased removal of urine from the body such as urethral
drome, rhabdomyolysis, or severe tra uma.
obstruction or ruptured urinary bladder can also result in
 Pseudohyperkalemia occurs if large amounts of potassium
hyperkalemia.
leak out of cells during or after blood is drawn. Platelets
Aldosterone acts to increase serum sodium and decrease
contain abundant intracellular potassium that is released
serum potassium concentrations by reabsorbing sodium and
upon activation. Blood clotting. therefore, can result in an
excreting potassium in the renal cortical collecting tubules.
elevation in serum potassium concentration, especially if a
Aldosterone deficiency results in decreased renal excretion
thrombocytosis is present. Reference intervals for serum
of potassium and hypoadrenocorticism is commonly associ-
potassium are typically about 0.5meq/L higher than for
ated with hyperkalemia and hyponatremia (Box 24.4).
   n    
Potassium renal excretion is decreased with a decreased
cytes. The amount of potassium in erythrocytes varies with
tubular flow rate which can occur with hypovolemia. This
species and even breed. Horses, pigs. and cattle have high
383
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Serum K+
Decreased Intake
Translocation
or
between ICF & ECF
Loss
K-Poor Fluids I.V.?
-Hyperinsulinism
-Alkalosis
Renal
GI
-Chronic Renal Failure
-Gastric Vomiting
-Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis
-Small Intestinal Diarrhea
-Post-Obstruction Diuresis
-Diabetic Ketoacidosis
-Diuretics
Figure 24.4 Diagnostic pathways for determining the cause of hypokalemia
erythrocyte potassium concentrations. Cats and dogs have
predominant cations of ECF are sodium, potassium, calcium,
lower erythrocyte potassium except for the Akita and other
and magnesium and the predominant anions are chloride.
Japanese dog breeds.
bicarbonate, plasma proteins, organic acid ions, phosphate.
 False elevations in potassium also occur if a sample has
and sulfate. The number of unmeasured anions is greater
been contaminated with potassium EDTA. In this case.
than the number of unmeasured cations, and the difference
calcium and magnesium should also be very low.
between these is called the anion gap. The greatest change
in the anion gap is when an elevation occurs due to an
Hypokalemia
increase of organic acids in the circulation. The anion gap.
Hypolkalemia (Fig. 24.4) is one of the more common elec-
therefore, is important in determination of the acid-base
trolyte disturbances in critically ill veterinary patients.
status of an animal (Chapter 25). The anion gap is essentially
although a definitive cause cannot always be identified.
Used to determine the cause of decreased blood bicarbonate
Hypokalemia may be due to decreased intake, increased
    i o s
excretion or loss, shifts between the ECF and ICF, or (often)
acidosis during a mixed acid-base disorder in which bicar-
a combination of these. Decreased intake from diet can
bonate may be normal or increased.
contribute to hypokalemia, but is usually not a cause on its
An indirect method is used to calculate the anion gap (Box
own. Hypokalemia can be caused iatrogenically with
24.6). The calculation is based on the law of electroneutral-
potassium-poor fluids.
ity (The number of positive charges need to equal the
 Loss of potassium occurs from the gastrointestinal or renal
number of negative charges in the body). The cations and
systems. Vomiting and small intestinal diarrhea can result in
anions that are considered "measured" are (a) sodium and
hypokalemia. Renal losses can occur for a variety of reasons.
potassium and (b) chloride and bicarbonate, respectively.
Hypokalemia associated with chronicrenal failure occurs more
The anion gap is the difference between these anions and
commonlyin cats. Distal renal tubularacidosis, postobstructive
cations as illustrated in Figure 24.5.
diuresis, diabetic ketoacidosis, and diuretic administration all
Since cations rarely change enough to affect the anion
can lead to increased potassium excretion and hypokalemia.
 gap, a decrease in bicarbonate has to be accompanied by
Hyperaldosteronism is a rare ca use of hypokalemia .
either an increase in unmeasured anions or a decrease in
 Increased movement of potassium from the ECF to ICF
 chloride to keep the equation equal and to maintain elec-
can cause hypokalemia. This can be due to an excess of
troneutrality (Figs. 24.6 and 24.7). Unmeasured anions that
insulin or a glucose infusion or because of alkalosis. Cate-
have the most affect on anion gap are the endogenous prod-
cholamines can also cause a shift of potassium from ECF to
lcts lactate, ketones, and uremic acids, as well as the exog-
ICF with pain, sepsis, or trauma.
enous substances salicylate and the metabolites of ethylene
glycol toxicity. Lactic acidosis is produced during hypoxia
Anion gap
and anaerobic metabolism. Keto acids are produced when
there is a negative energy balance and metabolism switches
We measure several anions and cations in the blood, but
from primarily glycolysis to lipolysis. Uremic acids are phos-
there are many others that are not routinely measured. The
phates, sulfates, and organic acids that are no longer ade-
384
CHAPTER 24 Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes
Cations
Anions
Sodium
Chloride
Bicarbonate
Potassium
Anion Gap
UC口
PUA
Anion gap is the difference between UA and Uc (definition).
Anion gap is the difference between Na&K and Cl&HcO , (calculation).
Figure 24.5 llustration of why the difference between measured cations and measured anions is equal to the difference between unmeasured anion5
(UA) and unmeasured cations (UC), or anion gap
are stored in bone. Maintaining appropriate circulating con-
 Box 24.6 Calculation of the anion gap.
 centrations of these electrolytes is largely dependent on hor-
monal control. Regulatory hormones are shared by these
Anion gap calculation
electrolytes, with magnesium regulation being less well
Given the law of electroneutrality (where Uc is unmeasured
understood. The main hormones that function to maintain
cations and UA is unmeasured anions):
normal calcium and phosphorus levels are calcitonin, para-
thyroid hormone (PTH), and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (cal-
Nat +K+ +UC+ =Cl- +HCOs + UA
citriol or vitamin D).
Subtracting UC+ and the anions Cl & HCO-s from both sides:
Calcitonin is produced by thyroid parafollicular cells (C-
(Na+ +K+)-(CI- +HCO)=UA- -UC+
release is inhibited by hypocalcemia. The main function of
 calcitonin is to limit postprandial hypercalcemia by inhibit-
Rewriting the equation:
ing osteoclastic bone resorption and decreasing reabsorption 
of calcium and phosphorus by the kidney tubules. Its overall
Anion Gap =UA- - UC+ =Nat + K+ - Cl- -HCO;
effect is to decrease serum calcium and phosphorus concen-
trations (Fig. 24.8).
Parathyroid hormone is produced by chief cells in the
parathyroid gland and is the principle hormone in fine.
quately filtered because of decreased glomerular filtration
minute-to-minute blood calcium regulation. It is released in
rate (GFR). For further utilization of the anion gap. see
response to hypocalcemia and its release is inhibited by
Chapter 25.
elevated calcium levels and vitamin D. Parathyroid hormone
acts to increase the activity of vitamin D, increase calcium
and phosphorus reabsorption from bone, and increase
Calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium
 calcium while decreasing phosphorus reabsorption by the
kidneys. Because of its potent phosphaturic action. the
Calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium are required for vital
overall effect of PTH is to increase serum calcium and
extra- and intracellular functions. Like potassium and in
decrease serum phosphorus concentrations (Fig. 24.8).
contrast to sodium and chloride, intracellular concentrations
Vitamin D results from cholecalciferol production in the
of calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium are higher than
liver, where it is metabolized to calcidiol. Calcidiol, under
extracellular concentrations. As with the other electrolytes.
the influence of PTH, becomes activated to calcitriol in the
their intake is by ingestion and the regulation of their blood
kidney. The activation of calcitriol is influenced by serum
concentration involves the kidneys and gastrointestinal
calcium, phosphorus, PTH, and calcitriol concentrations
tract. Bone is another essential player in regulation, as the
and the effects of calcium and calcitriol concentrations on
majority of total body calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium
PTH release. Vitamin D predominantly acts to increase the
385
Non-Anion Gap (Secretional) Metabolic Acidosis
Cations
Anions
Sodium
Chloride
Bicarbonate
Potassium
Anion Gap
UC 
DUA
UA"- UC+ =Na++ K+-CI(
HCO
Anion gap does not change.
Figure 24.6 llustration of why hyperchloremia and the resultant hypobicarbonatemmia do not result in a change in anion gap during secretional
metabolic acidosis (compare to Figure 24.5).
Anion Gap (Titrational) Metabolic Acidosis
Cations
Anions
Sodium
 Chloride
 Bicarbonate
Potassium
Anion Gap
UC 
UA
Organic acid (H+A') is added to the system:
UA" - UC+ = Na+ + K+ 
HcO
A
H
H+ is buffered by Hco, ', leaving behind an unmeasured
anion, increasing the anion gap. Chloride does not change.
Figure 24.7 llustration of how addition of organic acid increases the anion gap while bicarbonate is cecreased during titrational metabolic acidosis
(compare to Figure 24.5).
386
CHAPTER 24 Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes
absorption of calcium and phosphorus from the gastrointes-
e a an s (  g (qu)
tinal tract. Its overall action is to increase both serum calcium
hormonally regulated fraction that cormprises approximately
and phosphorus concentrations (Fig. 24.8).
50% of total calcium. Measuring the concentration of iCa is
centrations are significant or if calcitonin, PTH, and vitamin
Calcium
 D concentrations are appropriate. Ionized calcium is not
routinely included in serum chemistry panels because it is
Why is calcium measured? One reason is that alterations in
measured by a methodology using an ion-selective electrode
blood calcium concentrations can result in severe clinical
which is not a technique available in the large chemistry
problems, including death. Another reason is that recogniz-
analyzers. Total calcium is what is routinely reported on a
ing and pursuing the cause of calcium abnormalities often
serum biochemical panel; it is measured via a colorimetric
aids in diagnosing the underlying disease process.
technique. The total calcium measurement includes all
When measuring serum concentrations of calcium, it is
calcium, whether bound or unbound. The bound fractions
important to understand the difference between the mea-
of total calcium are those that are bound to protein (~40-
surement of total calcium and free, ionized calcium. Free
45% of total calcium) and complexed with nonprotein ions
such as phosphates, citrate, lactate, etc. (5-l0% of total
calcium). Changes in the amount of calcium bound to pro-
Predominant Hormone Actions on
teins or other ions will affect total calcium but will not affect
Serum Calcium and Phosphorus
the concentration of iCa. Bound calcium is essentially
removed from the biologically active pool of calcium. There-
Calcium
Phosphorus
fore, as long as regulatory mechanisms are functioning prop-
erly. the iCa concentration will remain within a narrow
Calcitonin
range, even if total calcium concentrations decrease or
become elevated due to changes in the amount of substances 
PTH
that bind calcium in the blood (Fig. 24.9).
Ionized calcium is required for vital intracellular and
Vitamin D
 extracellular functions, including muscle tone and contrac-
tion, nerve conduction, hormone secretion, enzymatic reac-
tions, blood coagulation, and cell growth, division, and
Figure 24.8 The effect of hormones on blood calcium and phosphoru5
function. It is also required for skeletal support. Some of the
con centrations.
Calcium Fractions
or complexed fractions. Note that the free, ionized fraction stays the same.
Protein-bound Ca
9888388988
Complexed Ca
 Free, iCa
Abumin = 3.5 g/dL Abumin = 1.7 g/dL Abumin = 3.5 g/dL
T Ca = 10 mg/dL
T Ca = 8.3 mg/dL
T Ca = 12 mg/dL
Figure 24.9 lonized calcium, the biologically active fraction, normally stays within a very narrow range while total calcium concentration is affected by
calcium that is bound or complexed and, therefore, inactive.
387
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Box 24.7 An acronym to help remember the
ism, unless there is a concurrent decrease in GFR, with
differentials for hypercalcemia.
which normal or elevated phosphorus levels may be seen.
A substance that has similar actions to PTH is PTH-related
 Acronym for most hypercalcemia differentials (total
protein (PTHrP). While this substance has normal functions.
calcium)
it becomes a problem when produced by neoplastic cells.
● G ranulomatous inflammation
One of the most common causes of hypercalcemia is neo-
●O steolytic lesions
plasia, and PTHrP is associated with many of these cases of
● S purious results 
humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (also called pseudo-
● H yperparathyroidism (primary)
hyperparathyroidism). The more common neoplasms asso-
ciated with humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy are
· D vitamin toxicity
lymphoid neoplasms and apocrine gland adenocarcinoma of
● A ddison's disease
the anal sac, although many different tumors have been
●R enal disease (chronic)
associated with hypercalcemia, including thymoma and
●N eoplasia
various carcinomas. An assay to measure the concentration
of PTHrP is available for dogs and cats. In cases of humoral
●I diopathic
hypercalcemia of malignancy, PTHrP is often elevated, iCa
· T ransient 
Phosphorus levels are typically decreased, unless there is a
concurrent decrease in GFR.
Vitamin D toxicity results in increased absorption of
polyuria, constipation, acute renal failure, and cardiac
calcium from the gastrointestinal tract. Toxicity can occur
arrhythmias. The majority of signs related to hypocalcemia
with cholecalciferol rodenticide poisoning. ingestion of
are due to the importance of calcium in muscle function.
plants containing vitamin D glycosides (Cestrum diurnum.
Signs may include muscle fasciculations, tetany, seizures.
Solanum malacoxylon, and Trisetum flavescens). ingestion of
paresis, tachycardia, hypotension, and respiratory arrest.
calcipotriene, an analog of calcitriol found in a topical
Abnormalities in blood calcium concentration result from
preparation used to treat psoriasis in people, or over supple-
an imbalance in hormonal regulation, altered absorption
mentation. Some granulomatous diseases as well as some
from the gastrointestinal tract, pathologic excretion from
neoplasms activate vitamin D precursors in an unregulated
the kidneys, or altered distribution involving bone or other
manner, resulting in hypercalcemia. Hypervitaminosis D
tissues.
results in increased iCa and phosphorus and low PTH
concentrations.
Hypercalcemia
 Renal disease can be associated with hypercalcemia, but
Hypercalcemia (Box 24.7). if ignored, can lead to serious
should only be attributed as the cause after other differen-
consequences such as acute renal injury and failure. There-
tials are ruled out since hypercalcemia can result in renal
fore, depending on the situation, it is a good idea to recheck
failure. Hypercalcemia is a common finding in chronic renal
a high total calcium concentration or, ideally, to measure the
failure in horses, as the horse kidney plays a more important
iCa concentration when total calcium is elevated. If the iCa
role in excreting excess calcium than in other species. In
equine chronic renal failure, iCa is often high, phosphorus
total calcium are due to changes in the amount of bound
low, and PTH appropriately low. Only approximately 10%
calcium and, therefore, an increase in the concentration of
of dogs with chronic renal failure are hypercalcemic; within
complexing or binding substances. If the iCa concentration
this population, dogs with hereditary disease are more
is elevated, this indicates that there is a problem with calcium
common. Hypercalcemia is also a common finding in dogs
regulation.
with grape- or raisin-induced renal failure.' Hypercalcemia
         
is more common in cats with chronic renal failure than in
PTH-like substances. High concentrations of calcium nor-
dogs. In cats and dogs. although total calcium may be ele-
mally feed back to decrease PTH secretion. If PTH concentra-
vated in chronic renal failure, iCa is usually normal or low,
tions are higher than they should be in the face of
consistent with increased complexing of calcium, and PTH
hypercalcemia, the cells producing PTH are not responding
may be increased.
to feedback signals, as occurs with parathyroid tumors.
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease) is a common
The disease associated most commonly with parathyroid
ca use of hypercalcemia in dogs. Approximately one-third of
adenoma is called primary hyperparathyroidism, in which
dogs with hypoadrenocorticism are hypercalcemic. The
the thyroid gland itself is inappropriately over producing
mechanism of hypercalcemia is unclear and the concentra-
 PTH. Along with elevated iCa and PTH levels, hypophospha-
tion of iCa is variable.23
388
CHAPTER 24 Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes
Because bone contains high amounts of calcium, osteo-
lytic lesions occurring from inflammatory conditions or from
Box 24.8 An acronym to help remember the
metastatic neoplasia can result in hypercalcemia.
differentials for hypocalcemia.
Idiopathic hypercalcemia is diagnosed if all other potential
Acronym for most hypocalcemia differentials (total calcium)
causes have been ruled out. This is an acknowledged entity
and is becorming more commonly recognized in cats. As the
● M agnesium deficiency
name implies, the underlyingmechanism is unknown. Hyper-
● I njury to tissues (severe)
calcemia is typically mild to moderate, with increasediCa, low
● L actation / pregnancy
to normal PTH, and normal vitamin D concentrations.4
● D vitamin deficiency
 There can be nonpathological reasons for hypercalcemia.
Mild, transient increases may occur postprandially. Dehy-
· P ancreatitis
dration concentrates proteins within the blood which can
· R enal disease
result in mild elevations in total calcium concentration.
●A Ibumin deficiency
Young. growing animals normally have higher calcium con-
● I ntake from Gl decreased
centrations: consequently, if adult reference intervals are
used, they will appear hypercalcermic when, in fact, their
· Sepsis
calcium concentrations are normal for their age. Depending
● E thylene glycol
on method of analysis, lipemia or marked hemolysis may
interfere with the colorimetric measurement of total calcium.
 If there is significant lipemia or hemolysis present in the
sample, a new sample should be collected and measured or
factor, iCa concentrations should be measured to determine
iCa determined.
the significance of decreased total calcium concentrations.
Diagnostic tools for further worlking up the cause of a
Primary hypoparathyroidism is an uncommon cause of
persistent hypercalcemia include laboratory techniques as
hypocalcemia. It should be considered after other causes are
well as other diagnostic modalities. If hypercalcemia was
ruled out. Iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism is more common
detected by measuring total calcium, determining the iCa
and occurs if the parathyroid glands are mistakenly removed
concentration is important in order to interpret the impor-
during thyroidectomy. With hypoparathyroidism, PTH is
tance of the abnormality as well as helping differentiate
inappropriately low in the face of a low iCa concentration.
between causes. A CBC, serum chemistry panel, and uri-
Phosphorus concentration is typically elevated.
nalysis are critical for the assessment of underlying disease
processes. A thorough physical exam, including careful pal-
mia beca use of the regulatory mechanisms in place to main-
pation of lymph nodes and the perianal area as well as
tain normal blood calcium, but a severe decrease in
radiographs and/or ultrasonography are valuable in the
absorption from the gastrointestinal tract due to a malab-
detection of masses or osteolyic lesions. Cytologic or histo-
sorption or maldigestion disease process or due to canthari-
logic examination of mass lesions provides additional diag-
diasis (blister beetle toxicity in horses)
can result
nostic information. It is possible to measure PTH and vitamin
in hypocalcemia. Decreased absorption associated with
D concentrations as well as, in dogs and cats, PTHrP for
vitamin D deficiency can result in hypocalcemia as well as 
assessment of hormonal status.
hypophosphatemia.
 Imbalances of other electrolytes can lead to hypocalcemia.
Hypomagnesemia decreases PTH secretion and action,
Hypocalcemia
resulting in hypocalcemia. This is a common occurrence in
It is uncommon for hypocalcemia (Box 24.8) to be severe
bovine grass tetany, but also occurs in other species. Hyper-
enough to cause clinical signs, but mild hypocalcemia is
phosphatemia can also lead to hypocalcemia as high
 often detected on a serum biochermistry panel when total
levels of phosphorus decrease the activation of vitamin D
calcium is measured. The most common reason for hypocal-
and decrease the action of PTH on bone. This pattern of
cemia is a decrease in the protein-bound fraction when
events is most commonly associated with renal disease
hypoalbuminemia is present. When this is the cause, the
(increased phosphorus with decreased GFR) or nutritional
iCa concentration is normal. A simple correction factor is
imbalances (excess phosphorus or low calcium:phosphorus
frequently used to correct for the decreased protein-
ratio) and is termed secondary hyperparathyroidism because
bound fraction of calcium (3.5 - patient albumin + patient
PTH levels become elevated secondarily to the persistent
calcium = corrected calcium). but it must be kept in mind
hypocalcemia.
that this equation is only for use in dogs and is only a rough
During late pregnancy or lactation, the demand for
estimate that tends to underestimate the incidence of defi-
calcium may be greater than the bearer's body can maintain.
cient iCa concentrations. Ideally, instead of the correction
Puerperal hypocalcemia most commonly occurs a few weeks
389
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
post whelping in dogs and is rare in cats. Parturient paresis
most commonly occurs within 3 days on either side of
Box 24.9 An outline for working through the
calving in cattle, but can occur several weeks before or after
differentials for hypophosphatemia and
parturition in sheep and goats. In horses, hypocalcemic
hyperphosphatemia.
tetany usually occurs l to 2 weeks after foaling (lactation
Working through phosphorus abnormalities
tetany). Hypocalcemic tetany can also occur with increased
1. What is the serum calcium concentration?
calcium loss with excessive sweating in horses.
- Is there a pattern consistent with hormonal imbalance?
Transport tetany has occurred in cattle, small ruminants.
and horses. Pregnancy or lactation can be a contributing 
Hypophosphatemia
 Hyperphosphatemia
factor, but the primary cause of the hypocalcemia is thought
to be due to stress and decreased intake.
Hypercalcemia
Hypercalcemia
Altered distribution of calcium results in hypocalcemia
- Prirmary hyperparathyroidism?
 Vitamin D toxicosis?
when there is deposition of calcium in tissues as can occur
- Hypercalcemia of malignancy?
Hypocalcemia 
with soponification of fat with pancreatitis or in massive
Hypocalcemia
- Hypoparathyroidism?
- Vitarnin D deficiency?
tissue injury, including acute tumor lysis. Precipitation of
calcium with oxalates occurs with ethylene glycol toxicity.
 2. What do renal parameters look like?
Although the mechanism is not completely understood,
inflammatory mediators appear to influence calcium regula-
- Is there evidence for decreased excretion or resorption?
tion. Hypocalcemia associated with sepsis and critical illness
 Hypophosphatemia
Hyperphosphatemia
is well recognized in human medicine and has been reported
in dogs with sepsis and with equine colic.7-i Total calcium
 Prolonged diuresis?
 Is there evicdence for decreased
concentrations and calcium concentrations corrected for
- Treatments?
GFR??
albumin are not reliable indicators of iCa in these cases.
- Hyperglycemia?
- Elevated serum BUN and 
Free, iCa should be measured in critically ill patients, espe-
- Polyuria?
creatinine?
cially if signs of hypocalcemia are evident.
- Dilute urine?
Most common cause of
Possible tubular defects?
hyperph osphatemia
- Glucosuria?
 Horse with hypercalcemia and 
Phosphorus
azotemia?
Phosphorus is required for energy metabolism, nucleic acid
 3. Is there any evidence of dietary or gastrointestinal problems?
synthesis, and cell signaling. It is an important buffer in
blood and urine and an important component in structural
Hypophosphatemia
Hyperph osph atemia
plasma membrane phospholipids and phosphoproteins and
in bone. Abnormalities in serum phosphorus concentrations
 Prolonged anorexia?
High phosphorous diet?
can be due to abnormalities in hormonal balance, intestinal
Diarrhea?
Phosphate enema use?
absorption, renal excretion, or tissue or cell distribution.
Vomiting?
Ingestion of ethylene glycol with
Low phosphorus diet?
phosphate rust inhibitors?
Serum concentrations of phosphorus may not reflect total
 Ruminant with upper Gl obstruction?
body levels.
If there is a concurrent abnormality in serum calcium,
4. Could there be redistribution, a shift between the ICF and
pursuing and determining the cause of the calcium abnor-
mality will often provide explanation for an abnormality in
ECF?
phosphorus. Examining the pattern of change between
Hypophosphatemia
Hyperph osphatemia
calcium and phosphorus can provide important clues.
Insulin therapy?
Evidence of extensive tissue damage?
Hyperphosphatemia
Carbohydrate loading?
 Presence of osteolytic bone lesion?
Hyperphosphatemia (Box 24.9) typically occurs when the
Alkalosis?
Acidosis?
phosphorus load (from GI absorption, cellular release, or
exogenous administration) exceeds excretion and tissue
 dogs and cats. In ruminants, upper GI obstruction can lead
excretion in via the kidneys, but in ruminants, it is via the
to hyperphosphatemia because of decreased GI excretion.
gastrointestinal tract. The most common cause of hyper
phosphatemia is decreased renal excretion associated with a
tion can occur with a high phosphate diet or ingestion of
decrease in glomerular filtration rate. Chronic renal failure
     
is the most common cause of hyperphosphatemia in adult
phosphate such as ethylene glycol that contains phosphate
066
CHAPTER 24 Laboratory Evaluation of Electrolytes
rust inhibitors. Hypervitaminosis D increases the amount of
intake, although anorexia or a low phosphate diet, if pro-
 phosphorus absorbed from the GI tract, leading to hyper-
longed, may lead to hypophosphatemia. Impaired absorp-
phosphatemia and hypercalcemia. Phosphate enemas can
tion because of vomiting. diarrhea, or an intestinal
also lead to severe hyperphosphatemia.
malabsorption disease can also lead to hypophosphatemia.
Given that the majority of total body phosphorus is stored
 Decreased intestinal absorption is the mechanism of hypo-
in bone and that the concentration of intracellular phospho-
phosphatemia with hypovitaminosis D.
rus is more than ten times that of ECF, the redistribution of
Redistribution of phosphate from ECF to ICF can result in
 phosphorus from bone or from the intracellular space can
hypophosphatemia. Insulin causes phosphate to move into
result in hyperphosphatemia. Release from bone can occur
cells. Hypophosphatemia can occur with administration of
with osteolytic lesions. Release from cells occurs with injury.
insulin or with insulin-producing tumors. It can also occur
which must be extensive in order to significantly affect the
with carbohydrate loading or intravenously administered
serum concentration of phosphorus; this can occur with
glucose which induces the secretion of insulin. Respiratory
acute tumor lysis or acute myopathies. Acidosis decreases
alkalosis has been associated with hypophosphatemia
the cellular uptake of phosphorus and can contribute to
because phosphate shifts to the intracellular space when CO2
hyperphosphatemia.
moves out of the cell. Because phosphate is required for
Improper sample handling may cause falsely increased
energy metabolism, accelerated metabolism, in general, will
serum phosphorus concentrations. This includes hemolysis
result in intracellular shifts of phosphate, decreasing extra-
of the sample or a delay in the removal of serum from
cellular concentrations.
erythrocytes after collection. Mild, transient increases may
      
concentrations of serum phosphorus; consequently, if adult 
Magnesium
temic when, in fact, their phosphorus concentrations are
Magnesium is primarily an intracellular ion and is a cofactor
normal for their age.
of many enzymatic reactions, including all reactions involv-
ing the formation and utilization of ATP and many mito-
Hypophosphatemia
chondrial reactions. It is also required for protein and nucleic
Hypophosphatemia (Box 24.9) occurs from hormonal imbal-
acid synthesis. Vitamin D and PTH influence, but do not
ances, decreased renal reabsorption, decreased intestinal
absorption, or redistribution from ECF to ICF. Hormonal
a balance between intestinal absorption and renal excretion.
imbalances typically include concurrent calcium abnormali-
Magnesium has a similar charge as calcium and, as does
ties, the pattern of which can aid diagnosis. Low phosphorus
calcium, exists in free ionized, protein-bound (approxi-
- s   s x n 'o 
nesium contains only approximately 1% of total body
phosphorus and calcium is the pattern seen with hypovita-
magnesium and therefore is not necessarily an accurate rep-
minosis D. Hypophosphatemia can also occur due to ele-
 resenta tion of total body magnesium.
Hypomagnesemia is more commonly associated with
(physiologic hyperpara thyroidism).
morbidity than hypermagnesemia. Neuromuscular signs
Decreased renal phosphorus reabsorption (increased
occur with hypomagnesemia, including hyperexcitability.
phosphate excretion) leads to hypophosphatemia. This can
muscle tremors, spasms, and fasciculations, and ataxia.
occur due to congenital or acquired defects in the proximal
Other complications  associated  with  hypomagnesemia
tubules where the majority of reabsorption normally occurs.
include the development of hypokalemia or hypocalcemia.
often called Fanconi's syndrome. Diuresis results in decreased
These deficiencies may not be able to be corrected unless
renal phosphate reabsorption which, when prolonged, can
hypomagnesemia is corrected first.
lead to hypophosphatemia. Diabetic ketoacidosis leads to
Hypomagnesemia is typically  associated with  either
hypophosphatemia because of osmotic diuresis, as well as
increased loss or decreased intake. Losses, the most common
phosphate's role as a buffer for excreted acid. Although the
cause of hypomagnesemia in small animals, are through the
mechanism is poorly understood, hypophosphatemia is
renal or gastrointestinal systems. Renal loss occurs with
often seen with the hypercalcemia associated with chronic
diuresis and renal disease. Renal reabsorption can also be
inhibited by hypercalcemia. Malabsorption and diarrhea are
the mechanism of hypophosphatemia associated with
causes of gastrointestinal magnesium loss.
hyperparathyroidism.
Decreased intake is a common cause of hypomagnesemia
Decreased intestinal absorption of phosphorus is an
in ruminants. Grass tetany is a disease that is associated with
uncommon cause of hypophosphatemia as the body typi-
cally can maintain normal blood levels even with decreased
sium and low in magnesium content. Elevated potassium
391
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
ingestion blocks normal magnesium absorption in the
6. Holowaychuk MK, Hansen BD, DeFrancesco TC, Marks SL
rumen. Milk tetany is a disease that is associated with older
    l    n ()
calves being fed milk-only diets. Prolonged anorexia or poor
Med 23(3): 509-13.
diet can lead to hypomagnesemia, especially if an animal is
7. Dart AJ, Snyder JR, Spier SJ, Sullivan KE {1992) Ionized
lactating. Prolonged intravenous fluids or parenteral nutri-
calcium concentration in horses with surgically managed gas-
tion can also lead to hypomagnesemia if magnesium supple-
trointestinal disease: 147 cases {1988-1990). J Am Ver Med Assor
201 (8): 1244-8
mentation is not included.
8. Garcia-Lopez JM, Provost PJ, Rush JE, et al. (200l) Prevalence
Other causes of hypomagnesemia include redistribution
-aenodu pue euasauaeuodau jo aueiodu ssouaoad pue
and hypoalbuminemia (if total magnesium is measured
mia in horses that have colic surgery. Am J Ver Res 62{l):
instead of free, ionized magnesium). Redistribution of
7-1 2.
magnesium is not well understood, but may be influenced
9. Toribio RE, Kohn CW, Chew DJ, Sams RA, Rosol TJ (2001)
by administration of insulin or glucose, sepsis, trauma, or
Comparison of serum parathyroid hormone and ionized calcium
pancreatitis.
and magnesium concentrations and fractional urinary clearance
of calcium and phosphorus in healthy horses and horses with
Hypermagnesemia
enterocolitis. Am J Ver Res 62(6): 938-47.
Hypermagnesemia is typically a less significant clinical
10. Toribio RE, Kohn CW, Hardy J, Rosol TJ (2005) Alterations in
serum parathyroid hormone and electrolyte concentrations and
problem, unless it develops acutely. It can result in cardiac
or neurological problems and cause nausea and vomiting.
toxemia. J Ver Interm Med 19(2): 223-31.
Hypermagnesemia can occur iatrogenically or due to decreased
11. Baker SB, Worthley LI (2002) The essentials of calcium, mag-
renal excretion, primarily associated with acute renal failure
or urethral obstruction.
Resusr 4(4): 301-6.
12. Lifton SJ, King LG, Zerbe CA (1996) Glucocorticoid deficient
References
Med Assoc 209(12): 2076-81.
13. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Kass PH (1996) Pretreatment clinical
1. Eubig PA, Brady MS, Gwaltney-Brant SM, et al. (2005) Acute
renal failure in dogs after the ingestion of grapes or raisins: a
cases (1979-1993). J Am Ver Med Assoc 208(1): 85-91.
retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002). J Ver Interm
14. Roth L, Tyler RD (1999) Evaluation of low sodium:potassium
Med 19(5): 663-74.
ratios in dogs. J Ver Diagn Invesr 1l (1y: 60-4.
2. Adamantos S, Boag A. (2008) Total and ionised calcium con-
15. Pak SI (2000) The clinical implication of sodium-potassium
ratios in dogs. J Ver Sei 1{l): 61-5.
25-6.
16. Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004) Canine and feline endocrinology
3. Gow AG, Gow DJ, Bell R, ef αl. (2009) Calcium metabolism in
and reproducrion. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
eight dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. Journa! of Small Anima!
17. Bell R, Mellor DJ, Ramsey I, Knottenbelt C (2005) Decreased
Practice 50: 426-30.
sodium:potassium ratios in cats: 49 cases. Ver Clin Parho! 34(2):
4. Midkiff AM, Chew DJ, Randolph JF, Center SA, DiBartola SP
110-14.
[2000) Idiopathic hypercalcemia in cats. J Ver Intern Med 14(6):
18. Nielsen L, Bell R, Zoia A, et af. Low ratios of sodium to potas-
619-26.
sium in the serum of 238 dogs. Ver Rec 162(14): 431-5.
5. Wills TB, Bohn AA, Martin LG (2005) Hypocalcemia in a criti-
cally ill patient. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critica! Care
15{2):136-42
392
25
Laboratory Evaluation of
Acid-Base Disorders
Glade Weiser
Colorado State University
poration of this capability into the practice routine provides
Introduction
the use frequency needed to build and maintain interpretive
skills. Users should focus on a few key values and not be
Acid-base analysis, also known as blood gas analysis, is a
overwhelmed by the various possible derivative calculations
growing point-of-care diagnostic application established for
that may appear on laboratory reports. Most of the calcula-
complicated medical cases and in critical care settings.
tions may be ignored while initial interpretive skill is
Assessment of acid-base status is typically done in conjunc-
acquired. Users may then adopt a few selected calculations
tion with electrolyte evaluation to determine the presence
as skill is accumulated.
and severity of fluid and electrolyte derangement attribut-
The purposes of this chapter are to present a background
able to the animal's underlying disease process. Advances in
 of the technical aspects of acid-base analysis and an intro-
technology have made acid-base evaluation possible and
ductory approach to interpretation of basic acid-base labora-
even routine within the in-clinic laboratory. These determi-
tory data. The introductory approach is designed to help the
nations allow for correction of such clinical abnormalities.
reader recognize and interpret basic, common acid-base
which in turn aids recovery time and may improve mortality
abnormalities; there is no intention to discuss advanced con-
oltcome.
cepts used by various specialties. The latter is left to literature
Blood gas analysis has historically been regarded as
and advanced training that exists for specialty applications.
complex and intimidating for many clinicians. This is likely
beca use measurement and interpretation of partial pressures
of gases in blood solution are less conceptually intuitive than
Technical considerations
concentration measurements dealt with in hematology and
conventional clinical chemistry. The subject also is compli-
Measurement of acid-base parameters
cated by many derivative specialty calculations that may
Acid-base laboratory data are generated on electrochemical
analyzers (Chapter l). These typically use the same sample
central laboratory, perceived complex sample handling. and
to simultaneously determine both electrolyte and acid-base
a perception that blood gas analysis necessitates arterial
determinations. Venous blood collection is adequate for
blood collection are factors that have contributed to very
evaluation of the metabolic complications of disease that
infrequent use. However, the clinician is encouraged to
result in acid-base and electrolyte disturbances. Arterial
embrace this capability made possible by the availability of
-n oi essu si ll uua pabau uo Aeidi si pooq
simplified point-of-care analysis systems that eliminate most
 cally eva luate blood oxygenation.
of these barriers.
While a number of parameters may appear on an acid-
 Recommendations to facilitate use include the following.
base report, there are very few direct measurements and
5 ads ao siiue s poa no n on diay  1
calculations that are important for interpretation of acid-
analysis of acid-base balance. This approach may be more
base balance. A systematic focus on this small number of
intuitive. Today's point of care electrochemical analyzers
parameters will simplify interpretation. These include the
makes capability to evaluate acid-base status routine. Incor-
following.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
393
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
pH
· Unless the sample is introduced for analysis immediately
The primary measurement of blood acidity. It is directly
after collection, the syringe should be capped to prevent
measured by an ion specific electrode (see Chapter l). pH is
sample contact with air. Recommended collection devices
the negative log of hydrogen ion concentration. Therefore a
have a cap for this purpose.
decrease in pH value indicates an increase in free hydrogen
ion concentration (relatively acidic) and an increase in pH
indicates a decrease in free hydrogen ion concentration
Physiologic considerations
(relatively alkaline). pH is very tightly regulated in the body
by a number of buffering systems.
Regulation of blood pH
It is critical for most physiologic functions that acid-base
PCO,
balance be maintained within a narrow range of pH, typi-
The partial pressure of carbon dioxide (COz) gas dissolved in
cally 7.35 to 7.45, with some minor species variations indi-
blood, measured in mm of mercury (mmHg). This may be
 n   s    
measured in either venous or arterial blood.
conditions may add or subtract acid in blood and body fluids.
The blood contains considerable buffering capacity to aid
HCO,orbicarbonateconcentration
regulation of blood pH. Major buffers include hemoglobin
Using the pH and pCO, values, bicarbonate concentration is
and the bicarbonate buffer systems. Minor contributory
calculated by the instrumentation software. It is expressed
buffers include inorganic phosphate and plasma proteins.
in mmol/L. The pH and bicarbonate values are the most
Through equilibrium reactions, these molecules may incor-
lseful for interpretation of acid-base disturbances when
porate or release hydrogen ions in the effort to maintain pH.
venous blood is the sample.
The bicarbonate buffer system is important because of its
rapid buffering capacity and because its components are
PO2
readily measured for assessment blood pH and associated
 The partial pressure of oxygen (Oz) gas dissolved in blood.
therapeutic monitoring. In addition, the bicarbonate system
measured in mm of mercury (mmHg). This measurement is
interacts with the mass quantity of hemoglobin in both pH
typically only useful for analysis of blood oxygenation and
regulation and gas exchange between tissues and respira-
therefore is only of interpretive value when arterial blood is
tion. The equilibria within the bicarbonate buffer system are
sampled specifically to evaluate the patient for oxygenation
shown in Figure 25.1.
pathology.
The relationship of the bicarbonate buffer system to pH is
described as:
Other calculatedvalues
There are a number of possible calculated indices. The pre-
[HCO,]
pH = pK+ log
sentation of these on reports varies by the manufacturer.
[HCO,]
Their use is somewhat optional and most are typically
adopted by critical care specialists. Some relate to arterial
where pK is the pH at which 50% of an acid is dissociated;
this is ~6.l for carbonic acid.
Sample handling requirements
Proper sample handling instructions are available and are
Tissue
exchange
simplified by the capability provided by point-of-care analy-
Tissues
Hb-H+ + O2
sis. pH may be affected by changes in pCO. Both CO, and
O, may move toward ambient equilibrium in blood removed
from the body if not properly handled. The following are
H2O + CO2—→HCO—
HCO + H
proper sample handling guidelines for electrochemical anal-
yses that should be supplemented by instructions accompa-
Lungs
nying point-of-care analyzers.
H++ HbO2
 Respiratory
· Avoid manual heparinization of syringes. This can cause
exchange
gross over heparinization of the sample leading to errors in
Figure 25.1 Bicarbonate buffer systerm interactions. At the lung level,
any of the acid-base and electrolyte results.
hemoglobin binds oxygen; this creates a molecular change that favors 
dissociation of H+ from hemoglobin. This wil push the equilibrium to the
syringe produced specifically for electrochemical analysis 
left, yielding CO and water that is expired. At the tissue level.
samples (see Chapter 2)
metabolismn yields CO2 and considerable acid. Hemoglobin releases O2 to
· Any gas bubbles in the collection syringe should be
tissues and deoxygenated hemoglobin then binds H+. Thus, equilibrium is 
expelled.
driven to the right.
394
CHAPTER 25 Laboratory Evaluation of Acid-Base Disorders
Table 25.1 Acid-base disturbances resulting in abnormal blood pH. For each disturbance category, the major abnormality in the bicarbonate buffer
parsll ane anuequnsip uanib e asnen Aew jeyl sassanoid jo sasnen uouwos osiy patenipui s! waisas
Acid-Base
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic Alkalosis
 Respiratory Acidosis
 Respiratory Alkalosis
 Disturbance
Decreased pH 
Increased pH
 Decreased pH 
Increased pH
Prirmary bicarbonate
Decreased bicarbonate
Increased bicarbonate
Increased CO2
Decreased CO2
 buffer alteration
Cause5
Any cause of generalized 
Loss of acid due to
Any cause of
Pulrnonary pathology resulting 
poor perfusion leading 
vomiting or functional 
 respiratory failure.
 in impaired O2 alveolar dliffusion 
to lactate production 
upper Gl obstruction 
e.g.:
Diabetic ketoacidosis
 Excess bicarbonate 
Severe pneumonia
Excess positive pressure 
Lactic acidosis
therapy
Pneumothorax
ventilation during anesthesia
 Severe pleural fluid 
Renal failure
Excess diuretic therapy
 Airway obstruction
 Ethylene glycol toxicity
Hypoventilation due
to anesthetic overdose
Diarrhea
Because pCO, can be measured and the dissolved CO, in
four primary categories. Common disease entities that may
blood is proportional to the carbonic acid concentration, this
result in these categories are outlined in Table 25.l. Meta-
relationship may be simplified to:
bolic acid-base disturbances develop relatively slowly.
usually over a period of days, whereas respiratory acid-base
[HCO,]
Blood pH =6.1+ log
disturbances may develop very acutely.
αpCO,
Bicarbonate (HCO,) depletion—metabolic acidosis
where α pCOz is pCOz multiplied by its solubility constant
This is due to pathologic metabolic production of acid in the
to yield the amount of COz gas dissolved in blood. Using the
form of hydrogen ions. The increased hydrogen ions are
solubility constant, the above formula may be rearranged to:
buffered by combining with bicarbonate to form carbonic
acid that then dissociates to COz gas and water. The CO, is
[HCO,]
Blood pH =6.1+ log
0.03×pCO2
then rapidly eliminated from the system via respiration.
Common  examples  of  pathologic  metabolism  resulting
Normally. the ratio of bicarbonate to CO, is 20:1. At this
in metabolic acidosis include lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis.
ratio, the log of 20 plus 6.1 yields the desired blood pH of
renal failure, and acid toxicities (e.g., ethylene glycol toxic-
 7.4. For interpretation purposes it is helpful to think of
ity). Alternatively. bicarbonate may be lost from the system
bicarbonate as being the metabolic component of blood pH
such as may occur with severe diarrhea. By any of these
regulation and pCO, as being the respiratory component of
mechanisms, depletion of bicarbonate establishes metabolic
blood pH regulation. For example, if bicarbonate is utilized
acidosis.
to buffer an increase in metabolic acid (H'). a decrease in
Metabolic acidosis is the most common acid-base distur
bicarbonate in the above equation results in a decrease in
bance. This is attributed to the fact that dehydration and
pH, or acidosis. In response, respiration may increase CO
poor tissue perfusion leading to lactic acid production is a
expiration to partially normalize the ratio, known as com-
pensation. The compensation response attempts to normal-
ders. Renal failure and diabetes mellitus, relatively common
ize the ratio, which in turn helps normalize or regulate pH.
disorders in veterinary patients, also contribute to the inci-
This framework of metabolic and respiratory components in
dence of metabolic acidosis.
the above equation will be very helpful for identifying and
interpreting acid-base abnormalities.
CO, retention due to hypoventilation
respiratory acidosis
Acid-base balance pathology
This is due to acute respiratory failure with accumulation of
General processes that may result in life-threatening abnor-
COz. Causes include hypoventilation during anesthesia or
 malities in acid-base balance are classifed in the following
any pathologic cause of acute spontaneous hypoventilation
395
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
or severe impairment of gas exchange at the blood—lung
The alternative cause of metabolic acidosis is due to a
interface.
primary process of bicarbonate loss. This may be due to
severe diarrhea or, less commonly, renal tubular acidosis in
Bicarbonate excess-metabolic alkalosis
which there is pathologic renal loss of bicarbonate. In this
This is due to metabolic production and accumulation of
situation, the anion gap will be normal because there is no
excess bicarbonate. Gastric parietal cells produce hydrogen
accumulation of unmeasured anions. Increased serum chlo-
ions by combining CO, and water to form carbonic acid,
ride may develop with this type of acidosis. The kidneys will
which then dissociates to H+ and bicarbonate. Bicarbonate is
continue to reaborb the vast majority of filtered sodium.
exchanged to the plasma for chloride ions. Ht and Cl are
Because active renal sodium reabsorption requires either
bicarbonate or chloride as a counterion, more chloride may
acid (H+Cl-) digestive response. The most common cause of
 be retrieved when there is relatively severe deficit of bicar-
metabolic alkalosis is upper gastrointestinal obstruction. The
bonate. As a result, hyperchloremia may develop.
hydrogen ions are secreted into the stomach and are lost in
the obstructive process, while bicarbonate is retained.
CO, loss due to hyperventilation—respiratory alkalosis
Approach to interpretation of
This may occur when there is hypoxemia that stimulates
acid-base data
hyperventilation, as seen with some forms of pneumonia.
With inflammatory or fluid pneumonia, the gas diffusion
Evaluation of acid-base status begins with analysis of blood
barrier is increased. Oxygen diffuses more slowly than CO
pH, bicarbonate concentration, and the partial pressure of
across such barriers. Increased ventilation due to poor oxy-
carbon dioxide. It is desirable to develop a stepwise approach
 genation can result in loss of CO, since it diffuses more freely
to interpretation of the acid-base data. A recommended
across the barrier. More severe pneumonia that impairs even
 stepwise approach is described below and diagrammed in
CO, diffusion is more likely to lead to respiratory acidosis as
Figure 25.2.
a result of CO, retention. Excess positive pressure ventilation
Step l—Evaluate pH. The pH is abnormal if either
during anesthesia may also cause respiratory alkalosis.
decreased or increased beyond the reference interval limits.
If the pH is decreased, the animal by definition has acidemia.
Relationship of acid-base pathology to anion gap
This is due to some process that is causing acidosis or accu-
The anion gap is discussed in Chapter 24. The anion gap is
mulation of acid in the system. If the pH is increased, the
useful in classifying metabolic acidosis into one of two cate-
animal by definition has alkalemia. This is due to some
gories, which may help determine the cause of the acid-base
process that is causing alkalosis or accumulation of base in
disturbance. The most common pathway to metabolic acido-
the system.
sis is accumulation of acid due to either production of organic
 If the pH is within the reference interval, a major acid-
acid or the presence of an acid toxicity. The accumulation of
base disturbance is unlikely. However, there is still merit in
a dissociable acid yields H+ and the respective anion. As the
checking the bicarbonate buffer pair for abnormality. If the
H+ is buffered by bicarbonate, the bicarbonate concentration
pH is near the lower or upper limit it should still be evalu-
decreases. The anion is unmeasured in calculation of anion
ated as a possible indicator of acidosis or alkalosis. Borderline
 gap and its accumulation results in the increased anion gap.
pH values may be an indication that a process causing aci-
Representative unmeasured anions associated with meta-
dosis or allkalosis is present, but there has been some com-
bolic acidosis disorders are listed in Table 25.2.
pensation in an attempt to normalize the pH. Alternatively.
a mixed acid-base disturbance may be due to severe disease.
Table 25.2 Causes of metabolic acidosis with increased anion gap.
but result in a relatively normal pH value. A mixed acid-base
with associated pathologic acids.
disturbance is due to two or more processes affecting acid
and/or base addition to the system.
 Disease with unmeasured anions
 Pathologic acid(s)
Because of the relationship between pH and HCO; and
pCO, described above, the bicarbonate buffer system should
Diabetes, unregulated 
Ketoacids: acetoacetate.
next be evaluated to determine the cause of the acid-base
beta-hycroxybuterate
disturbance defined by the pH. This involves a determina-
 Renal failure
Sulfates. phosphates, and 
tion of whether the metabolic component (HCO, ) or respi-
lactate when dehydrated 
 Hypoxemia and/or poor perfusion
Lactic acid
Acid toxicity, e.g., ethylene glycol
for the primary acid-base disturbance.
Metabolisrn to forrn 
toxicity
oxalic and glycolic acids
Step 2—Evaluate bicarbonate (HCO,) concentration.
Interpret if the HCO,- value is below the reference interval
limit, indicating increased metabolic acid (acidosis), or above
396
CHAPTER 25 Laboratory Evaluation of Acid-Base Disorders
Approach to Acid-Base Disturbances
pH
Step 1
<7.35
>7.45
Decreased, acidemia
Normal
Increased, alkalemia
Step 2
Evaluate
HCO,
Normal
Low
Low
High
High
Normal
Step3,4
Evaluate
pCO,
CO,
High
pCO,Low
Respiratory
pH Compensated,
Metabolic
Respiratory
Decreasing pCO2
by increasing pCO2
Acidosis
Acidosis
Alkalosis
Alkalosis
Acidosis
Alkalosis
uoissnssip aneeu iot ixat aas sanueqinsi asea-pie jo uoeiaidiatui ot yoeoidde asidai z'sz ano
the reference interval limit, indicating increased metabolic
This approach may be illustrated in the following example
base (alkalosis).
of a common patient acid-base data, with comparison refer-
Note that some references may suggest evaluation of
ence intervals (RI):
pCO, first. However, because most acid-base disturbances
pH
7.21
RI = 7.35-7.45
identified in animals are due to metabolic disorders, evalu-
ation of HCO, first usually will readily define the acid-base
decreased-
—-indicates a primary acid disorder (acidemia)
disturbance.
HCO,-
12 mmol/L
RI =15-23 mmol/L
Step 3—Evaluate the pCO,. If the pCO, value is normal,
decreased-
—indicates acid response.
the acid-base disturbance is defined by the bicarbonate con-
metabolic component of buffer system
centration abnormality. Interpret if the pCO, value is above
the reference interval limit, indicating increased respiratory
pCO,
30 mmHg
RI = 35-40 mm Hg
acid (acidosis), or below the reference interval limit, indicat-
decreased-
—-indicates base response.
ing increased respiratory base (alkalosis).
respiratory component of buffer system
Step 4—If needed, evaluate any combined abnormalities
between HCO, and pCO,. If both the HCO, and pCO, values
Both determinants of the bicarbonate buffer system are
are abnormal, the primary acid-base base disturbance is
abnormally decreased. The determinant abnormality that
almost always due to the most abnormal value in the pair.
adds acid or base consistent with the pH change is the
The change in the least abnormal value is almost always due
primary cause of the acid base disturbance. In this example.
to a compensation response in an attempt to normalize the
a decrease in HCO,- is interpreted as an addition of acid. The
pH. In addition, the compensating value is either abnormal
decrease in pCO, cannot explain the pH because this change
 o u    n  
would add base to the system, increasing the pH. Therefore.
would be required to cause the pH abnormality. This step may
the concluding interpretation is metabolic acidosis with
also aid in identifica tion of acid-base disturbances due to more
some respiratory compensation. The decrease in pCO, is a
than one process, known as a mixed acid-base disturbance.
compensa tion response. Increased respiratory elimination of
397
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
CO, tends to compensate to normalize the pH to some
degree. Some will find it useful to utilize the formula of this
More advanced considerations
relationship when making these interpretations:
Mixed acid-base disturbances
As mentioned above, a mixed acid-base disturbance is com-
Blood pH=6.1+log
[HCO,"]
posed of two or more pathologic processes that affect pH.
0.03×pCO2
The pH value will reflect a balance of the contributing pro-
cesses. An example of a mixed acid-base disturbance might
Looking at this equation, it is apparent that either a
 be recognized in a dog with severe pancreatitis. In this situl-
decrease in HCO, or an increase in pCO, would be required
ation, there may be dehydration with poor tissue perfusion
to decrease blood pH.
and prerenal azotemia, processes leading to metabolic aci-
Compensation is a normal, active physiologic action to
dosis. If there is protracted or disproportionate vomiting.
attempt pH correction in response to the primary acid-base
there is a superimposed process of metabolic alkalosis. The
disturbance. Unless the acid-base disturbance is very acute.
latter process may be suspected if there is a disproportion-
a compensation response is expected. Typically respiratory
ately decreased serum chloride concentration.
compensation for metabolic disorders occurs faster than
Recognition of a mixed acid-base disturbance should start
metabolic compensation for respiratory disorders. Table 25.3
with suspecting it based on diagnosis of the existing clinical
shows abnormalities in the bicarbonate buffer system for
problem or problems. Some example clinical scenarios that
various acid-base disturbances and the expected respective
may result in mixed acid-base disorders include:
- iun aou in iuodui si ln ssuodsn uoesuad
● Hypoadrenocorticism with disproportionate vomiting—
pensation will move the pH toward normal, but may at best
metabolic acidosis and alkalosis
only partially normalize the pH. For certain, mechanisms
· Protracted vomitingand aspiration pneumonia—metabolic
involved in compensation will not overcompensate pH nor-
alkalosis and respiratory acidosis
malization. This perspective is helpful for recognizing the
· Heart failure with severe pulmonary edema—metabolic
presence of mixed acid-base disturbances.
 and respiratory acidosis
● Renal failure with disproportionate vomiting—metabolic
acidosis and alkalosis
·Gastric
 dilatation /volvulus—variable.
depending
on
manifestations
● Anesthesia in excess, with preexisting disorder—variable.
Table 25.3 Expected values for pH, HCO3, and pCO2 in variou5
depending on disorder.
acid-base disturbances, including expected compensation responses
The acid-base data may aid in confirming the presence of
 Note that acute respiratory acidosis may not effectively compensate.
a mixed disturbance. Using the clinical findings and the most 
likely primary acid-base data abnormality. identify the
Disturbance
pH
HCO:
pCO2
primary acid-base disturbance. Then, predict the expected
Dec
compensation response to the primary disturbance. Guide-
 Metabolic acidosis 
Dec
N
lines for magnitude of compensation changes in Table 25.4
Metabolic acidosis.
 Dec or low N
Dec
Dec or 
may aid this determination. If the expected compensation
 compensating
low N 
response is either not present, excessive, or in the opposite
 Metabolic alkalosis
Inc
N
direction of what is expected, then a second primary distur-
bance should be suspected, indicating a mixed acid-base
 Metabolic alkalosis, 
Inc or high N 
LI
Inc or
disturbance. These guidelines should be used with consider-
 compensating
high N 
able latitude and only large deviation from the expectation
Respiratory acidosis 
Dec
N
LI
should be interpreted as inappropriate. By way of example.
consider the following case data.
 Respiratory acidosis.
Dec
 Inc or high N 
Inc
 compensating 
Respiratory alkalosis
Dec
pH
6.99
RI = 7.35-7.45
Respiratory alkalosis.
Inc or high N 
 Dec or high N
Dec
severely decreased—indicates
compensating 
a primary acid disorder (acidemia)
HCO;
 N = normal value, within reference interval; Dec = decreased;
12 mmol/L
RI =15-23 mmol/L
Inc = increased.
decreased—indicates acid response,
metabolic component of buffer system
398
CHAPTER 25 Laboratory Evaluation of Acid-Base Disorders
 Table 25.4 Guidelines for expected magnitude of cormpensation of primary acid-base disturbances. For each acid-base disturbance, the table shows
asudsal uoesuadun ay u ahueyo yo apnuieu paadxa pue 'uonesuaduo joy uoe 'uogeiale Aewud pateosse au 
Acid-Base
Metabolic Acidosis 
Metabolic Alkalosis
 Respiratory Acidosis
Respiratory Alkalosis
 Disturbance:
Decreased pH 
Increased pH 
 Decreased pH
Increased pH
 Prirnary bicarbonate 
 Decreased bicarbonate
Increased bicarbonate 
Increased CO2
Decreased CO2
 buffer alteration
Expected compensation:
Decrease pCO by respiration 
Increase pCO by
Increase HCO; by
Decrease HCO; by
change
 respiration change
metabolism
metabolism
Expected magnitude of
0.7 mm Hg per
0.7mmHg per
Acute:
Acute:
compensation
1. 0mmol/L decrease in HCO-
1. 0mmol/L increase in HCO3-
1.5 mmol/L HCO; per
2.5mmol/L HCO: per
1 0 rmmHg increase in pCO2
10 mmHg decrease in pCO2
Chronic: may
Chronic: may
 approximately double 
approximately double 
pCO,
50 mm Hg
RI=35-40 mm Hg
percentage saturation screening measurement to rule out
increased—-indicates acid response,
severe oxygenation defects.
When breathing ambient air and blood oxygenation is
respira tory component of buffer system
 normal, the animal will have an arterial pO, in the range of
85-100 mm Hg. At this level, the SO, is typically 95% or
At first glance, this may appear confusing if one is suspect-
higher. Generally. large pathologic change in pOz. e.g.
ing a single primary disturbance. If it is initially assumed that
<60-70 mm Hg. is required to result in clinically important
metabolic acidosis is the primary abnormality, one would
changes in SOz. The calculation of percentage saturation is
expect a compensatory decrease in pCO, of about 2mm Hg
reasonably accurate when hemoglobin is normal. However.
below the lower RI limit. 0r ~33mm Hg (Table 25.4).
it is not accurate in the presence of the toxicities such as
However, the pCO, result is grossly different from the com-
methemoglobinemia and carboxyhemoglobinemia (below)
pensation expectation. If it is initially assumed that respira-
and in some hemoglobin abnormalities present only in
tory acidosis is the primary abnormality, one would expect
humans.
an increase in HCO; of about 1.5-3.0mmol/L,
or
25 mmol/L. Again the result is grossly different than the
Base excess calculation
compensation expectation. This should prompt consider-
The base excess (BE) value is typically included on the acid-
ation of a mixed acid-base disturbance. In this case there are
base data report. This value is calculated to account for the
two acid responses consisting of both respiratory acidosis
combined bicarbonate and hemoglobin buffering capacity of 
and metabolic acidosis. The two primary acid-base distur-
blood. This is a complex calculation that utilizes information
bances are recognized as a mixed disturbance. Therefore.
from a nomogram built on the relationship between pH.
both the pulmonary function and potential causes of meta-
pCOz. and HCO, in blood. This relationship is similar for
bolic acidosis should be investigated (Table 25.1).
human and dog. but may vary with other species. Instru-
ment software typically uses the human calculation to derive
Arterial blood oxygenation
BE. The normal range of BE is slight positive and negative
A conventional blood gas analyzer measures pO, along with
deviation around zero. A positive abnormal value indicates
 other values discussed above. It then calculates or predicts
an excess of base, or alkalosis. A negative value indicates the
the percent hemoglobin saturation with oxygen (SOz) based 
magnitude of HCO; deficit in mmol/L in metabolic acidosis.
on the expected behavior of hemoglobin affinity at a given
The amount of deficit may be useful in planning fluid and
pH, temperature, and pO. The relationship between per-
bicarbonate therapy.
centage saturation and these variables is chara cterized by the
The BE utility is for calculation of the amount of bicarbon-
hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve. These values are
ate replacement in fluid therapy formulae. These calcula-
Ai r iq 's  s a e uo sd
tions result in the target amount of bicarbonate that would
 only useful for arterial samples performed specifically 
to
be administered to normalize the bicarbonate concentration
evaluate oxygenation. As an initial alternative to arterial
and pH. The calculation is based on body weight and the
sampling. a pulse oximeter may be used as a hemoglobin
goal to deliver bicarbonate to the extracellular fluid space.
665
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
which is approximately 30% of body weight. A representa-
· unoxygenated hemoglobin (deoxy-HGB)
tive formula using the absolute value of BE is:
● carboxyhemoglobin (CO-HGB)—used to detect the pres-
ence and severity of carbon monoxide poisoning
Bicarbonate
● methemoglobin (Met-HGB)—used to detect the presence
dosage (mmol)
= 0.3 ×Body weight (kg)×BE (mmol/L)
and severity of methemoglobinemia.
Because cooximetry is used to characterize HGB
One may encounter variations of the above formula, but
oxygenation, it is typically useful only for arterial blood
the general principle is unchanged. The user must realize
analysis.
that bicarbonate replacement in acidosis is a moving target.
The administration of bicarbonate is initially distributed to
the extracellular fluid space, but there is movement intracel-
lularly over time. Furthermore, the process(es) causing acid-
Recommended Reading
base disturba nce may change or con tinue to affect bicarbonate
balance. As a result, the acid-base status should be moni-
For case management of medical problems that may have acid-base
tored during replacement therapy and ongoing bicarbonate
disturbances, eg., diabetes mellitus with ketoacidosis, lactic acidosis, rena!
administration should be adjusted accordingly.
failure,etc.
DiBartola SP (ed.) (2012) Fluid, Elecrolyre, and Arid Base Disorders,
Cooximetry
4th ed. St. Louis: Saunders-Elsevier. Recommendations: Section
In contrast to measurement of pO, co-oximetry is the mea-
I "Acid Base Disorders," pp. 231-329. Other sections may be
Useful, e.g., Section Iv "Fluid Therapy," as it relates to treatment
surement of hemoglobin (HGB) spectrophotometrically
 of acid-base disorders.
using multiple wavelengths of light. HGB will absorb light
Silverstein DC, Hopper K (eds.) (2009) Small Animal Critical Care
maximally at different wavelengths depending on its con-
Medicine. St. Louis: Saunders-Elsevier. Recommendation: Section
figuration. The 4 common absorption maximum wave-
V, "Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disturbances.," pp. 224-59.
lengths used in these devices are to provide measurement of:
Tilley LP, Smith FWK (eds.) (201l) Blackwel's Five-Minute Vererinary
● oxygenated hemoglobin (oxy-HGB or O,-HGB), which is
Consuit: Canine and Feline, 5th ed. West Sussex, UK: John Wiley &
expressed as true, measured oxygen saturation percent
Sons, Ltd.
400
26
Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
Robin W. Allison
 Oklahoma State University
The liver functions in an amazing variety of biologic pro-
cesses that are essential to life. These functions include
Introduction to enzymology
metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids. proteins, hormones.
and vitamins; detoxification and excretion of waste products
A basic understanding of diagnostic enzymology is necessary
and other toxic substances, digestion (especially of fats), and
to interpret the results of serum enzyme assays used to
production of most clotting factors. The liver is highly vas-
detect liver disease. Principles of diagnostic enzymology
cular and uniquely situated to receive not only arterial blood
include:
via the hepatic artery, but also venous blood via the portal
● Different organs, tissues, or cells contain different enzymes.
vein. In fact, the majority (70-75%) of blood flow to the
In some cases, only a few organs or tissues contain a given
liver arrives from the portal circulation, and the liver's
 enzyme; these "tissue-specific" enzymes tend to be the most 
capacity to remove various solutes from portal blood is
diagnostically useful.
central to many of its functions.7 Because of the liver's
● Increased serum enzyme activity results when an increased
remarkable diversity. liver dysfunction may result in a
quantity of the enzyme passes into the blood, either because
variety of laboratory abnormalities.
        o
production.
· Detection of increased serum enzyme activity. therefore.
Liver disease vs liver failure
suggests either injury to the cells of origin or stimulation of
the cells to produce increased quantities of the enzyme.
Liver disease includes any process that results in hepatocyte
● Diagnostic enzymology is a means of locating where tissue
injury, cholestasis, or both. These include hypoxia, metabolic
injury or stimulation of increased enzyme production has 
diseases, toxicoses, inflammation, neoplasia, mechanical
occurred.
trauma, and intrahepatic or extrahepatic bile duct blockage.
● Results of diagnostic enzymology. in combination with
It is important to realize that the liver is frequently secondarily
other clinical and laboratory data, are helpful in understand-
affected by primary disease processes occurring in other
ing the disease process and in making a diagnosis.
tissues, such as inflammatory bowel disease and pancreatitis.
· Diagnostic enzymology does not provide information
Liver failure may result from liver disease, and is recognized
about tissue function.
In the body, enzymes catalyze biochemical reactions by
eliminated by the liver and by failure to synthesize those
converting a substrate into a product. For example,
substances normally produced by the liver. Liver disease.
Substrate
however, does not always result in liver failure. The liver has
+ Product
a marked reserve capacity, and 70-80% of the functional
Enzyme
hepatic mass must be lost before liver failure occurs. Tests for
liver disease or failure fall into three main categories:
 To measure enzyme activity, a standard quantity of serum
● Serum enzyme assays that detect hepatocyte injury.
  a s  a n a a 
● Serum enzyme assays that detect cholestasis.
solution containing the substrate for that enzyme. The reac
· Tests that evaluate liver function.
tion is then allowed to occur, and the enzyme's activity is
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
401
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
measured by the rate of either substrate disappearance or
HEPATOCYTE
product formation. The more rapidly that either one occurs.
the greater the patient's serum enzyme activity. Frequently.
AST
the product is not measured directly: rather, it is incorpo-
AST
rated into a second reaction, which often involves the con-
(AST)
version of NAD+ (or NADPt) to NADH (or NADPH), or vice
AST
LEAKAGE
versa. This second reaction results in a change in the sam-
AST
ENZYMES
ple's light absorbance, which can be measured using a spec-
trophotometer' (see Chapter 1 for additional measurement 
AST
ALT
GLDH
principles).
AST
 Enzyme concentrations are not measured directly, but the
SDH
serum activity of an enzyme is considered to be directly
(AST)
→AST
proportional to its concentration. Currently, enzyme activi-
ties are reported in terms of units per liter (U/L), with a unit
defined as the quantity of enzyme that catalyzes the reaction
of 1 μmol of substrate per minute.'bl Although this unit was
Mitochondria
historically referred to as an international unit (IU). the
Damage to organelles
actual SI unit (Systeme International, for international uni-
 or cell membrane
formity) is the katal, which describes enzyme activity in
Figure 26.1 Leakage enzymes escape from the cell because of altered
moles per second; using the SI system enzyme activity is
 plasma mmemmbranes. Some leakage enzymes, such as AST, are also present
reported in terms of katals per liter (kat/L).'i For conversion 
in the organelles. More severe darmage is required to cause leakage from
of units, IU/L × 0.01667 = μkat/L.156
these organelles.
Basic concepts and information that must be considered
to properly interpret the results of serum enzyme assays
HEPATOCYTE
BLOOD
include:
· the difference between leakage enzymes and induced
enzymes;
ALP
ALP
ALP
· the duration of enzyme activity after passage into the
ALP
blood (i.e., the enzyme's biologic half-life in the blood):
ALP
● the tissue specificity of enzymes;
ALP
· the proper handling and storage of serum for enzyme
ALP
assays.
ALP
Leakage vs induced enzymes
ALP
ALP
ALP
Increased serum enzyme activities can result from either
leakage or induction. This distinction is most applicable to
the liver because of the array of enzymes used in evaluation
ALP
of liver disease. Enzymes can be released when cell injury
alters cell membranes; enzymes that pass into the extracel-
了
Organelles
lular space and then into the serum by this mechanism are
INDUCER
termed leakage enzymes (Fig. 26.l). The term is somewhat
misleading. however. Although membranes of fatally injured
Figure 26.2 Increased serum activities of induced enzyrmes result, in
cells can certainly leak enzymes as they degrade, sublethally
part, from increased production of these enzymes, with a subsequent
 increase in secretion. This increased production is caused by some type of
injured cells may release membrane blebs that later rupture.
inducer.
resulting in increased serum enzyme activity.6 Nevertheless.
it is useful to think of the process in terms of leakage. By
contrast, induction involves the increased production of an
Leakage enzymes are present in the cytosol, organelles, or
enzyme by cells that normally produce the enzyme in
both, and escape following sublethal or lethal (i.e., necrosis)
smaller quantities. This increased production is induced by
cell injury. Increased serum enzyme activities can be detected
some type of stimulus, and it results in increased release of
within hours of the injury.?4 By contrast, induced enzymes
the enzyme from the cells and increased activity of the
are attached to cell membranes. Increased serum activity of
enzyme in serum. Enzymes that pass into the serum by this
these enzymes depends primarily on increased production
mechanism are termed induced enzymes (Fig. 26.2).
and develops more slowly (i.e., days rather than hours).24
402
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
The concept of leakage versus induced enzymes is impor-
diagnostician to narrow the list of possible tissues that are
tant, but the difference is not entirely clear-cut in clinical
involved in a disease process. Tissue specificity is a function
situations. For example, acute hepatocyte injury can result
of:
in loss of leakage enzymes, but enzyme production may be
· The presence or absence of the enzyme in the tissue.
up-regulated in the subsequent reparative process of hepatic
When increased serum activity of an enzyme is detected,
regeneration, resulting in a slower decline of serum enzyme
only the tissues in which that enzyme is normally present
activity than expected based on the enzyme half-life.is In
are considered potential sites of injury.
addition, the release of membrane blebs containing
· The concentration of the enzyme in tissues. An enzyme
membrane-bound enzymes may cause rapid but generally
can be present in many tissues, but have high concentration
      s 
in only one or a few. When increased serum activity of an
enzymes.?4 Release of induced enzymes can also occur sec-
enzyme is detected, the tissues in which that enzyme is
ondary to less acute membrane alterations. The increased
found at the highest concentrations are the most lilkely sites
serum activities of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and Y gluta-
of injury.
myltransferase (GGT) that occur as a result of cholestasis are
·Where the enzyme goes after leakage or secretion.
examples. A portion of the increase in the serum activities
Enzymes that are detected in serum have either leaked or
of these enzymes probably results from increased enzyme
been secreted into the extracellular spaces and then passed
production, but the bile acids sequestered in bile canaliculi
into the serum. Some tissues may have high enzyme con-
and ducts can solubilize membranes of hepatocytes and bile
centration, but leaked or secreted enzymes are not readily
duct epithelial cells, resulting in increased release of these
accessible to blood. For example, injury to renal epithelial
enzymes.124.129
cells results in leakage of the enzyme GGT. This enzyme
Although activities of both leakage and induced enzymes
leaks from the brush border of the cell into the lumens of
often increase during most types of liver disease, the relative
the renal tubules, rather than into the extracellular space.
magnitudes of the increases can provide a hint about the
Thus, increased GGT activity can be detected in the urine,
underlying liver lesions. In diseases characterized primarily
but the serum activity does not increase.
 s  sa a  a 
  sn n  n   
to be increased to a greater degree than are the activities of
same catalytic activity might be produced in several different
induced enzymes. Similarly. in diseases characterized pri-
tissues, but these enzymes can vary regarding other proper-
marily by cholestasis, the activities of induced enzymes tend
ties. These different forms of enzymes are termed isoen-
to be increased to a greater degree than are the activities of
zymes or isoforms (see later discussion of ALP isoenzymes
leakage enzymes. However, many liver diseases (particularly
versus isoforms), and they may have different half-lives in
serum. If an isoenzyme has a very short half-life (e.g..
lestasis, so these distinctions are not always useful.
    l  iin    i s
serum after leakage or secretion and, therefore, is less likely
Enzyme half-life
to be detected. If an enzyme originates from two different 
After leakage or secretion from cells, the enzymes eventually
tissues, but the half-life of the isoenzyme from one tissue is 
are degraded and/or excreted from the body. Some enzyme
minutes and that of the isoenzyme from the second tissue 
molecules also lose their activity in the serum over time. The
is days, then the increased serum enzyme activity is more 
rate at which the loss of activity, degradation, or excretion
likely to have originated from the second tissue. For example.
occurs determines the length of time during which the
the placenta of dogs contains large quantities of the enzyme
enzyme activity is detectable in the serum after leakage or
ALP, but the half-life of the placental isoenzyme is minutes.
secretion. The disappearance rate of enzyme activity typi-
Therefore, the placenta is not considered to be a likely source
cally is measured as the biologic half-life of the enzyme.
when an increased serum ALP activity is detected.24
which is the time required for one-half of that enzyme's
The ideal diagnostic enzyme would be specific for only
activity to disappear from the serum. Knowledge of the
one tissue. Increased serum activities of such an enzyme
average biologic half-life of an enzyme is helpful when
would direct the diagnostician to that tissue as the site of a
  a   a o ss
occurred and whether these processes are continuing. The
only one tissue; however, some are found in only a few
biologic half-lives of various diagnostic enzymes and the use
tissues.
of enzyme half-lives in assessing tissue injury are discussed
Diagnosticians commonly attempt to relate the magnitude
later.
of injury in a tissue. It is tempting to assume that higher
Tissue specificity
enzyme activities are indicative of more severe tissue injury
It is important to know from which tissue the enzyme most
(especially in the case of leakage enzymes), but this assump-
likely originated. Knowledge of tissue specificity allows the
tion is not always true (Fig. 26.3). Dead cells release all of
403
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Sublethal Damage
Nccrosis
spectrophotometric assays (increased serum bilirubin may
also interfere, but is not preventable). Some enzymes are
ALT
present in erythrocytes, and hemolysis can also directly con-
tribute to the increased enzyme activity. (See Chapter 3.)
ALI
ALT
Hepalocyles
AIH
ALT
ALT
Hepatocyte injury
Hepatocyte injury is detected by measuring the serum activi-
 ties of hepatocellular leakage enzymes. Three serum enzymes
  n s a a ( s
Figure 26.3 The magnitude of serum enzyme activity is not necessarily
mation about hepatocyte injury. An additional enzyme.
related to the severity of tissue injury. Serum ALT leaks from hepatocytes
GLDH, is available, but is primarily utilized in countries
when their plasmma rmemmbranes are injured. The resultant serurn ALT
other than the United States. However, numerous other
activity can be greater after sublethal injury to many hepatocytes than
enzymes are utilized in laboratory animals as biomarkers of
after necrosis of a few hepatocyte5.
hepatic toxicity. 107
Alanine aminotransferase
their enzymes, and they produce no additional enzymes.
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), previously referred to as
Sublethally injured cells, however, lose only a portion of
serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT), is a leakage
 d    n  
enzyme that is free in the cytoplasm. In dogs and cats, the
(possibly at an increased rate). Such cells can ultimately
highest concentrations of ALT occur in hepatocytes (espe-
release more enzyme than can dead cells. In other words.
cially those in periportal regions), and the ALT assay is com-
necrosis can result in increased enzyme activity, but diffuse,
monly included in the serum biochemical profiles of these
sublethal injury to the same tissue can result in even greater
species.? ALT activity is sometimes the only test used to
serum enzyme activity. Thus, the magnitude of the serum
detect hepatocyte injury in dogs and cats because ALT is
enzyme activity is not a reliable indicator of the type or
much more liver specific than AST (discussed below).
degree of tissue injury. The relative magnitude of increased
However, ALT is not totally liver specific; severe muscle
serum enzyme activity is often referred to in terms of the
damage or disease can cause increases in serum ALT activ-
fold increase above the upper reference limit (URL): for 
ity.'3 ALT activity of muscle is less than that of the liver
example, 3x URL signifies a 3-fold increase above the upper 
(activities in skeletal and cardiac muscle are approximately
reference limit.
5% and 25% that of liver activity, respectively). Because
the total mass of muscle is much greater than that of the
Sample handling
liver, muscle can be a significant source of ALT leakage.
Unlilke substances in serum that are directly measured (e.g..
While increased serum ALT activity in dogs and cats is
lrea, creatinine, electrolytes), serum enzyme concentration
usually indicative of either hepatocyte death or sublethal
is determined by measuring serum activity. It is then assumed
that the activity is proportional to the serum concentration.
cells must be considered as well. When ALT activity is
If serum samples are not properly handled the enzyme activ-
      n  
ity can be altered leading to erroneous results. It is important
more muscle specific (e.g., creatine kinase [CK]) is helpful
to realize that serum enzymes are proteins that are subject
in order to determine if muscle damage is a possible source
to degradation or denaturation by heat, changes in pH, vari-
of the increased ALT.
able inherent stability, and exposure to various chemicals.
Horses and ruminants have low ALT concentration in
any of which can result in loss of enzyme activity.01
hepatocytes; consequently, serum ALT activity is not useful
 Regardless of whether serum enzyme activities are assayed
for detecting liver disease in these species." Moderate
in an in-clinic laboratory or a reference laboratory. some
amounts of ALT are present in the muscle of horses and
delay usually occurs between sample acquisition and testing.
ruminants, and moderate increases in the serum ALT activity
making proper sample handling essential. while serum to
 occur with muscle injury in these species; however, ALT is
be used in these assays should be harvested and assayed as
 not included in large animal biochemical profles. Other
soon as possible, most enzymes are stable in refrigerated,
muscle-specific enzymes (e.g. CK) are more commonly
separated serum for 24 hours. The degree of degradation
used for detecting muscle injury in these species.
that occurs after 24 hours varies considerably depending
In dogs and cats, a wide variety of liver diseases can
upon the particular enzyme.13 Hermolysis and lipemia
produce increased serum ALT activity. Hypoxia, metabolic
should be avoided because of the potential to interfere with
alterations resulting in hepatocyte lipid accumulation, bacte-
404
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
rial toxins, inflammation, hepatic neoplasia, and a multitude
Aspartate aminotransferase
of toxic chemicals and drugs can cause hepatocyte injury.
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), previously termed serum
thereby resulting in ALT leakage. Acutely, the serum activity
glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), is present at
of ALT is proportional to the number of cells that are injured.
but as illustrated in Figure 26.3, the magnitude of ALT activ-
skeletal and cardiac) of all species.? Therefore, AST is not a
ity is not indicative of the cause of the injury or of the type 
liver-specific enzyme. AST is a leakage enzyme that is found
of damage to the hepatocytes (sublethal damage versus
predominantly in the cytoplasm, with about 20% located
necrosis). After acute severe injury, such as from a toxin,
within mitochondria.8 By contrast to ALT, hepatocyte AST
serum ALT activity can increase markedly within a day or
is in highest concentration in cells of the periacinar region,
two.24 If the injury is not ongoing. ALT activity slowly
surrounding central veins (zone 3)."4 Increased serum AST
decreases over several weeks. Serum ALT activity can also
activity can result from lethal or sublethal injury to either
be increased during recovery from liver injury when active
hepatocytes or muscle cells.
hepatocyte regeneration is occurring: this may explain why
  n l ae     so 
ALT activity does not always return to normal as quickly as
result of the same liver diseases previously listed for ALT and
expected based on its serum half-life, which has been esti-
generally parallels ALT activity. but the magnitude of the
mated at 17 to 60 hours in dogs and 3.5 hours in cats.1ps.10
increase may be less than that of ALT.24 The serum AST
activity may return to baseline faster than ALT following
odic "flares" of increased ALT activity. Thus, repeated mea-
acute liver injury in some animals, making repeated mea-
surement of serum enzyme activity may give insight about
surements useful for monitoring disease resolution. Although
the underlying disease process. However, it is important to
AST is less liver specific than ALT, it may be more sensitive
recognize that in certain situations significant liver disease
than ALT for detecting some liver diseases in dogs and cats.24
can occur with normal or only slightly increased serum
For example, one study reported 89% of cats with hepatic
ALT activity. For example, if liver disease is severe and the
lipidosis had increased AST activity compared to 72% for
hepatic mass is markedly decreased there may be too few
increased ALT activity.23
remaining hepatocytes to result in markedly increased
Similar to ALT, mild increases in AST activity may be seen
serum enzyme activity, even if the remaining cells are
in dogs as a result of enzyme induction due to corticosteroids
injured and leaking ALT. Some chronic diseases may have
and possibly phenobarbital, although there is some contro-
 little active hepatocyte injury taking place, resulting in little
enzyme leakage. Also, a few toxins (aflatoxin, microcystin)
source of serum AST activity, measurement of an enzyme
seem to interfere with transaminase production; massive
specifc for muscle injury (i.e., CK) is useful to determine if
acute hepatic necrosis may occur with minimal increases in
the increase in AST activity is due to muscle injury.
ALT (or AST) 24.43
 In horses and ruminants, AST is often used for the routine 
Increases in serum ALT activity can also be observed in
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism or that have been adminis-
large animal biochemical profiles and because of low hepa-
tered corticosteroids.12 These increases are generally mild
tocyte ALT concentra tion (discussed earlier) . In these species.
(two- to fivefold), but ALT activity increases can vary widely
an increased serum AST activity can result from the same
among dogs receiving corticosteroid therapy. depending on 
spectrum of liver diseases (both sublethal and necrotic) as 
the dose and duration of treatment.6.45., It is not entirely
listed for ALT. The major problem with AST in detecting
clear whether these increases in ALT activity are due to
hepatocyte injury is its lack of liver specificity. As in dogs
induction of enzyme production by steroids (as is well-
and cats, increased serum AST activity in horses and rumi-
documented for the induction enzymes ALP and GGT) or
nants can result not only from hepatocyte injury. but also
due to actual hepatocyte membrane injury: morphologic
from muscle injury. This problem can be mitigated to a
s    doa s  s
certain extent by assaying a muscle-specific enzyme such as
therapy begins and resolve slowly after therapy ceases.6.45.61
CK along with AST. Increased AST activity with normal CK
Anticonvulsant drugs (e.g.. phenobarbital, primidone.
activity may be seen if the source of the AST is the liver.
e      o 
suggesting hepatocyte injury has occurred. Uncertainty
remains in such a case, however, because the half-life of CK
and liver biopsies have not shown morphologic evidence of
is shorter than that of AST (Fig. 26.4). Serum activities of
liver damage these increases have been attributed to induc-
both enzymes may increase as a result of muscle injury, but
tion (up-regulation of enzyme production); however, in
the CK activity may return to normal earlier than the AST
u zars sisaunody iun paoddns nou aau saps ona
activity.2 These problems with use of AST in detecting hepa-
addition, some dogs receiving anticonvulsants will develop
o  n al  sn e sao  n a
a toxic hepatopathy. in which case ALT activity may be
more liver-specific enzymes (such as sorbitol dehyrogenase
markedly increased due to hepatocyte injury.41
[SDH]} in these species.
405
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
llamas, SDH is stable in serum for 8 hours, and in refriger-
ated or frozen serum for up to one week.14? In dogs. SDH is
stable in serum for 4 hours at room temperature, 48 hours
CK
refrigerated, 1 week frozen at -20°C, and 1 month frozen at
AST
-70°℃.2 In most cases, these time periods should be suff-
ENZYME
cient to allow the delivery of serum to a laboratory for an
ACTIVITY
SDH assay. Because SDH is preferable to AST for detecting
tify a laboratory that can perform this assay within the
appropriate time frame. This assay is not available in a point
of care format.
24
48
72
Glutamate dehydrogenase
HOURS SINCE INJURY 
Glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH) is a leakage enzyme
present in highest concentration within mitochondria of
hepatocytes, predominantly in periportal regions.′ The same
Figure 26.4 Serum activities of both AST and CK increase because of
types of reversible and irreversible hepatocyte injury that
muscle injury. As illustrated here, these activities increase and decrease at
cause increased serum activity of ALT will cause increased
different rates. Depending on when a blood sarmple is analyzed after
serum activity of GLDH. Increased serum concentration of
muscle injury, it is possible to detect increased serum AST activity and
this enzyme is reported to have excellent sensitivity for the
normal serum CK activity (note tirme A) and to erroneously interpret this
 as being an indication of hepatic injury.
equine hepatic disease is reported to be good, but slightly
less than that of GGT. GLDH activity is stable in canine
serum for 2 days at room temperature, 7 days refrigerated
As discussed for ALT, the serum activity of AST may be
at 4°℃, and 6 months frozen at -20°℃.14 Serum activity of
normal or only slightly increased with significant liver dis-
GLDH may increase in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism;
eases that are chronic and low-grade, that have resulted in
increases have also been documented in dogs receiving anti-
markedly decreased hepatic mass, or that are due to toxins
convulsants.l114 Assays for this enzyme have not been rou-
that inhibit transaminase activity. In dogs and cats the half-
tinely available in the United States, but are used more
life of AST is shorter than that of ALT, and has been esti-
commonly in other countries.
mated between 4 and 12 hours in dogs. and 77 minutes in
cats.14s In horses, the half-life of AsT has been estimated at
7 to 8 days.20
Cholestasis
Sorbitol dehydrogenase (iditol dehydrogenase)
Cholestasis (impaired bile flow) can be detected by measur-
Sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH), also called iditol dehydroge-
ing the activities of serum enzymes whose increased produc-
nase (ID), is a leakage enzyme that is free in the cytoplasm.
tion is induced by cholestasis or by measuring the serum
It is present at high concentration in the hepatocytes of dogs.
concentrations of substances (either endogenous or exoge-
cats, horses, and ruminants, but its concentration in other
nous) that normally are considered tests of liver function
tissues in these species is low.? Therefore, SDH is a liver-
and are discussed later. The two serum enzymes used to
specific enzyme. Increased serum SDH activity is suggestive
detect cholestasis are alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and Y-
of either hepatocyte death or sublethal hepatocyte injury.
glutamyltransferase (GGT).
SDH is not superior to ALT for detecting hepatocyte injury
in dogs and cats, and it is not commonly used in these
Alkaline phosphatase
species. In horses and ruminants, however, SDH is much
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an induced enzyme that is
more specific than AST for detecting hepatocyte injury. The
attached to cell membranes and synthesized by many tissues
half-life of SDH is very short (<2 days); serum activities may
such as liver, bone, kidney. intestine, pancreas, and pla-
return to normal within 4-5 days after acute hepatocyte
centa.9.so.so In domestic animals two ALP isoenzymes are
injury.& The main disadvantage to SDH is that it is less stable
produced from two different genes; these are referred to as
in vitro than most other diagnostic enzymes, and the stabil
the intestinal isoenzyme and the tissue-nonspecific isoen-
ity varies by species. In both horses and cattle, however, SDH
Zyme.5 The tissue-nonspecific isoenzyme undergoes further
is stable in room temperature or refrigerated serum for as
posttranslational modification in different tissues resulting
long as 5 hours (24 hours refrigerated in cattle), and for as
in different isoforms from liver (LALP), bone (BALP), kidney.
long as 48 hours (72 hours in cattle) when frozen." In
and placenta. The intestinal isoenzyme can also undergo
406
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
further modification to produce the unique corticosteroid
bile canaliculi and induce increased ALP production and
induced isoform (CALP) in dogs. These different isoforms
release.?? It is also important to realize that pancreatic and
are often mistakenly referred to as different isoenzymes, but
intestinal lesions can sometimes be the primary cause of
isoenzymes must be produced from different genes. Most of
cholestasis due to extrahepatic bile duct obstruction.
the normal serum ALP activity originates from the liver. The
half-life of intestinal, renal, and placental ALP in dogs is
Osteoblastic activity
approximately 6 minutes, and the half-life of intestinal ALP
Increased serum ALP activity associated with increased
 n   '   sn s 
osteoblastic activity occurs in all species. These increases are
to cause increased serum ALP activity.$ Increased ALP pro-
most often detected in young. growing animals when the
duction and increased serum ALP activity commonly occur
results of ALP assays are compared with adult reference
with cholestasis, increased osteoblastic activity, induction by
intervals for ALP. For instance, the mean serum activity of
certain drugs (primarily in dogs). and a variety of chronic
alkaline phosphatase of bone origin (BALP) in immature
diseases.
cats in one study was more than ten times that of adult cats.
resulting in a mean total ALP activity more than twice that
Increased serum alkaline phosphatase activity
of the adults.7 Another study found the reference interval
Hepatobiliary disease
for total ALP activity in four-week old kittens was 97-
ALP in the liver is associated with biliary epithelial cells and
-3 aous g' sieo 1npe 1os i0s-01 on paieduoo T/t7
canalicular membranes of hepatocytes."4 A variety of hepa-
specific reference intervals are seldom provided, one must
tobiliary diseases can result in increased serum ALP activity
remember that young animals commonly have serum ALP
due to increased enzyme production, solubilization of mem-
branes by the action of bile salts, and release of membrane
kittens, and calves, ALP activity increases attributed to bone
growth are generally mild (<4-5x URL), but foals may have
in marked increases in serum ALP activity in dogs (greater
increases up to 20x URL in the first three weeks of life.50.64
than l0 fold URL). but increases are more variable in other
A few causes of increased osteoblastic activity in mature
species.24,355.68 Impaired bile flow induces increased ALP
animals may result in mildly increased serum ALP activity
production, and sequestration of bile salts in the biliary
due to production of BALP. Osteosarcoma and other bone
system causes solubilization of ALP molecules attached to
neoplasms (both primary and secondary) inconsistently
cell membranes. which are then released into the
result in increased serum ALP activity because of osteoblast
blood.65,78.124, 12 The half-life of the cholestasis-induced LALP
proliferation in these processes, and dogs with osteosarcoma
is approximately 3 days in dogs but only 6 hours in cats.24
and increased serum ALP activity appear to have a worse
In cats, this short half-life, in addition to lower liver ALP
 prognosis than those with normal ALP activity.47.sp,54 Frac-
concentration per gram of tissue, contributes to the rela-
ture healing usually results in localized increases in osteo-
tively smaller magnitude of serum ALP activity increases
   d s  s  e e 
seen with liver disease in cats compared to dogs.24 However.
useful for monitoring the progression of healing. In one
ALP is still a useful enzyme for evaluation of feline choles-
      s 
tatic liver disease if one keeps in mind that even mild
increases in serum ALP activity that returned to normal with 
increases (2-3x URL) can be significant.?4 The utility of ALP
bone union, while dogs with failure of bone union had no 
for detection of cholestasis in horses and ruminants is gener-
changes in serum ALP activity.s Canine hyperparathyroid-
ally considered inferior to that of GGT (discussed later). 50.68
Wide reference intervals for ALP in horses and ruminants
result in increased bone turnover and increased osteoblastic
contribute to the reduced sensitivity of the serum ALP assay
activity: mild increases in serum ALP may be detected in
for the detection of liver disease in these species.
patients with these diseases.5D
When cholestasis is the cause of increased serum ALP
activity. serum total bilirubin and bile acid concentrations
Induction by drugs (dogs)
may be increased concurrently. In dogs with cholestasis.
Serum ALP activity can be markedly increased when enzyme
        
production is induced by certain drugs. Drug-induced ALP
serum bilirubin concentration; thus ALP is a more sensitive
 u ou iq 'so u pn hm sn uoo
indicator of cholestasis in dogs.133.13 However, even if the
species. thus the following discussion pertains to dogs
 serum bilirubin concentration is normal, bilirubinuria may
only. Corticosteroids (exogenous or endogenous) and anti-
accompany cholestasis-induced increases in ALP. Whereas
convulsants (e.g.. phenobarbitol, phenytoin, primidone)
lesions primarily involving the intra- or extrahepatic biliary
induce increased ALP production by canine hepatocytes.
system are common causes of cholestasis, hepatic diseases
 l    n 
resulting in significant hepatocyte swelling (e.g, lipidosis or
topical, ophthalmic, and otic) have been implicated.72.97
inflammation of the hepatic parenchyma) can obstruct small
Increased serum ALP activity induced by corticosteroids
407
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
varies depending on dose and duration of exposure, but can
hepatic function (increased total bilirubin or bile acids) is
be marked (>20x URL).24 Anticonvulsants generally cause
uncommon in these dogs, but can occur in severe cases.24
somewhat milder increases (<10x URL),241.53
Chronic stress resulting in increased blood concentra tion of
Corticosteroids induce production of a unique isoform
endogenous steroids may also cause increases in CALP
(CALP) that is distinct from that produced by hepatocytes in
activity.24.50
response to cholestasis (LALP). Although it is possible to
To help distinguish cholestasis-induced from corticosteroid-
distinguish LALP from CALP with special laboratory tests,
induced increases in serum ALP in dogs. other tests can be
the clinical utility of such distinction is uncertain. In dogs
performed. These tests include serum and urinary bilirubin
given corticosteroids the initial rise in serum ALP activity is
concentration, serum bile acid concentration, and tests to
due to LALP, while CALP increases after a 10-day lag period.
detect hyperadrenocorticism. A suggested approach is pre-
and there appears to be considerable individual variation in
sented in Figure 26.5. The concurrent presence of increased
the degree of ALP induction caused by corticoste-
ALP activity and hyperbilirubinemia is strongly suggestive
of cholestasis, but the serum bilirubin concentration may be
activity is common in dogs with naturally occurring hyper-
normal in some cases of cholestatic disease (e.g. early in the
adrenocorticism, and a lack of increased CALP argues against
          sd 
obstructed). In the latter situation, the unobstructed portion
dogs with increased blood corticosteroid concentration will
have increased serum ALP activity due to induction, some
concentration remains within the reference interval.
will develop a steroid hepatopathy with swelling of hepato-
Dogs receiving anticonvulsant drugs (e.g.. phenobarbitol,
cytes due to glycogen deposition. Evidence of decreased
phenytoin, primidone) often have increased serum ALP
INCREASED SERUM ALP
No
Young growing dog?
Yes
5
Are any of these increased?
Yes
Is ALP >3X Url?
No
·Serum bilirubin
(and no evidence of hemolysis)
•Urine bilirubin
Consider BALP from
·Serum bile acids
osteoblastic activity
Yes
No
R5
5
Consider hepatobiliary disease
Is dog receiving corticosteroids
Perform additional tests:
Yes
or anticonvulsants?
(see Fig. 26.7)
·Liver function tests
Yes
No
Evidence of bone disease
·Tests for pancreatic injury
and ALP is <3X URL?
·Radiology
Consider drug
·Ultrasound
No
·Liver biopsy
induction of ALP
·Abdominal fluid evaluation
Evaluate
adrenocortical function
Figure 26.5 Flow chart for evaluating the possible causes of increased serum ALP activity in dogs.
408
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
activity, which may be due to LALP, CALP, or both.24.55 Most
Y-Glutamyltransferase
 i    s a go
Y-Glutamyltransferase (GGT) is considered an induced
are also known to cause a toxic hepatopathy in dogs. In
enzyme. Acute hepatic injury, however, can produce rapid
healthy dogs the serum ALP increases have been attributed
increases in serum GGT activity. likely due to release of
to induction, but this has not been confirmed by in vitro
membrane fragments to which GGT is attached.6 Most body
 studies and remains controversial.56.102 Animals that develop
tissues synthesize GGT, with the highest concentrations
a toxic hepatopathy will usually have other indications of
decreased hepatic function (increased total bilirubin or
present at lower concentrations in hepatocytes, bile duct
serum bile acids), as well as histologic abnormalities.41
epithelium, and intestinal mucosa and at high concentra-
tions in the mammary glands of cattle, sheep. and dogs.
Miscellaneous other causes
Most of the serum GGT activity originates in the liver (except
Neonates of several species have high serum ALP activity
for neonates of some species, discussed later). Release from
following ingestion of colostrum. During the first few days
renal epithelial cells results in increased urinary GGT activ-
of life puppies, kittens, and lambs have transient marked
ity. but not increased serum GGT activity (see Chapter 23).
increases in serum ALP activity (up to or >30x URL for adult
Similarly. pancreatic cells release GGT into pancreatic ducts
rather than into the blood.
increases following colostrum ingestion, although serum
Increased GGT production, release, and subsequent
ALP activity is increased compared to adults due to BALP.
increased serum GGT activity occur with cholestasis and
as discussed earlier.10.64.157
biliary hyperplasia.6ss The increased serum GGT activity
A variety of endocrine diseases have been associated with
that occurs with cholestasis may result from both increased
increased serum ALP activity. Hyperadrenocorticism has
production and solubilization of GGT attached to cell mem-
already been discussed as a cause of often marked
branes."4 In dogs. increased GGT activity also occurs as a
 o  s  r rn
result of drug induction, similar to that described for ALP.24
precise mechanisms for the generally mild increases seen
Experimentally, extra hepatic bile duct obstruction in dogs
with other endocrine diseases are not clearly defined, but
results in increases in GGT activity up to 50 fold within two
are likely multifactorial; remember that stress associated
weeks; similar studies in cats found increases up to l6
with any chronic disease may increase endogenous cortico-
steroids and result in induction of CALP in dogs. Such dis-
is more specific, but less sensitive, than ALP.* For the detec-
eases include diabetes mellitus, canine hypothyroidism and
tion of liver disease in cats, GGT is more sensitive, but less
hyperparathyroidism, and feline hyperthyroidism; as many
specific, than ALP (the exception is hepatic lipidosis, dis-
cussed below).27 In both dogs and cats, results of serum ALP
serum ALP activity (generally <4x URL, due to both BALP
and GGT assays performed in combination to detect hepa-
and LALP) 15,50,52,69,115
tobiliary disease are more diagnostically valid than those of
activity. Hepatic neoplasia may directly cause cholestasis,
   s  n   n
and bone neoplasia may be associated with increased osteo-
activity compared to GGT, which may be within the refer-
 blastic activity (both discussed earlier) In addition, mammary
gland neoplasia, without metastases to bone or liver, has
there is an underlying necroinflammatory disease present 
been identified as a cause of increased serum ALP activity in
 i s  a    ae s r
dogs. Serum ALP activity increases may be seen with benign
ity may be increased to a greater degree than is ALP
or malignant mammary gland tumors, are generally mild
activity.23,27
(<8x URL), and do not appear to have prognostic value.63.79
Similar to ALP, increases in serum GGT activity are seen
 In cattle there are mild increases in ALP activity associated
with pregnancy (mid to late gestation) and early lacta-
these increases are due to increased GGT production or are
tion.z3,ss In dogs serum ALP activity increases slightly
 secondary to steroid hepatopathy.61,3t when the increase in
during pregnancy, but remains within reference intervals.50
GGT activity is induced by corticosteroids, GGT activity
Breed-related increases in serum ALP activity have been
increases more slowly and to a lesser degree than does ALP
identified in Siberian husky and Scottish terrier dogs. ALP
activity. Drug induction of GGT activity has also been
activity in some Siberian huskies was >5x that of siblings in 
eight related litters; no underlying cause was identified.84
resulting increases are minimal (2-3x URL) and may not 
Similarly. increased serum ALP activity in comparison to
other breeds has been reported in Scottish terriers, with ALP
greater magnitude are seen in dogs receiving such medica-
activity as high as 15x URL.53 These observations await
tions, they are more likely the result of cholestasis. Marked
further characterization.
increases in the serum GGT activity of a dog being treated
409
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
with anticonvulsant medication may be indicative of a
Hemoglobin
--> Hene + Globin
drug-associated toxic hepatopathy with life-threatening
Hleme
--> Fc + Unconjugated bilirubin
implica tions. 18.24
 In horses and cattle, GGT is generally considered more
sensitive than ALP for detection of cholestasis. In horses
with experimental cholestasis induced by bile duct ligation,
 Unconjugatcd bilirubin
serum GGT activity increased to a greater degree than did
ALP activity.6 Cattle and horses with pyrrolizidine alkaloid
- Glucuronic acid
LIVER
conjugation
toxicity, which causes marked biliary hyperplasia and even-
tual liver failure, consistently have early increases in serum
Conjugated bilirubin
GGT activity.38.3 However, ALP activity may be increased to
a greater degree than GGT activity in more chronic cases.39
Cattle with moderate to severe hepatic lipidosis have only
10%recirculates
mild increases in serum GGT activity (2-3x URL).21
BILIARY
in portal system
High serum GGT activity in the colostrum of dogs. cattle
SYSTEM
  s r     r 
Renal
serum of young puppies, calves, and lambs that have con-
excretion
sumed colostrum.341i,140 In calves, the GGT activity can be
 s  r a  s re   xo
Conjugated bilirubin
→Urobilinogen
Bactcrial reduction
period of weeks to reach normal adult levels by about 5
SMALL
weeks of age. Lambs also have markedly increased serum
INTESTINE
 90% excreted in feces
GGT activity after colostrum consumption, with this activity
  s r r  i  
Figure 26.6 Normal bilirubin metabolism.
mately 30 days of age."l In puppies, marked increases in
GGT activity (up to 10ox URL for adults) following colos-
trum ingestion return to normal adult levels more quickly.
hemoproteins (e.g. myoglobin, cytochromes, peroxidase.
by about 10 days of age.34 Increased serum GGT activity also
catalase)." Erythrocytes normally are destroyed at a con-
occurs in foals and is typically 1.5-3x URL during the first
 stant rate because of aging, but they also can be destroyed
month of life, but this enzyme activity is apparently not of
at an increased rate because of hemolytic processes (dis-
colostral origin.13,110
cussed later). Senescent erythrocytes, which have reached
the end of their normal life span, are phagocytized by mono-
nuclear phagocytes primarily in the spleen, but also in the
liver and the bone marrow. The hemoglobin of phagocytized
Liver function
erythrocytes is catabolized. The globin portion is converted
to amino acids, and the heme portion is split into iron and
Tests of liver function include measurement of the serum
protoporphyrin. The iron is recycled, but the protoporphyrin
concentrations of substances that normally are removed
is converted first to biliverdin and then to bilirubin. The
from the blood by the liver and then metabolized or excreted
newly formed unconjugated bilirubin (U-bilirubin, also
via the biliary system (e.g., bilirubin, bile acids, ammonia.
called indirect bilirubin) is released from macrophages, non-
cholesterol), and substances that normally are synthesized
covalently bound to albumin, and transported in blood to
by the liver (e.g., albumin, globulins, urea, cholesterol, coag-
the liver sinusoids, where it is released from albumin and
ulation factors). Although abnormal blood concentrations of
these substances can result from nonhepatic factors, the
brane is facilitated by a carrier, the capacity of which can be
detection of abnormal concentrations in addifion fo evidence
saturated if too much bilirubin is presented to the liver (as
occurs with increased erythrocyte destruction).
enzyme activities) can supply further evidence of significant
Once inside the hepatocyte U-bilirubin is bound by pro-
liver disease or liver failure. Often, however, liver biopsy is
teins (Y protein or ligandin, and Z protein), which limit
required for a definitive diagnosis.
efflux of U-bilirubin back into the plasma.* In the hepato-
cyte, U-bilirubin is conjugated to sugar groups forrming
Bilirubin
conjugated bilirubin (C-bilirubin, also called direct biliru-
Normal bilirubin metabolism
bin). In many mammals, the major sugar group to which
Bilirubin is formed primarily from the degradation of hemo-
bilirubin is conjugated is glucuronic acid, resulting in
globin (Fig. 26.6). with a small contribution from other
the formation of bilirubin glucuronide. This reaction is cata-
410
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
-    o  
increased amounts of U-bilirubin may overwhelm the liver's
glucuronosyltransferase superfamily." Both monoglucuro-
capacity for U-bilirubin uptake or C-bilirubin excretion.
nides and diglucuronides are formed in mammals, with the
resulting in an increased serum bilirubin concentration. This
latter being the predominant form of conjugated bilirubin in
is often referred to as prehepatic hyperbilirubinemia.
bile. In addition to glucuronides, alternate conjugates (e.g..
By contrast, hepatic hyperbilirubinemia may result from
 glucosides. glucoside-glucuronide mixed conjugates, xylo-
decreased uptake or conjugation of bilirubin by hepatocytes.
sides) are produced in some species, with glucosides pre-
(Intrahepatic cholestasis, discussed later, is also a cause of
dominating in horses.3751 Conjugated bilirubin is not tightly
hepatic hyperbilirubinemia.) Decreased functional hepatic
protein bound, and is more water soluble than the protein-
capacity due to acute or chronic hepatic disease can cause
bound, unconjugated bilirubin. Most C-bilirubin is actively
both decreased bilirubin uptake and decreased bilirubin con-
transported against the concentration gradient into bile can-
jugation. Hereditary defects in conjugation due to enzyme
aliculi and then excreted in the bile. A small amount of
deficiencies occur in people, but have not been confirmed
C-bilirubin normally passes through the sinusoidal side of
the hepatocyte membrane and back into the blood. If this
bilirubinemia in a horse that appeared to have a congenital
C-bilirubin remains unbound to protein, it is quickly excreted
defect in an enzyme required for bilirubin conjugation,
by the kidney via glomerular filtration. A portion of the
similar to Crigler-Najar syndrome in people; the exact enzy-
C-bilirubin in the blood may become covalently bound to
matic defect was not characterized. Two forms of inherited
 albumin and is termed biliprotein or delta bilirubin.1z This
hyperbilirubinemias have been identified in sheep. Mutant
form of C-bilirubin does not pass through the glomerulus
Southdown sheep can have hyperbilirubinemia associated
and remains in the blood for a longer period of time. (The
   r    m
implications of delta bilirubin in the assessment of choles-
serum producing increased serum U-bilirubin concentra-
tatic disease are discussed later.)
Conjugated bilirubin that is secreted into bile canaliculi
Corriedale sheep can have hyperbilirubinemia associated
passes with the bile into the small intestine where it is con-
with defective hepatic excretion of conjugated bilirubin pro-
verted to urobilinogen by bacterial reduction. Approxi-
ducing increased serum C-bilirubin concentration; this is
mately 90% of the urobilinogen is excreted with the feces
 similar to Dubin-Johnson syndrome in humans.97
as stercobilinogen. The remaining l0% of urobilinogen is
 Decreased uptake of bilirubin occurs in some species sec-
reabsorbed and enters the blood. A portion of this urobilino-
ondary to fasting. This type of hyperbilirubinemia is most 
gen then is removed from the blood by the hepatocytes and
obvious in horses. It can result in serum bilirubin concentra-
is re-excreted. Another portion of the urobilinogen is
tion that plateaus at 5-6 mg/dL by 64-136 hours after initial
excreted in the urine by glomerular filtration.
food deprivation; bilirubin concentration up to 8.5mg/dL
Abnormalities of bilirubin metabolism
develop milder hyperbilirubinemia (<1.4mg/dL).117 Small
Three main pathologic processes can cause increased
increases in the serum bilirubin concentration occur in other
serum bilirubin concentration (hyperbilirubinemia). These
species when deprived of food. These increases result from 
include increased bilirubin production (due to accelerated
an increased serum concentration of U-bilirubin, but they 
erythrocyte destruction), decreased bilirubin uptake or con-
do not appear to relate to increased bilirubin production.
jugation by hepatocytes, and decreased bilirubin excretion
The mechanisms responsible for fasting hyperbilirubinemia
(cholestasis).
have not been determined, but increased blood fatty acid
Increased production of bilirubin most often occurs due
concentrations correlate with hyperbilirubinemia. Increased
to hemolytic disease (extra- or intravascular hemolysis), but
fatty acids in the blood may compete for binding to Y and Z
can also result from massive internal hemorrhage and sub-
       
sequent breakdown of erythrocytes in the area of that hem-
 protein transport proteins.4s,100.103
orrhage. During the process of extravascular hemolysis.
 Decreased bilirubin excretion (cholestasis) can be either
macrophages remove and destroy erythrocytes just as they
hepatic or posthepatic in origin, and usually results from a
do senescent erythrocytes, but at an accelerated rate. Hemo-
blockage (partial or complete) in the biliary system that
globin breakdown and bilirubin delivery to the liver then
causes accumulation of bile (i.e., bile inspissation). Blockage
occurs in the normal way. During the process of intravascu-
of bile flow results in regurgitation of C-bilirubin into the
lar hemolysis, the free hemoglobin that is released into the
blood. Blockages are often caused by processes directly
blood forms complexes with haptoglobin. These complexes
affecting the biliary tree, such as infections or neoplasms
that compress or damage bile ducts or biliary calculi.
cytes with subsequent breakdown of hemoglobin and
However, diseases that primarily affect the hepatic paren-
U-bilirubin production. Whatever the specific underlying
chyma can also result in cholestasis by causing hepatocyte
cause, increased erythrocyte destruction and production of
swelling that blocks small bile canaliculi and prevents the
411
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
normal flow of bile. Extrahepatic bile duct obstruction can
also occur secondary to small intestinal or pancreatic lesions.
relatively low renal threshold for bilirubin, and because
which may cause severe cholestasis and hyperbilirubinemia.
C-bilirubin is efficiently excreted by the kidney, bilirubinuria
Leakage of bile into the abdominal cavity resulting from
often precedes hyperbilirubinemia.'37 Healthy dogs, however.
rupture of the gall bladder or bile duct can also result in
frequently exhibit mild bilirubinuria, likely due to the ability
hyperbilirubinemia.
of the canine renal tubules to form and conjugate biliru-
Another type of intrahepatic cholestasis results not from
bin.'o Bilirubinuria in dogs should be interpreted in con-
obstruction but from impaired excretion of C-bilirubin sec-
junction with the urine specific gravity; concentrated urine
ondary to extrahepatic bacterial infection. This has been
(specific gravity >l.025) may normally contain a small
termed functional or sepsis-associated cholestasis. Func-
amount of bilirubin.'37
tional cholestasis has been well described in people, but is 
Serum total bilirubin concentration in healthy horses
lilkely underrecognized in animals. The pathogenesis involves
tends to be greater than in other domestic species, so it is
the production of inflammatory cytokines (TNF, IL-6, IL-1β)
important to use species-specific reference intervals when
that reduce bile flow by inhibiting hepatocellular transport
interpreting test results. Hepatic necrosis, neoplasia, cirrho-
mechanisms.57
sis, lipidosis, fasting. and hemolysis are reported to cause
Whenever there is increased serum C-bilirubin concentra-
hyperbilirubinemia in horses: biliary obstruction is a rela-
tion, a portion of the C-bilirubin may become tightly (cova-
tively uncommon cause.'5l Hyperbilirubinemia in horses
lently) bound to serum protein (biliprotein or delta bilirubin).
with hemolysis can be marked; serum bilirubin concentra-
 Delta bilirubin is removed from circulation relatively slowly:
tion approaching 50mg/dL has been reported in foals
it is eliminated at a rate approximately equal to the half-life
with neonatal isoerythrolysis.1 As noted earlier anorexia
of albumin (8-20 days)." Delta bilirubin is included in the
or starvation can result in increased serum bilirubin concen-
serum total bilirubin as measured by routine wet chemistry
tration in horses. Regardless of the cause of hyperbilirubi-
methods. Therefore, total bilirubin concentration can occa-
nemia in horses, most of the bilirubin in the blood is
sionally be misleading since delta bilirubin may persist for a
unconjuga ted.?
period of weeks in the serum of animals with resolved cho-
Hyperbilirubinemia is not consistent in ruminants with
lestatic disease. Such animals may have increased serum
liver disease. Diffuse hepatic diseases such as hepatic lipido-
total bilirubin concentration, but normal urinary bilirubin
sis or chronic liver failure are most likely to cause hyperbili-
concentration, since tightly protein-bound delta bilirubin
rubinemia.2lis Primary diseases of the biliary tract and
does not easily cross the glomerulus. Practical laboratory
gallbladder are uncommon in ruminants. Significant hyper-
methods for the measurement of delta bilirubin concentra-
bilirubinemia most often results from hemolysis. Cattle that
tion exist; dry chemical methods allow calculation of delta
are ill with a variety of nonhemolytic, nonhepatic diseases
bilirubin concentration. However, delta bilirubin is not cur-
S     
rently routinely measured in clinical practice.
and anorexia.
Historically, the measurement of serum bilirubin involved
not only the measurement of total bilirubin, but also the
determination of the concentrations of both conjugated and
Bile acids
unconjugated bilirubin. In theory, hyperbilirubinemia asso-
Serum bile acids
ciated with hemolysis or reduced hepatic uptake of bilirubin
Measurement of serum bile acid (SBA) concentration is a
should produce marked increases in U-bilirubin and smaller.
routine diagnostic test for hepatic function, cholestasis, and
if any, increases in C-bilirubin. Similarly, cholestasis or
abnormalities of portal circulation. It has replaced the more
leakage of bile should produce marked increases in
difficult to perform dye excretion tests such as bromosul-
C-bilirubin and smaller, if any, increases in U-bilirubin. Such 
fophthalein (BSP) and indocyanine green (ICG). Bile acids
determinations, however have proved unreliable in differ-
are synthesized in hepatocytes from cholesterol (Fig. 26.8).
entiating between causes of hyperbilirubinemia.zi.izz If
 d a a e   e 
hyperbilirubinemia is detected, the patient history, physical
acids in most animals. After their synthesis, bile acids are
findings. and results of other laboratory tests can be helpful
conjugated to amino acids (primarily taurine in most
in differentiating the potential causes. A flow chart for the
animals) before secretion into bile. Bile acids are stored and
evaluation of hyperbilirubinemic animals is presented in
concentrated in the gallbladder (in those species that have
Figure 26.7.
one). At the time of a meal, hormonal and neurohormonal
 Species differences should be considered when evaluating
factors stimulate gallbladder contraction and passage of bile
serum bilirubin concentration. If cholestasis is the cause of
acids into the small intestine, where dehydroxylation by
hyperbilirubinemia, the serum ALP and GGT activities may
anaerobic microorganisms results in the conversion of the
also be increased and are considered more sensitive than
primary bile acids to secondary bile acids. Thus, cholic acid
serum bilirubin concentration for cholestasis in dogs and
is converted to deoxycholic acid, and chenodeoxycholic acid
412
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
Yes
Anemic?
No
5
5
Regenerative?
↑ ALP and/or GGT?
Yes
No
Yes
No
5
Consider anemia
Consider:
↓ Total protein?
Consider:
2° to chronic
-Cholestasis
·Bile leakage
liver disease
·Hepatic failure
*Anorexia
(horses,
No
Yes
5
ruminants)
R5
*Cholestasis (early)
Consider hemolysis.
Bleeding into body
Look for:
cavities/tissues?
·Spherocytes
Additional tests:
*Agglutination 
Yes
No
·Liver function tests? (ammonia, albumin,
*Heinz bodies
BUN, glucose, cholesterol)
·RBC parasites
Consider
Consider
*Tests for pancreatic injury (PLib)
*Hemoglobine mia
↑ RBC
Hepatic
·Radiology/ultrasound (liver size, choleliths,
*Hemoglobinuria
failure
hepatic/biliary masses, pancreatic/intestinal 
destruction
lesions, biliary obstruction)
·Liver biopsy
*Abdominal fluid evaluation (bile peritonitis,
neoplasia)
Figure 26.7 Flow chart for the evaluation of hyperbilirubinemmic animals. Serum bile acids are not usually useful in hyperbilirubinemic animals, but may
 be helpful in anorexic horses or anemic animals (see text for details). bPLl, pancreatic lipase irmmunoreactivity.
is converted to lithocholic acid. Bile acids emulsify fat and.,
 blood is shunted away from hepatocytes impairing frst-pass
therefore, promote both the digestion and absorption of fat
clearing of bile acids from portal circulation; bile acids then
as well as of fat-soluble vitamins. Most of the bile acids are
enter the systemic circulation.
reabsorbed from the ileum into the portal circulation (<5%
2. Decreased functional hepatic mass. This is a major factor
of the bile acid pool is lost in the feces each day).?* Normally.
in many diffuse liver diseases (e.g., hepatitis, necrosis., glu-
bile acids are efficiently cleared from the portal circulation
on their first pass through the liver; as a result, only a slight
damage that uptake of bile acids from portal blood is
postprandial increase in serum bile acid concentration is
impaired.
 seen in healthy animals. Bile acids that are cleared by hepa-
3. Decreased bile acid excretion in bile. This can result from
tocytes are secreted into the biliary system and recirculate;
hepatic or posthepatic cholestasis from any cause (obstruc-
a bile acid molecule recirculates several times after a meal.
tion, hepatocyte swelling. neoplasia, inflammation). func-
There are three main pathologic processes involving the
tional or sepsis associated cholestasis, or leakage from the
liver that result in increased SBA concentration. Decreased
bile duct or gallbladder.
SBA concentration does not occur with hepatic disease, but
Bile acid assays are most useful for animals in which liver
may occur with some intestinal disorders.26
disease is suspected, but not unequivocally proven on the
1. Abnormalities of portal circulation (e.g., congenital por-
basis of routine biochemical profile tests. A good example
tosystemic shunts, hepatoportal microvascular dysplasia.
is when serum liver enzyme activities are increased, but
acquired shunts due to severe cirrhosis). In these situations.
serum total bilirubin concentration is normal. Serum bile
413
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
LIVER
In dogs and cats, both fasting (preprandial) and postpran-
dial samples are recommended for bile acid assays in order
Choleslerol
to provide the most reliable interpretation. A standard pro-
cedure is the following:
Cholic acid
 Chenodeoxyclholic acid
1. The patient is fasted for l2 hours before collection of the
first (fasting) serum sample.
 Ainino Acid Conjugation
2. A fat-containing diet of adequate volume and adequate
fat to stimulate cholecystolkinin secretion by the small intes-
Bile Acids
tine and subsequent gallbladder contraction is fed. Growth
diets with higher fat content are recommended. In animals
with potential hepatic encephalopathy, a restricted-protein
GALL
Portal Circulation
diet can be used but should be supplemented with corn oil
BLADDER
(95-98%)
to increase the fat content to approximately 5%.
3. A serum sample is collected at 2 hours after feeding
Fecal Excretion
(postprandial sample) .
(2-5%)
4. Both fasting and postprandial bile acid concentrations are
measured.
Fasting bile acid concentrations of >20 μmol/L and post-
prandial bile acid concentrations of >25μmol/L are very
specific for liver disease in dogs and cats.? A fasting bile
acid concentration of <5μmol/L is normal in dogs and
cats, and concentrations between 5-20μmol/L are sugges-
SMALL INTESTINE
tive of hepatic disease. However, a fasting bile acid concen-
tration as great as 20 μmol/L occasionally occurs in normal
Figure 26.8 Normal production and circulation of bile acid.
dogs and cats. Fasting bile acid concentrations between
5-20 μmol/L in dogs and cats should be interpreted in light
of the patient history, clinical signs, and results of diagnostic
acid concentration is a sensitive indicator of cholestasis, and
imaging as well as other laboratory tests for hepatic disease
it is important to recognize that patients already icteric due
or function.
to cholestasis will always have increased SBA concentration
 In dogs, increased serum bile acid concentration can occur
as well. However, measuring SBA concentration may be
with a variery of liver diseases, including portosystemic
helpful in differentiating hemolytic hyperbilirubinemia from
shunt, cholestasis, cirrhosis, necrosis, hepatitis, hepatic lipi-
hepatic or cholestatic hyperbilirubinemia in anemic patients
for which a hemolytic cause is not obvious and liver enzyme
 gerated increases in postprandial bile acid concentration are
 activities are equivocal. Bile acids do not compete with bili-
most consistent and marked in animals with portosystemic
rubin for uptake or metabolism by hepatocytes; therefore, a
 shunts.? However, defining the type of liver disease on the
hemolytic hyperbilirubinemia can occur without a concur-
basis of the bile acid concentration alone is not possible.
rent increase in SBA concentration.26 However, severe
Abnormal bile acid concentration is an indication for further
anemia can cause hepatocellular hypoxia leading to hepatic
testing (e.g., liver biopsy, radiologic studies, ultrasound)
dysfunction, with subsequent increases in SBA concentra-
aimed at identifying the specific type of liver disease that is
present. Slight increases in SBA concentration with an
discriminating fasting hyperbilirubinemia from hepatic or
increased percentage of unconjugated bile acids has been
cholestatic hyperbilirubinemia. Bile acid concentration does
reported in some dogs with small intestinal bacterial over-
increase 2-3 fold after three days of fasting. but generally
 growth.? Additionally, there is one report of increased SBA
stays below 25 μmol/L, and so may be only slightly outside
concentration in healthy Maltese dogs.142 The sometimes
marked increases were found with the routine enzymatic
experimental bile duct obstruction or diffuse hepatic necro-
assay, but not by an HPLC assay, suggesting presence of a
sis have SBA concentration increases exceeding 8-l0 fold
crossreacting substance or unusual bile acid.
(50-100 μumol/L) after three days.68
 In cats, increased serum bile acids occur with portosys-
Bile acid assays are readily available. Bile acids are stable
temic shunt, cholestasis, cirrhosis, necrosis, hepatitis, hepatic
in serum at room temperature for several days, and serum
for bile acid assays can be frozen. Depending upon the test
tion in cats with these diseases is less consistently increased
method, hemolysis may cause false decreases and lipemia
than is the postprandial concentration, and measuring both
false increases in SBA concentration.26
is desirable.
414
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
The postprandial bile acid concentration is occasionally
Plasma ammonia
lower than the fasting bile acid concentration in dogs and
Ammonia (predominantly ammonium, NH*) is produced
cats. This may result from spontaneous emptying of the
largely by bacteria in the GI tract during normal digestion
gallbladder during the fasting period or to differences in
and absorbed from the intestinal tract into the blood. It is
gastrointestinal variables (gastric emptying time, intestinal
removed from portal circulation by the liver, where it is used
transit time, intestinal flora) or the release of/response to
for urea and protein synthesis. Alterations in blood flow to
cholecystokinin.26
the liver or markedly decreased numbers of functional hepa-
In horses, ruminants, and llamas, a single sample is usually
tocytes can result in an increased blood ammonia concentra-
collected for a bile acid assay. Reference intervals in these
tion. Blood ammonia measurement or the ammonia
species tend to be wider than those in dogs and cats. Inter-
tolerance test may be used to assess liver function. One
pretation of SBA concentration in cattle is hampered by the
advantage of measuring ammonia concentration over SBA
periodically interrupted flow of ingesta into the duodenum.
concentration is that blood ammonia levels are not altered
which results in considerable hourly variation (differences
by cholestasis. Additionally, increased blood ammonia con-
up to 6Oμmol/L) in SBA concentrations.12 Differences
centration is considered evidence for hepatic encephalopa-
also occur between dairy and beef breeds, and among
thy, although this is not a consistent finding. Increased blood
age groups and stages of lactation." However, despite rela-
ammonia concentration is considered fairly specific, but
tively wide reference intervals, SBA concentration is still
relatively insensitive for serious hepatic disease. Increased
 the most sensitive test for hepatobiliary diseases in cattle.153
plasma ammonia concentration is most common in animals
Fluctuations in SBA concentration are less in llamas than in
with portosystemic shunting of blood (either congenital
cattle, and increased SBA concentration has been reported
shunts or shunting secondary to severe cirrhosis). Increased
in llamas with hepaticlipidosis and portosystemicshunt.373,104
blood ammonia concentration also can occur with the loss
 Reported reference intervals for llamas <l year of age
0f 60% or more of the hepatic functional mass.22
are 2-50 μmol/L, and those for llamas >l year of age are
 In addition to decreased clearance of ammonia from portal
1-23 μmol/L.3
circulation, as occurs with portosystemic shunting or
 In horses, the SBA reference interval has varied in differ-
decreased functional hepatic mass, there are additional situ-
ent studies, but the upper limit of this interval is
ations in which blood ammonia concentration may be
<20 μmol/L.6s,152 Horses continuously secrete bile into the
increased.Increased ammonia intake and/or production
intestinal tract because of their lack of a gallbladder and
have been documented in cattle with urea toxicosis or inges-
apparent weakness of the sphincter of the common bile
duct. Increased SBA concentration is a sensitive indicator of
shown to increase ammonia levels in dogs and horses.s,p8,1zs
hepatobiliary disease in horses with a variety of disorders
Intestinal disease in horses has occasionally been associated
including hepatic necrosis, hepatic lipidosis, neoplasia, and
  s     i
cirrhosis.151,152 The increase in SBA concentration observed
with these diseases is often marked (40 to >l00 μmol/L).
transient hyperammonemia that disappears in adulthood;
however, Irish wolfhounds also have an increased incidence 
Urine bile acids
of inherited portosystemic shunts."5 Finally, there are rare 
Because the liver efficiently removes bile acids from the
instances of inherited or acquired urea cycle defects that 
portal circulation, in health only small amounts of bile
 may cause hyperammonemia .'37
acids enter systemic circulation to be eliminated in the
Ammonia concentration is typically measured in plasma
urine. However, when SBA concentration is increased there
using an enzymatic method available in commercial labora-
are increased amounts of bile acids excreted in urine. In
tories. Ammonia concentration in blood is very unstable
theory. a one-time measurement of urine bile acid (UBA)
after collection, however, which has been a deterrent to
concentration compared to urine creatinine concentration
routine use of this test." A procedure for the collection and
(UBA :creatinine ratio) might provide information similar to
 storage of plasma for an ammonia assay is as follows:137
    an i a  s5
1. Simple-stomached animals are fasted for at least 8 hours
postprandial blood samples. Preliminary investigations of
before sampling.
urine sulfated and nonsulfated bile acid:creatinine ratios
2. Blood is collected and placed into EDTA or ammonia-free
have been performed in dogs and cats.714 In dogs, the ratio
heparin anticoagulant, placed in an ice bath, and the plasma
of unsulfated UBA:creatinine had excellent specificity
separated immediately (within 10 minutes). There should
  ()  d  1 )
be minimal exposure to air. Delayed separation of plasma or 
disease.' In cats, the ratio of unsulfated UBA:creatinine had
storage at room temperature will cause falsely increased
good specificity (88%) and sensitivity (87%) for liver
ammonia concentration.
disease.146 The clinical utility of these ratios for diagnosis of
3. Plasma is refrigerated (4°C) and assayed within 30-60
various hepatic disorders awaits further study.
minutes.
415
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Point-of-care analyzers that utilize whole blood samples
Globulins
have increased the usefulness of blood ammonia assays in
Liver is the site of synthesis for the majority of globulins.
with the exception of immunoglobulins synthesized in lym-
sample handling for timely delivery of plasma to a commer-
phoid tissue. Hepatic failure can result in decreased synthesis
cial laboratory.59,134 However, reference intervals for these
and, therefore, decreased serum concentration of these glob-
 point-of-care methods may need to be adjusted in order to 
ulins. However, globulin concentration usually does not
 minimize false negative test results.59
decrease as much as the albumin concentration, and so the
Assaying blood ammonia concentration following admin-
albumin:globulin ratio commonly decreases in hepatic
istration of ammonium chloride (ammonia tolerance test)
failure. In many cases, globulin concentration may increase
increases the diagnosticaccuracy of the test.229 The ammonia
with chronic liver disease, either as a result of increased
tolerance test is usually performed on animals in which
acute phase protein production or immunoglobulin produc-
portosystemic shunt or decreased hepatic function are sus-
tion.? This has been especially well documented for horses.
in which more than 50% of those with chronic hepatic
concentration is normal. Ammonia tolerance tests should
disease also have increased globulin concentration.o? In
never be performed on animals with fasting hyperammone-
animals with severe liver disease, the clearance of foreign
mia, as dangerously high blood ammonia concentration may
proteins by the Kupffer cells of the liver is theorized to be
result, causing acute ammonia toxicity. Ammonia tolerance
decreased. Such foreign proteins are thought to be absorbed
tests involving both oral and rectal administration of ammo-
from the intestine and carried to the liver by the portal
nium chloride have been described.
circulation. Thus, when Kupffer cells fail to efficiently
A suggested procedure for the oral ammonia tolerance
clear these proteins on their first passage through the
tests is as follows:?2
liver, they come in contact with the immune system in
1. A fasting (preadministration) heparinized (ammonia free
other parts of the body resulting in an immune response and
heparin) blood sample is obtained and processed as previ-
hyperglobulinemia.
ously described.
2. Ammonium chloride solution (20mg/mL) at a dosage
Glucose
of 100 mg/kg body weight is administered via a stomach
The liver plays a key role in glucose metabolism. Glucose
tube.
that has been absorbed by the small intestine is transported
3. A total dose of 3g should not be exceeded.
to the liver via the portal circulation and then enters hepa-
4. A 30-minute postadministration heparinized blood
tocytes. The hepatocytes convert glucose to glycogen, which
sample is collected and processed.
helps to regulate the blood glucose concentration. Hepato-
 The preadministration to postadministration increase of
cytes also synthesize glucose via gluconeogenesis and release
blood ammonia in normal dogs is from 2.0 to 2.5 fold. Most
 stored glucose via glycogenolysis. In anirmals with hepatic
dogs with portosystemic shunts or severe hepatic insuff-
failure, glucose concentration can vary from decreased to
 ciency have postadministration increases of 3-10 fold.
increased. Increased glucose concentration may occur
A postprandial ammonia tolerance test has also been
because of decreased hepatic glucose uptake, resulting
described for dogs. in which food instead of ammonium
 in  prolonged  postprandial  hyperglycemia.  Conversely.
chloride is used as the challenge material.4 This test had a
decreased glucose concentration may occur because of
sensitivity of 91% for detection of portosystemic shunts in
 reduced hepatocytic gluconeogenesis or glycogenolysis. The
dogs when the postadministration sample was collected 6
liver has tremendous reserve capacity for maintaining
hours after feeding. However, it was not useful for detecting
normal blood glucose levels; 70% hepatectomy does not
other liver diseases.
result in hypoglycemia.25
Urea
Albumin
 Urea is synthesized by hepatocytes from ammonia. In animals
Liver is the site of all albumin synthesis. Hypoalbuminemia
with liver failure, the decrease in functional hepatic mass
usually is not noted until 60-80% of hepatic function is lost.
results in decreased conversion of ammonia to urea. Conse-
There appear to be some species differences, however, in the
quently, the blood ammonia concentration increases, and
incidence of hypoalbuminemia accompanying liver disease.
the blood urea (also known as BUN) concentration decreases.
Hypoalbuminemia is quite common in dogs with chronic
However, blood urea concentration also may decrease
liver diseases (>60% have hypoalbuminemia). but it does
because of numerous other disorders (see Chapter 23).
not appear to be as common in horses with chronic liver
diseases (~20% have hypoalbuminemia),.s,po.,125 Many non-
Cholesterol
hepatic factors can influence blood albumin concentration
 Bile is a major route of cholesterol excretion from the body
(see Chapter 29).
Therefore, interference with bile flow (cholestasis) can result
416
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
in increased serum cholesterol concentration (hypercholes-
Early congenital portosystemic shunts usually do not
produce much active hepatocyte damage. Consequently.
can result in hypercholesterolemia (see Chapter 31).
leakage enzyme activities often are normal or only slightly
The liver is also a major site of cholesterol synthesis. In
increased. Cholestasis is not a feature of congenital porto-
some forms of hepatic failure, decreased cholesterol synthe-
systemic shunts; consequently increased production of ALP
sis can lead to decreased blood cholesterol concentration
and GGT does not occur. However, because congenital
(hypocholesterolemia). The balance between decreased cho-
shunts most commonly occur in young animals with growing
lesterol synthesis and decreased cholesterol excretion varies
bones, mildly increased serum ALP activity (due to BALP)
with different types of liver disease. If decreased synthesis
is common. Because portal circulation to the liver is impaired.
increased fasting or postprandial bile acid concentration and
cholesterolemia can result; if cholestasis is the major altera-
increased blood ammonia concentration are common. While
tion, hypercholesterolemia may occur. Many dogs and cats
fasting SBA increases may be marginal, postprandial SBA
increases are often marked. The decreased hepatic blood
emia." However, many animals with liver failure have
flow can cause hepatic atrophy and decreased functional
normal serum cholesterol concentration.
hepatic mass. Therefore, other tests of hepatic function may
become abnormal in more chronic cases. Microcytosis, with
Coagulation factors
or without mild anemia, is a relatively common hematologic
The liver plays a central role in the regulation of coagulation
finding in dogs with portosystemic shunts. The pathogenesis
 as the sole source of synthesis for the majority of coagulation
is uncertain, but abnormal iron metabolism associated with
factors; it also produces anticoagulants such as antithrom-
bin, protein C, and protein S.? In addition, the blockage of
bile flow can result in decreased absorption of vitamin K
Hepatic necrosis
leading to decreased function of the vitamin K-dependent
Hepatic necrosis can vary from focal to multifocal to diffuse.
coagulation factors (factors II, VII, IX, and X) and anticoagul-
n    si i   
lants (proteins C and S). Therefore, defects in both hemo-
activities of leakage enzymes, but these increases are less
stasis and fibrinolysis may occur in animals with liver
frequent and of lesser magnitude than those resulting from
disease.? Accordingly, animals with liver disease may have
diffuse necrosis. Focal necrosis usually does not cause sig-
abnormalities in a variety of coagulation tests including pro-
nificant cholestasis, and induced enzyme activities usually
thrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, anti-
    n    
thrombin  activity. protein  C  activity.  and  fibrinogen
mise the flow of bile and cause cholestasis, resulting in
concentration.45,76,s7,1p4.145 Although coagulation test abnor-
induced enzyme activity increases. Bile acid concentration
malities are frequent, clinical bleeding tendencies are recog-
can produce increased SBA concentration because of
thrombocytopenia and decreased platelet function may also
decreased hepatocyte removal of bile acids from the portal
be associated with liver disease.25.42 Animals with evidence
circulation as well as cholestasis. Similarly, other tests of 
of liver disease and coagulation abnormalities should be
hepatic function are not affected by focal necrosis, but if 
fully evaluated using the tests discussed in Chapter l6 due
more than 60-80% of the hepatic mass is lost because of 
to the potential for serious complications such as dissemi-
diffuse necrosis, results of liver function tests (i.e., albumin,
nated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
BUN, glucose, cholesterol, coagulation) may be abnormal.
Infiltrative disease, such as lymphoma or other hematopoi-
etic cell neoplasia, can cause laboratory changes similar to
Patterns of laboratory abnormalities for
those seen with diffuse necrosis. Modest increases in leakage
specific diseases
enzyme activities may occur, with variable increases in
induced enzyme activities depending on the degree of cho-
The spectrum and potential magnitude of changes in labora-
lestasis. Liver function may eventually become impaired in
tory test results for selected liver diseases are summarized in
advanced cases of infiltrative disease.
Table 26.1. The most common changes in different types of
liver diseases are listed, but one should be aware that there
Hypoxia or mild toxic damage
is a great deal of overlap.
Hypoxia (due to anemia or hepatic congestion) or mild toxic
damage (possibly secondary to endotoxins, mycotoxins, or
Portosystemic shunt
other toxicants) can result in mild injury to many hepato-
Portosystemic shunting of blood can be acquired because of
cytes. As a result, leakage enzyme activities can be mildly to
severe cirrhosis, and if this is the case, test results similar to
moderately increased. Generally cholestasis does not occur
those described for end-stage liver disease are expected.
and the activities of induced enzymes usually are normal.
417
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Table 26.1 Common laboratory findings for various hepatic diseases.
 Disorder 
Leakage
Induced
Bilirubin
Serum Bile Acids
 Other Function Tests 
Miscellaneous
Enzymes
 Enzymes (ALP,
(ALT, AST)
159
Congenital
N to ↑
ALP = N to ↑ 
N
Fasting = N to ↑↑
Ammonia = N to ↑
RBC microcytosis 
 portosystemic shunt 
(due to BALP in
 Postprandial =↑↑ to 个↑↑ 
Albumin = N to ↓
(60-70% of dogs)
young animals)
BUN = N to ↓
Ammonium 
↑ 01 N = a502n(5
 biurate crystalluria
Cholesterol = N to ↓
Protein C =↓
 PT = N to prolonged 
Necrosis-—focal to 
N to 个↑
N
N
mmultifocal
Necrosis—dliffuse, or
↑↑ to ↑↑↑
N to ↑↑
N to ↑ 
Fasting = N to ↑↑
Variable
infiltrative disease
Postprandial = N to ↑↑
Hypoxia or mild toxic
↑to ↑↑
N to ↑
N
Fasting = N to ↑
N
insult 
 Postprandial = N to ↑
Focal abscesses,
N to ↑ 
N to ↑↑
N to ↑
Fasting = N to ↑ 
 infarcts, neoplasrms 
 Postprandial = N to ↑ 
Hepatic lipidosis
N to ↑↑
ALP = N to ↑↑↑
N to ↑↑
Fasting = N to ↑↑↑ 
PT, APTT = N to prolongedF
 RBC poikilocytosis 
(diffuse, cats)
GGT = N to ↑ 
Postprandial = ↑ to ↑↑↑
BUN = N to ↓
 Steroid hepatopathy 
N to ↑↑
↑ to ↑↑↑
Nto ↑
Fasting = N to ↑
N
(s6op)
 Postprandial = N to ↑ 
 Bile duct obstruction.
↑ to ↑↑ 
ALP = ↑ to ↑↑↑
N to 个↑↑
Fasting = N to ↑↑↑ 
Variable
 cholangiohepatitis.
GGT = N to ↑↑↑
 Postprandial = ↑ to ↑↑↑
 PT, APTT prolonged if Vit.
cholangitis
K deficient
Chronic liver disease
Nto↑
N to ↑↑↑
N to ↑↑
Fasting = N to ↑↑↑
Variable
or diffuse neoplasia 
 Postprandial = N to ↑↑↑
 End-stage liver (Liver
N to ↑↑
N to ↑↑↑
↑↑ to ↑↑↑
 Fasting = N to ↑↑↑
Ammonia = N to ↑
failure)
Postprandial = N to ↑↑↑ 
 Albumin = N to ↓
BUN = N to ↓
↑ 04 N = ason(5
Cholesterol = N to ↓
Protein C =↓
 PT, APTT prolonged 
 N, Normal; PT, prothrombin timme; APTT, activated partial thrommboplastin tirme.
However, cell swelling may occur and if it is severe enough.
increased. The activities of these enzymes depend on the
swollen hepatocytes can impinge on bile canaliculi and
 time and the extent of hepatocyte damage. Expansion of
cause cholestasis as well as increased activities of induced
abscesses or neoplasms into the surrounding tissue may be
enzymes. This cholestasis usually is not severe enough to
slow and result in only a few hepatocytes being damaged
result in increased serum bilirubin concentration, but may
during any given period of time. Activities of induced
cause a mild increase in SBA concentration.
enzymes usually are normal but may be increased if the focal
lesion causes significant cholestasis. Serum bilirubin or SBA
Focal lesions
concentrations occasionally are increased, however the
Focal lesions such as abscesses, infarcts, or localized neo-
pathogenesis is not clear; focal lesions seldom occlude bile
plasms may only cause local hepatocyte damage. in which
 as a ii   a r s
case the activities of leakage enzymes are normal or mildly
bile flow. Other tests of hepatic function usually are normal,
418
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
because 60-80% of the hepatic mass is not lost with focal
so, resulting from the blockage of bile flow. Other tests of
lesions.
hepatic function are usually normal, unless these diseases
progress to end-stage liver disease.
Hepatic lipidosis
Hepatic lipidosis occurs in many species, but the syndrome
Chronic progressive liver diseases
has been documented best in cats.'? Serum activities of
Chronic progressive liver diseases can occur in many species
but are most common in dogs. Moderate to severe inflam-
in 70-90% of cats with hepatic lipidosis, likely from marked
mation is a common feature, and variable degrees of hepa-
lipid accumulation in hepatocytes. More than 80% of cats
tocyte necrosis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis may also occur.
with hepatic lipidosis have increased serum ALP activity.
Some cases of chronic hepatitis are associated with abnor-
varying from mild to marked, whereas only approximately
16% have increased serum GGT activity.3 However cats
  a    n 
have a well-described hereditary disorder resulting in hepa tic
with underlying necro-inflammatory disorders may have
copper accumulation and chronic hepatitis; the molecular
relatively greater GGT activity compared to ALP activity.2?3
defect in this disorder has been characterized.8 A variery of
Serum activities of these induced enzymes are most likely
other dog breeds have been identified that seem to have a
canaliculi, with resultant cholestasis. The serum bilirubin
titis, including West Highland white terriers, Skye terriers.
concentration is increased to some degree in the majority of
Doberman pinschers, Dalmations, and Labrador retriev-
cats (75-95%), probably because of cholestasis, and most
ers.67.141 Certain drugs (e.g., anticonvulsants) and infectious
cats have increased SBA concentra tion. Other tests of hepatic
agents also may cause chronic hepatitis in dogs. Serum activ-
function are inconsistently abnormal. If diabetes mellitus is
ities of leakage enzymes often are mildly or moderately
the underlying problem in cats with hepatic lipidosis, blood
increased because of progressive hepatocyte damage. If pro-
glucose concentration may be very high. Coagulation abnor-
gression of the disease is slow, the release of these enzymes
malities (prolonged prothrombin time or activated partial
within a given period of time may be minimal, and serum
thromboplastin time) are not unusual, occurring in 25-40%
activity may be normal. Many of these diseases ultimately
of cats with hepatic lipidosis.
result in varying degrees of hepatic fibrosis which may com-
promise bile flow. Therefore, serum activities of induced
Steroid hepatopathy
enzymes are often mildly or moderately increased. Serum
Steroid hepatopathy is most common in dogs and can
bilirubin concentration is normal in animals with the early.
produce moderate damage to hepatocytes, largely due to
less severe forms, but can be increased in those with later.
distention of hepatocytes from glycogen accumulation. The
more advanced disease. Fasting and postprandial SBA con-
       
centrations are inconsistently increased, depending on how
increased in dogs with steroid hepatopathy. while serum
far the disease has advanced. These increases probably relate
activities of induced enzymes may be markedly increased
to impaired blood flow to the liver, impaired clearance of
because of corticosteroid-mediated induction of their syn-
bile acids by hepatocytes, and cholestasis. Other tests of 
thesis. Serum bile acids may be modestly increased, but total
hepatic function are normal, unless the disease has resulted 
bilirubin concentration is rarely increased, and other tests of
in the loss of 60-80% of functional capacity.
hepatic function are usually normal.
Biliary abnormalities
End-stage liver disease
Cholangitis, cholangiohepatitis, and extrahepatic bile duct
End-stage liver disease occurs when more than 60-80% of
obstruction can occur in many different species. Because
the hepatic functional mass has been lost. The serum activi-
lesions usually are centered in the portal areas of the liver
or outside of the liver, increased serum activities of leakage
Normal serum activities of these enzymes may result from
enzymes usually are mild and result from secondary damage
markedly decreased numbers of hepatocytes or minimal
to hepatocytes ca used by increased intrabiliary pressure. The
active hepatocyte damage. Serum activities of induced
enzymes are moderately to markedly increased because of
and become progressively higher as the disease becomes
cholestasis. Serum bilirubin concentration is moderately to
more severe. Increased intrabiliary pressure induces hepa-
markedly increased. Fasting or postprandial SBA concentra-
tocytes and biliary epithelial cells to produce increased
tions are increased, and sometimes markedly so, resulting
amounts of these enzymes. Serum bilirubin concentration is
      
moderately to markedly increased because of the blockage
uptake of bile acids from portal blood, and cholestasis. Many
of bile flow. Both fasting and postprandial serum bile acid
other hepatic function tests are often abnormal, including
concentration is usually increased and sometimes markedly
increased blood ammonia concentration, decreased blood
419
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
glucose concentration, decreased blood urea (BUN) concen-
11. Braun JP, Benard P, Burgat V, Rico AG (1983) Gamma Gluta-
tration, and decreased serum albumin concentration. Serum
my] Transferase in domestic animals. Ver Res Commun 6:
globulin concentration varies from mildly decreased to
77-90.
increased. Coagulation tests are also often abnormal in
12. Braun JP, Rico AG, Benard P Thouvenot JP, Bonnefis MJ
(1978) Tissue and blood distribution of gamma-glutamy] trans-
animals with end-stage liver disease.
ferase in the lamb and in the ewe. Res Ver Sri 25: 37-40.
13. Braun JP, Tainturier D, Bezille P, Raviart I, Rico AG (1984)
Iransfer of gamma-glutamyltransferase from mother colos-
Summary
trum to newborn goat and foal. Enzyme 3l: 193-6.
14. Britti D, Massimini G, Peli A, Luciani A, Boari A {2005) Evalu-
Biochemical testing can suggest three basic categories of
ation of serum enzyme activities as predictors of passive trans-
liver disease depending upon the pattern of abnormalities
fer status in lambs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 226: 95 1-5.
observed: hepatocellular injury, cholestasis, and decreased
1 5. Broussard JD, Peterson ME, Fox PR (1995) Changes in clinical
function. However, characterization of the specific type of
and laboratory findings in cats with hyperthyroidism from
liver disease usually requires additional tests (e.g., radio-
1983 to 1993. J Am Ver Med Assoc 206: 302-5.
graphic studies, ultrasound, liver fine needle aspirate, liver
16. Bulle F Mavier P Zafrani ES, er al. {l990) Mechanism of
biopsy). Additionally, careful attention must be paid to the
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase release in serum during intra-
hepatic and extrahepatic cholestasis in the rat: a histochemical,
patient's clinical history, current medications, and physical
biochemical and molecular approach. Hepatrology ll: 545-50.
examination findings in order to rule-out underlying condi-
17. Bunch SE (1993) Hepatotoxicity associated with pharmaco-
tions that could affect test results. Repeated biochemical
logic agents in dogs and cats. Ver Clin Norrh Am Smal! Anim Prac!
testing is often useful for evaluating disease progression or
23: 659-70.
response to therapy.
18. Bunch SE, Baldwin BH, Hornbuckle WE, Tennant BC (1984)
vulsant drugs. Journal of the American Vererinary Medical Associa-
References
rion 184: 444-8.
19. Bunch SE, Jordan HL, Sellon RK, Cullen JM, Smith JE (1995)
1. Aitken MM, Hall E, Scott L, Davot JL, Allen WM (2003) Liver-
Characterization of iron status in young dogs with portosys-
related biochemical changes in the serum of dogs being treated
temic shunt. Am J Ver Res 56: 853-8.
with phenobarbitone. Ver Rerc 153: 13-16.
20. Cardinet GH, Littrell JF, Freedland RA (1967) Comparative
2. Amory H, Perron MF, Sandersen C, et al. (2005) Prognostic
investigations of serum creatine phosphokinase and glutamic-
value of clinical signs and blood parameters in equids suffering
from hepatic diseases. Journal of Equine Veterinary Science 25:
binuria. Res Ver Sci 8: 219-26
1 8-25.
21. Cebra CK, Garry FB, Getzy DM, Fettman MJ (1997) Hepatic
3. Andreasen CB, Pearson EG, Smith BB, Gerros TC, Lassen ED
lipidosis in anorectic, lactating holstein cattle: a retrospective
{1998) Normal reference intervals and the effects of time and
study of serum biochemical abnormalities. J Ver Inrerm Med 1l:
feeding on serum bile acid concentrations in llamas. J Ver Diagn
231-7.
Invesr 10: 174-8.
22. Center SA (1996) Diagnostic procedures for evaluation of
4. Badylak SF (1988) Coagulation disorders and liver disease. Ver
hepatic disease. In: Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 18: 87-93.
3rd ed., pp. 130-88. W.B. Saunders.
 5. Badylak SF Dodds WJ, Van Veet JF (1 983) Plasma coagulation
23. Center SA (2005) Feline hepatic lipidosis. Ver Clin North Am
factor abnormalities in dogs with naturally occurring hepatic
Small Anim Pracr 35: 225-9.
disease. Am J Vet Res 44: 2336-40.
24. Center SA (2007) Interpretation of liver enzymes. Ver Clin
6. Badylak SF Van Veet JF (198l) Sequential morphologic and
North Am Small Anim Pracr 37: 297-333.
clinicopathologic alterations in dogs with experimentally
 25. Center SA (1 996) Pathophysiology of liver disease: normal and
induced glucocorticoid hepatopathy. Am J Ver Res 42:
abnormal function. In: Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenrerol-
1310-18.
0gy, 3rd ed. pp. 553-632. W.B. Saunders.
7. Balkman CE, Center SA, Randolph JF, et al. (2003) Evaluation
26. Center SA (1993) Serum bile acids in companion animal medi-
 of urine sulfated and nonsulfated bile acids as a diagnostic test
cine. Ver Clin Norrh Am Small Anim Pract 23: 625-57.
for liver disease in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 222: 1368-75.
27. Center SA, Baldwin BH, Dillingham S, Erb HN, Tennant BC
8. Bermard WV, Divers TJ (l989) Variations in serum sorbitol
{1986) Diagnostic value of serum gamma-glutamyl transferase
dehydrogenase, aspartate transaminase, and isoenzyme 5 of
lactate dehydrogenase activities in horses given carbon tetra-
the cat. J Am Ver Med Assor 188: 507-10.
chloride. Am J Ver Res 50: 622-3.
28. Center SA, Baldwin BH, Erb H, Tennant BC (1986) Bile acid
9. Boyd JW (1983) The mechanisms relating to increases in
concentrations in the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in the
 plasma enzymes and isoenzymes in diseases of animals. Ver Clin
cat. J Am Ver Med Assor 189: 891-6.
Pathof 12: 9-24.
29. Center SA, Baldwin BH, Erb HN, Tennant BC (1985) Bile acid
10. Boyd JW (l989) Serum enzyme changes in newborn calves
 concentrations in the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in the
fed colostrum. Ver Clin Parhol 18: 47-51.
dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 187: 935-40.
420
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
30. Center SA, Crawford MA, Guida L, Erb HN, King J (1993) A
46. Divers TJ, Schappel KA, Sweeney RW, Tennant BC (1993)
retrospective study of 77 cats with severe hepatic lipidosis:
     r
1975-1990. J Ver Inrerm Med 7: 349-59.
horse. Cormel! Ver 83: 237-42.
31. Center SA, Erb HN, Joseph SA (1995) Measurement of serum
47. Ehrhart N, Demell WS, Hoffmann WE, Weigel RM, Powers
bile acids concentrations for diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease
BE, Withrow SJ (l998) Prognostic importance of alkaline
in cats. J Am Ver Med Assoc 207: 1048-54.
phosphatase activity in serum from dogs with appendicular
32. Center SA, Magne ML (1990) Historical, physical examination,
osteosarcoma: 75 cases (1990-1996). J Am Ver Med Assoc 213:
and clinicopathologic features of portosystemic vascular anom-
1002-6.
alies in the dog and cat. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5:
48. Engelking LR (1993) Equine fasting hyperbilirubinemia. Adv
83-93.
Ver Sci Comp Med 37: 115-25.
33. Center SA, ManWarren T, Slater MR, Wilentz E (l991)
49. Engelking LR, Gronwall R {1979) Effects of fasting on hepatic
Evaluation of twelve-hour preprandial and two-hour
bile acid clearance. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 16l: 123-7.
postprandial serum bile acids concentrations for diagnosis of
50. Fermandez NJ, Kidney BA (2007) Alkaline phosphatase:
1 5s        
beyond the liver. Ver Clin Pathol 36: 223-33.
217-26.
51. Fevery J, Van de Vijver M, Michiels R, Heirwegh KP (1977)
34. Center SA, Randolph JF, ManWarren T, Slater M (1991) Effect 
of colostrum ingestion on gamma-glutamyltransferase and
conjugates with the activities of hepatic and renal bilirubin-IX
alkaline phosphatase activities in neonatal pups. Am J Ver Res
alpha-uridine diphosphate glycosyltransferases. Biochem J 164:
52: 499-504.
737-46.
35. Center SA, Slater MR, Manwarren T, Prymak K (1992) Diag-
52. Foster DJ, Thoday KL (20o0) Tissue sources of serum alkaline
nostic efficacy of serum alkaline phosphatase and gamma-
phosphatase in 34 hyperthyroid cats: a qualitative and quan-
titative study. Res Ver Sri 68: 89-94.
hepatobiliary disease: 270 cases (1980-1990). J Am Ver Med
53. Gallagher AE, Panciera DL, Panciera RJ (2006) Hyperphospha-
Assoc 201: 1258-64.
          
36. Chowdhury JR, Wolkoff AW, Arias IM (1988) Heme and bile
418-21.
pigment metabolism. In: The Liver: Biology and Pathobiology
54. Garzotto CK, Berg J. Hoffmann WE, Rand WM (2000)
(eds.), Arias IM, Jokoby WB, Propper H, Schachter D, Shafritz
Prognostic significance of serum alkaline phosphatase activity
DA, 2nd ed., pp. 419-49. Raven Press, Ltd, New York.
 in canine appendicular osteosarcoma. J Ver Inrerm Med 14:
37. Comelius CE, Kelley KC, Himes JA (1975) Heterogeneity of
587-92.
bilirubin conjugates in several animal species. Cormel! Ver 65:
55. Gaskill CL, Hoffmann WE, Cribb AE (2004) Serum alkaline
90-9.
38. Craig AM, Pearson EG, Meyer C, Schmitz JA {199l) Clinico-
leptic dogs. Ver Clin Pathol 33: 215-22.
-uanbas rsauod u stsosgon lomlei Asuen jo sapnis oao oued
56. Gaskill CL, Miller LM, Mattoon JS, er af. (2005) Liver histopa-
tial serum and histopathological changes. Journal of Equine
thology and liver and serum alanine aminotransferase and
Vererinary Science 1l: 261-2, 264-71.
alkaline phosphatase activities in epileptic dogs receiving phe-
39. Craig AM, Pearson EG, Meyer C, Schmitz JA {199l) Serum
mobarbital.VerPathol 42:147-60
liver enzyme and histopathologic changes in calves with
57. Geier A, Fickert P, Trauner M (2006) Mechanisms of disease:
chronic and chronic-delayed Senecio jacobaea toxicosis. Am J Ver
mechanisms and clinical implications of cholestasis in sepsis.
Res 52: 1969-78.
Nat Clin Pracr Gastroenterol Hepatol 3: 57485.
40. Craig AM, Pearson EG, Rowe K (1992) Serum bile acid con-
58. Gilliam LL, Holbrook TC, Dechant JE, Johnson BJ (2007)
centrations in clinically normal cattle: comparison by type, age.
and stage of lactation. Am J Ver Res 53: 17846.
horse. Ver Clin Parhol 36: 196-9.
41. Dayrell-Hart B, Steinberg SA, VanWinkle TJ, Farnbach GC
59. Goggs R, Serrano S, Szladovits B, Keir I, Ong R, Hughes D
(1991) Hepatotoxicity of phenobarbital in dogs: 18 cases
(2008) Clinical investigation of a point-of-care blood ammonia
(1985-1989). J Am Ver Med Assoc 199: 1060-6.
analyzer. Ver Clin Patho! 37: 198-206.
42. DeJong K, George J, Hass C (2008) Stability of sorbitol dehy-
60. Gores GJ, Herman B, Lemasters JI (1990) Plasma membrane
drogenase in canine serum and plasma (abstract). Vererinary
bleb formation and rupture: a common feature of hepatocel-
Pathology 45: 732.
lular injury. Hepatology 1l: 690-8.
43. Dereszymski DM, Center SA, Randolph JF, et al. Clinical and
61. Hadley SP, Hoffmann WE, Kuhlenschmidt MS, Sanecki RK,
dinicopathologic features of dogs that consumed foodborme
Dormer JL (1990) Effect of glucocorticoids on alkaline phospha-
hepatotoxic aflatoxins: 72 cases (2005-2006). J Am Ver Med
tase, alanine aminotransferase, and gamma-glutamyltransferase
Assoc 232: 1329-37.
in cultured dog hepatocytes. Enzyme 43: 89-98.
44. Dillon AR, Sorjonen DC, Powers RD, Spano S (1983) Efects
62. Haliburton JC, Morgan SE (l989) Nonprotein nitrogen-
of dexamethasone and surgical hypotension on hepatic mor-
 indu ced ammonia toxicosis and ammoniated feed toxicity syn-
phologic features and enzymes of dogs. Am J Ver Res 44:
drome. Ver Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 5: 237-49.
1996-9.
63. Hamilton JM, Wright J, Kight D (1973) Alkaline phosphatase 
45. Dillon AR, Spano JS, Powers RD (1 980) Prednisolone induced
Jevels in canine mammary neoplasia. Ver Rer 93: 121-3.
hematologic, biochemical, and histologic changes in the dog.
64. Hank AM, Hoffmann WE, Sanecki RK, Schaeffer DJ, Dorner
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 16: 831-7.
JL {l993) Quantitative determination of equine alkaline
421
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
phosphatase isoenzymes in foal and adult serum. J Ver Interm
phosphatase activity with the healing process of long bone
Med 7: 204.
fractures in dogs. Ver Clin Pathol 34: 35-8, 2005.
65. Hatoff DE, Hardison WG (1979) Induced symthesis of alkaline
83. Laflamme DP, Mahaffey EA, Allen SW, Twedt DC, Prasse KW.
phosphatase by bile acids in rat liver cell culture. Gasrroenrero/-
 s  s  e s (61)  1aq
0gy 77: 1062-7.
surgically induced portosystemic shunts. J Ver Intern Med 8:
66. Hitt ME, Jones BD {1986) Effects of storage temperature and
212-16.
time on canine plasma ammonia concentrations. Am J Ver Res
84. Lawler DF, Keltner DG, Hoffman WE, er al. (1996) Benign
47: 3634.
familial hyperphosphatasemia in Siberian huskies. Am J Ver Res
67. Hoffmann G, van den Ingh TS, Bode P, Rothuizen J (2006)
57: 612-17.
85. Leonard TB, Neptun DA, Popp JA (1984) Serum gamma glu-
Ver Interm Med 20: 856-61.
tamyl transferase as a specific indicator of bile duct lesions in 
68. Hoffmann WE, Baker G, Rieser S, Domer JL (1987) Altera-
the rat liver. Am J Pathol 1l6: 262-9.
tions in selected serum biochemical constituents in equids after
86. Levy JK, Crawford PC, Wermer LL (2006) Effect of age on
induced hepatic disease. Am J Ver Res 48: 1343-7.
reference intervals of serum biochemical values in kittens.
69. Hormey BS, Farmer AJ, Honor DJ, MacKenzie A, Burton S
J Am Ver Med Assoc 228: 1033-7.
(1994) Agarose gel electrophoresis of alkaline phosphatase
87. Lisciandro SC, Hohenhaus A, Brooks M (1998) Coagulation
isoenzymes in the serum of hyperthyroid cats. Ver Clin Patho!
 abnormalities in 22 cats with naturally occurring liver disease.
23: 98-102.
J Ver Intern Med 12: 71-5.
70. Hormey BS, Farmer AJ, MacKenzie A, Honor DJ, Buczkowski
88. McDonagh AF, Palma LA, Lauff JJ, Wu TW (1984) Origin of
 S (1992) Alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes in feline serum
mammalian biliprotein and rearrangement of bilirubin gluc-
using an agarose gel alkaline phosphatase kit method. Canα-
uronides in vivo in the rat. J Clin Invesr 74: 763-70.
dian Journal of Veterinary Research 56: 373-5.
89. McGorum BC, Murphy D, Love S, Milne EM (1999) Clinico-
 71. Homey BS, Honor DJ, MacKenzie A, Burton S (1 993) Stability
pathological features of equine primary hepatic disease: a
of sorbitol dehydrogenase activity in bovine and equine sera.
review of 50 cases. Ver Rec 145: 1349.
Ver Clin Pathol 22: 5-9.
90. McSherry BJ, Lumsden JH, Valli VE, Baird JD (1984) Hyper-
72. Huang HP, Yang HL, Liang SL, Lien YH, Chen KY (1999) Iat-
bilirubinemia in sick cattle. Can J Comp Med 48: 237-40.
91. Melgarejo T, Williams DA, O'Connell NC, Setchell KD (2000)
35: 200-7.
Serum unconjugated bile acids as a test for intestinal bacterial
73. Ivany JM, Anderson DE, Birchard SJ, Mattoon JR, Neubert BG
overgrowth in dogs. Dig Dis Sci 45: 407-14.
(2002) Portosystemic shunt in an alpaca cria. J Am Ver Med
 92. Meyer DJ, Moriello KA, Feder BM, Fehrer-Sawyer SL, Maxwell 
Assor 220: 1696-9, 1652.
AK (l990) Effect of otic medications containing glucocorti-
74. Jansen PL, Mulder GJ, Burchell B, Bock KW (1992) New
coids on liver function test results in healthy dogs. J Am Vet
developments in glucuronidation research: report of a work-
Med Assoc 196: 743-4.
shop on "glucuronidation, its role in health and disease." Hepα-
93. Meyer DJ, Noonan NE 
(198l) Liver tests in dogs
tology 15: 532-44.
receiving anticonvulsant drugs (diphenylhydantoin and primi-
75. Jensen AL, Poulsen JS (1992) Preliminary experience with the
done). Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 17:
diagnostic value of the canine corticosteroid-induced alkaline
26 1-4.
 phosphatase isoenzyme in hypercorticism and diabetes melli-
94. Meyer DJ, Strombeck DR, Stone EA, Zenoble RD, Buss DD
tus. Zentralb! Vererinarmed A 39: 342-8
76. Johns IC, Sweeney RW (2008) Coagulation abnormalities and
in dogs with portosystemic shunts. J Am Ver Med Assor 173:
a  sasr u sdq iaa anad iae sud
377-9.
Intern Med 22: 185-9.
95. Meyer HP, Rothuizen J, Tiemessen I, van den Brom WE, van
77. Jones AL, Schmucker DL (1977) Current concepts of liver
structure as related to function. Gastroenrerology 73: 833-51.
young Irish wolfhounds. Ver Rec 138: 105-7.
78. Kaplan MM, Ohkubo A, Quaroni EG, Sze-Tu D (1983)
96. Mia AS, Gronwall RR, Cornelius CE (1970) Bilirubin-14C
a  sr aee ia in po ssas ps
tumover studies in normal and mutant Southdown sheep with
duct ligation. Hepatology 3: 368-76.
congenital hyperbilirubinemia. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 133:
79. Karayannopoulou M, Koutinas AF Polizopoulou ZS, et af.
955-9.
ym ssop u Aiane as1ierdsoud auex[e wnias [enoi (eoom)
97. Mia AS, Gronwall RR, Comelius CE (1970) Unconjugated
'sa [eieu e uo Aps aanadsond e suse doau Areu
bilirubin transport in normal and mutant Corriedale sheep
J Ver Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 50: 501-5.
with Dubin-Johnson syndrome. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 135:
80. Keller P (l98l) Enzyme activities in the dog: tissue analyses,
33-7.
plasma values, and intracellular distribution. Am J Ver Res 42:
98. Miller PA, Lawrence LM (1986) Changes in equine metabolic
575-82.
characteristics due to exercise fatigue. Am J Ver Res 47:
81. Klomp AE, van de Sluis B, Klomp LW, Wijmenga C (2003) The
2184-6.
ubiquitously expressed MURRl protein is absent in canine
99. Moore GE, Mahaffey EA, Hoenig M (1992) Hematologic and
copper toxicosis. J Hepatol 39: 703-9.
serum biochemical effects of long-term administration of anti-
82. Komnenou A, Karayannopoulou M, Polizopoulou ZS, Con-
inflammatory doses of prednisone in dogs. Am J Ver Res 53:
stantinidis TC, Dessiris A (2005) Correlation of serum alkaline
1033-7.
422
CHAPTER 26 Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver
100. Morandi F Frank N, Avenell J, Daniel GB (2005) Quantitative
and function following a six-day fast. J Comp Pathol 87:
assessment of hepatic function by means of 99mTe-mebrofenin
253-65.
in healthy horses. J Ver Inrern Med 19: 751-5.
118. Rico AG, Braun JP, Benard P, El Hassan AA, Cazieux A (1977)
101. Moss DW, Henderson AR (200l) Principles of clinical enzy-
Tissue distribution and blood levels of gamma-glutamyl tran5-
mology. In: Terz Fundamentals of Clinical Chemistry (eds.), Burtis
ferase in the horse. Eguine Ver J 9: l00-l.
CA, Ashwood, E.R., 5th ed., pp. 157-76. W.B. Saunders,
1 19. Robinson SH (1968) The origins of bilirubin. N Engl J Med 279:
Philadelphia.
143-9.
102. Muller PB, Taboada J, Hosgood G, er al. (2000) Effects of long-
-d  s a  (a I  a  o  1
term phenobarbital treatment on the liver in dogs. J Ver Inrern 
able glucocorticoid-induced hepatopathy in dogs. J Am Ver Med
Med 14: 165-71.
Assoc 170: 603-6.
103. Naylor JM, Kronfeld DS, Johnson K (l980) Fasting hyperbili-
121. Rothuizen J, van den Brom WE (1987) Bilirubin metabolism
rubinemia and its relationship to free fatty acids and triglycer-
in canine hepatobiliary and haemolytic disease. Ver Q 9:
ides in the horse. Proc Sor Exp Biol Med 165: 86-90.
23540.
104. Niles JD, Williams JM, Cripps PJ (2001 ) Hemostatic profiles in
122. Rothuizen J, van den Ingh T (1988) Covalently protein-bound
39 dogs with congenital portosystemic shunts. Ver Surg 30:
bilirubin conjugates in cholestatic disease of dogs. Am J Ver Res
97-1 04.
49: 702-4.
105. Noonan NE, Meyer DJ (l979) Use of plasma arginase and
123. Sato J, Kanata M, Yasuda J, er al. (2005) Changes of serum
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase as specific indicators of hep-
alkaline phosphatase activity in dry and lactational cows. J Vet
tocellular or hepatobiliary disease in the dog. Am J Ver Res 40:
Med Sei 67: 813-15.
942-7.
124. Schmucker DL, Ohta M, Kanai S. Sato Y, Kitani K
106. Osbome CA, Stevens JB (1999) Urinalysis: A Clinical Guide I0
{1990) Hepaticinjury induced by bile salts: correlation between
Compassionate
Patienr Care. Bayer Corporation, Shawnee
biochemical and morphological events. Heparology 12: 1216-
Mission, KS.
21.
107. Ozer J, Ratner M, Shaw M, Bailey W, Schomaker S (2008)
125. Sevelius E (1995) Diagnosis and prognosis of chronic hepatitis
The current state of serum biomarkers of hepatotoxicity. Toxi-
and cirrhosis in dogs. J Small Anim Prarr 36: 521-8.
cology 245: 194-205.
126. Sharkey LC, DeWitt S, Stockman C (2006) Neurologic signs
108. Pappas NJ, Jr. (1986) Source of increased serum aspartate and 
and hyperammonemia in a horse with colic. Ver Clin Pathol 35:
alanine aminotransferase: cycloheximide effect on carbon tet-
254-8.
rachloride hepatotoxicity. Clin Chim Arta 154: 181-9.
127. Simpson KW, Meyer DJ, Boswood A, White RN, Maskell IE
109. Parraga ME, Carlson GP, Thurmond M (1995) Serum protein
(1997) Iron status and erythrocyte volume in dogs with con-
concentrations in horses with severe liver disease: a retrospec-
 genital portosystemic vascular anomalies. J Ver Intern Med ll:
tive study and review of the literature. J Ver Intern Med 9:
14-19.
15461.
128. Snow DH, Harris RC, Stuttard E (1988) Changes in haematol-
110. Patterson WH, Brown CM (1986) Increase of serum gamma-
Ogy and plasma biochemistry during maximal exercise in grey-
glutamyltransferase in neonatal Standardbred foals. Am J Ver
hounds. Ver Rer 123: 487-9.
Res 47: 2461-3.
129. Solter PF, Hoffmann WE (1999) Solubilization of liver alkaline
111. Pauli JV (1983) Colostral transfer of gamma glutamyl trans-
phosphatase isoenzyme during cholestasis in dogs. Am J Ver Res 
ferase in lambs. N Z Ver J 3l: 150-1.
60: 1010-15.
112. Pearson EG, Craig AM, Rowe K (1992) Variability of serum
130. Solter PF Hoffmann WE, Chambers MD, Schaeffer DJ.
bile acid concentrations over time in dairy cattle, and effect of
Kuhlenschmidt MS {1994) Hepatic total 3 alpha-hydroxy bile 
feed deprivation on the variability. Am J Ver Res 53: 1780-3,
acids concentration and enzyme activities in prednisone-
1992.
treated dogs. Am J Ver Res 55: 1086-92.
131. Solter PF, Hoffmann WE, Hungerford LL, Peterson ME, Dorner
associated with encephalopathy and abdominal pain without
JL {1 993) Assessment of corticosteroid-induced alkaline phos-
evidence of liver disease in four mature horses. Equine Ver J
29: 704.
cism in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assor 203: 5348.
114. Peta HG, Carr AP, Myers SL, Joffe DJ, Kidney BA (2007)
132. Spano JS, August JR, Henderson RA, Dumas MB, Groth AH,
 Effect of serum storage anti-inflammatory oral doses of pred-
Jr. (1983) Serum gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase activity in
nisone, and spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism on serum glu-
healthy cats and cats with induced hepatic disease. Am J Ver
tamate dehydrogenase activity in dogs. Ver Clin Pathol 36:
Res 44: 2049-53.
25-9.
133. Stein TA, Burns GP, Wise L {l989) Diagnostic value of
115. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Cavanagh PG, et al. (l983) Feline
liver function tests in bile duct obstruction. J Surg Res 46:
hyperthyroidism: pretreatment clinical and laboratory evalua-
226-9.
tion of 13l cases. J Am Ver Med Assor 183: 103-10.
134. Sterczer A, Meyer HP, Boswijk HC, Rothuizen J {1999) Evalu-
116. Polkes AC, Giguere S, Lester GD, Bain FT (2008) Factors asso-
ation of ammonia measurements in dogs with two analysers
ciated with outcome in foals with neonatal isoerythrolysis (72
for use in veterinary practice. Ver Rec 144: 523-6.
135. Stickle JE, McKnight CA, Williams KJ, Carr EA (2006) Diar-
117. Reid IM, Harrison RD, Collins RA (1977) Fasting and refeeding
rhea and hyperammonemia in a horse with progressive neu-
in the lactating dairy cow. 2. The recovery of liver cell structure
rologic signs. Ver Clin Parhol 35: 250-3.
423
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
136. Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Enzymes. In: Fundamenrals of
148. Wakim KG, Fleisher GA (1963) The fate of enzymes in body
fluids-an experimental study. I1. Disappearance rates of
Ames, IA.
glutamic-oxalacetic transaminase I under various conditions.
137. Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Liver Function. In: Fundamen-
J Lab Clin Med 6l: 86-97.
tals of Veterinary Clinical Pathology. 2nd ed., pp. 675-706. Black-
149. Walker MC, Hill RC. Guilford WG, Scott KC, Jones GL.
well, Ames, IA.
Buergelt CD (2ool) Postprandial venous ammonia concentra-
138. Swenson CL, Graves TK (1997) Absence of liver specificity for
tions in the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in dogs. J Ver
canine alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Ver Clin Pathol 26:
Intern Med 15: 463-6.
26-8.
 ard pe ss [ s (o)   
139. Thomas JS, Green RA (1998) Clotting times and antithrombin
in hepatobiliary disease. In: Texrbook of Vererinary Interna! Medi-
IMI activity in cats with naturally developing diseases: 85 cases
cine, ed. Ettinger SJ, 6th ed., pp. 1422-34. Elsevier Saunders,
{1984-1994). J Am Ver Med Assorc 213: 1290-5.
St. Louis, MO.
140. Thompson JC, Pauli JV (198l) Colostral transfer of gamma
151. West HI (1 996) Clinical and pathological studies in horses with
glutamyl transpeptidase in calves. N Z Ver J 29: 223-6.
hepatic disease. Equine Vererinary Journal 28: 146-56.
152. West HJ (1 989) Evaluation of total plasma bile acid concentra-
in the dog. J Ver Diagn Invesr 12: 101-10.
tions for the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in horses. Res
142. Tisdall PL, Hunt GB, Tsoukalas G, Malik R (1995) Post-prandial
Ver Sri 46: 264-70.
serum bile acid concentrations and ammonia tolerance in
153. West HJ (l99l) Evaluation of total serum bile acid concentra-
e sa  r   s 
tions for the diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease in cattle. Res Vet
Ausr Ver J 72: 121-6.
Sri 51: 133-40.
143. Tornquist SJ, Dodson L, Lanning DV (2000) Effect of tempera-
154. Wiedmeyer CE, Solter PE, Hoffmann WE (2002) Kinetics of
ture, storage time, and sample type on sorbitol dehydrogenase
mRNA expression of alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes in
activity in llama serum and plasma. Ver Clin Parho! 29: l6-18.
hepatic tissues from glucocorticoid-treated dogs. Am J Ver Res
144. Tornquist SJ, Van Saun RJ, Smith BB, Cebra CK, Snyder SP
63: 1089-95.
{1999) Hepatic lipidosis in llamas and alpacas: 3l cases (1991-
155. Yokus B, Cakir UD (2006) Seasonal and physiological varia-
1997). J Am Ver Med Assoc 214: 1368-1372, 1999.
tions in serum chemistry and mineral concentrations in cattle.
145. Toulza O, Center SA, Brooks MB, Erb HN, Warmer KL, Deal
Biol Trace Elem Res 109: 255-66.
W (2006) Evaluation of plasma protein C activity for detection
156. Young DS (1990) Implementation of SI units for clinical labo-
f 'sho u luunus ounssood pue aseas Aeqonedau io
ratory data: style specifications and conversion tables. J Nutr
Am Vet Med Assoc 229: 1761-71.
Biochem 1: 599-613.
146. Trainor D, Center SA, Randolph F, et af. (2003) Urine sulfated
157. Zanker IA, Hammon HM, Blum JW (200l) Activities of
and nonsulfated bile acids as a diagnostic test for liver disease
gamma-glutamyltransferase,
alkaline phosphatase  and
in cats. J Ver Inrern Med 17: 145-53.
aspartate-aminotransferase in colostrum, milk and blood
147. Villar D, Schwartz KJ, Carson TL, Kinker JA, Barker J (2003)
plasma of calves fed first colostrum at 0-2, 6-7, 12-13 and
Acute poisoning of cattle by fertilizer-contaminated water. Ver
Hum Toxicol 45: 88-90.
179-85.
424
27
Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas
and Glucose Metabolism
Robin W. Allison
 Oklahoma State University
The pancreas is a compound organ with both exocrine and
enzymes. EPI is due to loss of pancreatic acinar cells, and
 endocrine functions. The exocrine pancreas is composed of
results in inadequate digestive function (maldigestion). The
 glandular epithelium that forms acinar lobules comprising
clinical signs are similar to intestinal disorders that result in
about 80% of the pancreas," and the endocrine cells are
inadequate absorption of adequately digested nutrients
concentrated in the islets of Langerhans.
(malabsorption). Laboratory testing to differentiate mal-
digestion and malabsorption is discussed in Chapter 28.
The exocrine pancreas
 Detection of pancreatic injury
The diagnosis of pancreatitis can be extremely difficult to
The primary function of the exocrine pancreas is the syn-
establish, especially in cases of chronic or mild disease. Dogs
thesis and secretion of digestive enzymes. These enzymes
with acute pancreatitis frequently exhibit vomiting and
include proteases that are stored in acinar cell zymogen
abdominal pain, but these clinical signs are less common in
granules and secreted as inactive proenzymes (e.g., trypsino-
cats.* Cats seem to develop chronic pancreatitis more fre-
 gen, chymotrypsinogen. proelastase, and proca rboxypepti-
-u saps Asdoau suanao raseas ainoe ueui auanb
dases). lipase, which hydrolyzes lipids; and amylase, which
cate subclinical chronic pancreatitis occurs more often in
hydrolyzes starches.'2 The inactive proenzymes become acti-
vated by enzymatic cleavage of a small peptide (activation
Although most cases of pancreatitis are considered idio-
 peptide). Normally, trypsinogen is cleaved by enterokinase
pathic, various risk factors have been identified. Sorme dog
in the intestine to form trypsin and trypsinogen activation
breeds (miniature schnauzers, Yorkshire terriers) seem to
 peptide (TAP); trypsin then activates other proenzymes.124
be at increased risk.12 Idiopathic hyperlipidemia is also
Unlike the proteases, amylase and lipase are secreted in
common in miniature schnauzers, and hyperlipidemia fre-
active form.12
quently occurs with acute canine pancreatitis; whether
Two major disorders of the exocrine pancreas can be
hyperlipidemia is a cause or effect of the pancreatitis is not 
detected by laboratory evaluation:
clear.124 Other risk factors in dogs include obesity, high fat
● Injury to the pancreatic parenchyma usually due to pan-
diets, a wide variety of drugs, zinc toxicosis, hypercalcemia.
creatitis. Inflammation may result in the premature activa-
trauma, ischemia, biliary tract obstruction, neoplasia, and
tion and leakage of pancreatic enzymes into the pancreatic
infectious agents.124 In cats, many cases of pancreatitis have
interstitium, peritoneal cavity, and vasculature. Pancreatitis
been associated with inflammatory diseases of the bowel
is recognized most commonly in dogs and cats, and may be
and biliary tract (often referred to as triaditis).127 Trematode
acute or chronic. Intraperitoneal release of pancreatic
infections of the liver or pancreas can cause pancreati-
'd a r  a   as i a
tis.43ss.14 Other risk factors in cats are similar to those in
thereby increasing both the severity and the extent of the
dogs.103,129
inflammation. Subsequent release of inflammatory media-
Because clinical signs are nonspecific and highly variable
tors can result in a systemic inflammatory response.96
depending upon disease severity, laboratory testing. imaging
● Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI), a disorder result-
studies, and sometimes pancreatic biopsy are employed to
ing in insufficient production and secretion of pancreatic
confirm the diagnosis. Many laboratory tests for pancreatitis
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
425
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
have been developed, but most have significant limitations.
cats is 33-36 %,96,127 less than that of PLI. Specificity has been
Historically, serum activities of enzymes such as amylase and
reported between 65-90%.* also less than that of PLI. As a
lipase were measured, but such tests have poor sensitivity
result, the serum TLI concentration is now principally
and specificity for pancreatitis (discussed later). However.
applied to diagnosis of pancreatic exocrine insufficiency (see
recently developed immunodiagnostic methods appear more
Chapter 28).
 promising, as detailed below.
 Acute and chronic pancreatitis have been recognized in
 a a      e 's
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI)
been describedas Information on the utility of this assay
 These tests are species-specific immunoassays that use anti-
for diagnosis of equine pancreatitis awaits clinical trials. In
bodies to measure serum concentrations of lipase originating
one study, five of seven horses with strangulating intestinal
obstructions had increased serum TLI, with the highest
(discussed later) used enzymatic methods to measure serum
values in two horses that did not survive.* Serum TLI was
not increased in three of three horses with nonstrangulating
from many tissue sources (i.e., not pancreas-specific lipase ).9
obstructions. Pancreatic histopathology was not performed.
Recently, radioimmunoassays have been developed to detect
canine (cPLI) and feline (fPLI) pancreatic lipase immunore-
Serum lipase activity
Enzymatic assays that measure serum lipase activity detect
cially (Spec cPLIM and Spec fPLIM, IDEXX Laboratories.
lipase from pancreas as well as other tissues." Thus, increases
Westbrook, Maine). There is also a rapid in-clinic test avail-
in serum lipase activity are not specific for pancreatic injury.
able for cPLI (SNAP? cPLIM, IDEXX Laboratories). In dogs.
The utility of measuring serum lipase activity to detect pan-
the sensitivity of cPLI for the detection of pancreatitis is
creatitis varies between species. Serum lipase activity is fre-
65-82%, depending upon disease severity,10 with a specific-
quently normal in cats with spontaneous pancreatitis, and
ity >95%.* Limited studies suggest that cPLI concentrations
therefore is not considered useful for the diagnosis of pan-
are minimally increased with renal failure and not affected
creatitis in this species.46.96.127 Similarly, it is not considered
by prednisone administration,98.9 in contrast to enzymatic
helpful in the diagnosis of pancreatitis in horses or cattle.
although there are rare reports of increased serum lipase
needed. In cats, the sensitivity of fPLI for the detection of
activity with acute pancreatitis in these species.770.115 Serum
pancreatitis is 54-100%. depending upon disease severity.
lipase activity has some utility as a screening test for detec-
   55  e1    
tion of pancreatitis in dogs. and is frequently included on
for detection of moderate to severe pancreatitis, and to date
standard biochemical profiles. However, it is neither sensi-
they are the most useful laboratory tests for diagnosis of
tive nor specific for canine pancreatitis96.ipi Generally.
pancreatitis in dogs and cats.%6
 x- e       s
 Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity
pancreatitis in dogs. and should prompt further evaluation
Trypsinogen is synthesized only by the pancreas, and it is
(cPLI, imaging, biopsy).* However, in one study of dogs
converted to the active proteolytic enzyme, trypsin, in the
with fatal acute pancreatitis, serum lipase activity was
small intestine. The TLI assay uses species-specific antibodies
increased in only 16 of 4l cases.44 In dogs, increased serum
to detect both trypsinogen and trypsin in serum (hence.
lipase activity can result from a variety of conditions other
than pancreatitis, including:
readily available for dogs and cats, and have been used
· Decreased GFR. Dogs with prerenal, renal, or postrenal
experimentally in horses.4o.o.1iz3 In healthy animals, a small
azotemia can have increased serum lipase activity due to
amount of trypsinogen leaks into the extracellular space and
 decreased renal excretion and/or inactivation of lipase.50,76,108
then diffuses via the lymphatics into the blood. Thus. a
Usually the increase is <4x URL, but increases up to 10x URL
normal serum TLI concentration is a good indicator of ade-
have been reported.
quate pancreatic trypsinogen production.123
· Corticosteroid administration. Dexamethasone and, to a
 Increased serum TLI is expected with pancreatitis due to
lesser extent prednisone, can cause increased serum lipase
leakage from damaged acinar cells; however, trypsinogen is
-dai aie sasa ezssd iou sop u aae
cleared by glomerular filtration;* thus any disorder causing
cally <2x URL, but may be as much as 5x URL.
a decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR) can increase
● Neoplasia. A variety of neoplasms involving the pancreas
serum TLI concentration. Activated trypsin, on the other
(carcinoma, adenocarcinoma), liver (hepatocellular carci-
hand, is quickly complexed with protease inhibitors in the
noma, bile duct carcinoma, lymphoma), gastrointestinal
blood, and these complexes are removed by the mononu-
tract (lymphoma, adenocarcinoma), and heart (hemangio-
clear phagocyte system.124 The sensitivity of increased serum
sarcoma) have been associated with increased serum lipase
TLI concentration for diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs and
activity in dogs.77.108
426
CHAPTER 27 Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas and Glucose Metabolism
● Hepatic disease. In addition to neoplasia, hepatic necrosis
lipase activities for detecting pancreatic injury have not been
and fatty degeneration have been associated with increased
determined.
serum lipase activity in dogs. 108
● Other. Gastrointestinal and hepatic tissues can be a source
Other laboratory abnormalities associated with
for serum lipase activity.?7 Increased serum lipase activity up
pancreatic injury
to 5x URL has been reported in dogs with acute enteritis;
None of the routine laboratory tests typically performed as
however, pancreatitis was not ruled out in those dogs.7s Mild
part of the minimum database (CBC and biochemical profile)
transient increases in serum lipase activity (3-fold baseline
is diagnostic for pancreatic injury, but the presence of several
 of these abnormalities in addition to physical findings sug-
rotomy that included manipulation of viscera; no histologic
gestive of pancreatitis should prompt further evaluation
 evidence of pancreatitis was present.
Using more sensitive and specific tests (cPLI, imaging. etc.).
 Laboratory abnormalities that can accompany pancreatic
Serum amylase activity
injury are discussed here. It is important to realize that some
Assays that measure serum amylase activity, similar to those
for serum lipase activity. detect amylase from a variety of
 may have normal CBC and biochemical profle results 127,129
tissue sourcesinadditiontothe pancreas9,10s Thus increased
· Leukocytosis and neutrophilia with or without a left shift
serum amylase activity is not specific for pancreatic injury.
may be present. Hematologic evidence of inflammation
In dogs. four amylase isoenzymes have been identified
occurs more often with severe pancreatitis in dogs (~55% of
including amylase complexes bound to proteins (macroamy-
cases), and less often with pancreatitis in cats.96.127 Because
lases), which have a longer serum half-life than uncom-
 pancreatitis can be very painful, neutrophilia induced both
plexed amylase.18.105
by epinephrine (excitement) and corticosteroids (stress)
Although serum amylase activity is readily available on
 a sd aq os  ao io oe 
standard biochemical profles, its utility for the diagnosis of
either inflammation or stress.
pancreatitis is limited. Cats with spontaneous or experimen-
· Increased hematocrit, hemoglobin concentration, and red
blood cell count may be present if the animal is significantly
dehydrated, which may occur secondary to vomiting and
reduced fluid intake. Mild anemia, regenerative or nonregen-
Useful for diagnosis of pancreatitis in cats.17 Increased serum
erative, occurs occasionally in dogs and cats with pancreatitis.
amylase activity has rarely been reported with pancreatitis
· Azotemia, usually prerenal, is common in severe cases of
in cattle or horses,770.115 and may also occur with intestinal
pancreatitis and is caused by a combination of factors.
including dehydration and hypovolemia that result in
is neither sensitive nor specific for pancreatitis, and gener-
decreased GFR %6.127 Tubular concentrating ability is usually
ally considered inferior to serum lipase activity as a screen-
normal, and urine specific gravity is usually high. Urine
specifc gravity helps to differentiate prerenal azotemia
as suggestive of pancreatitis, prompting further evaluation
accompanying pancreatitis from renal azotemia associated
(cPLI, imaging. biopsy). However, in dogs without pancre-
with renal failure. This is an important distinction, because 
atitis many of the same conditions that cause increased
pancreatitis and renal failure can cause increases in serum 
serum lipase activity (discussed earlier) can also cause
amylase and lipase activities of similar magnitude. In addi-
tion, the clinical signs of pancreatitis and renal failure can
main exception is corticosteroid administration, which does
be similar. Analysis of urine collected at the time of blood
not increase serum amylase activity and may actually
sampling is important for animals in which pancreatitis or
decrease it.32.73
renal failure (or both) are possibilities; keep in mind that
acute renal failure can occur in severe cases of pancreatitis.
Peritoneal fluid amylase and lipase activities
Details of differentiating prerenal from renal azotemia.
 If peritoneal fluid can be obtained from animals suspected
including other potential causes of dilute urine in azotemic
 of having pancreatic injury. measurement of amylase and
animals, are discussed in Chapter 23.
lipase activities in this fluid may be diagnostically useful.
· Hyperglycemia is common in animals with acute pancre-
With active pancreatic damage, these enzymes leak into the
atic injury and, acutely, is the result of increased serum
cavity resulting in increased fluid enzyme activity. Peritoneal
concentrations of corticosteroids, epinephrine, and gluca-
fluid amylase or lipase activity that is higher than serum
'd   i  d   
amylase or lipase activity is suggestive of pancreatic
hyperglycemia may be caused by diabetes mellitus resulting
from islet cell injury.
e     a  
   n    
The sensitivity and specificity of peritoneal fluid amylase and
in animals with pancreatic injury. The exact pathogenesis of
427
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
this hypocalcemia is not known, but is likely multifactorial.
Proposed mechanisms include calcium binding with fatty
acids in plasma or those freed from peripancreatic fat by the
action of pancreatic lipase (fat saponification), hormonal
imbalances involving PTH, glucagon, or calcitonin, and
intracellular translocation of calcium.' In dogs with marked
hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia resulting in decreased
protein-bound calcium also may contribute to the hypocal-
cemia. In one study of cats with acute pancreatitis, 19 of 46
cats had low total serum calcium but 28 of 46 had low
ionized calcium, and low ionized calcium was associated
with a poorer clinical outcome.61
ferase, aspartate aminotransferase) or induced (alkaline
phosphatase, and Y-glutamyltransferase) liver enzymes
enzymes results from ischemic or toxic damage to hepato-
50.0
wn
atic enzymes. Increased serum activity of induced enzymes
may result from blockage of the common bile duct second-
Figure 27.1 The islets of Langerhans (arrow) are the endocrine portion
ary to inflammation of tissue near both the pancreas and
of the pancreas. Both deficient and excesive production of insulin by
the bile duct. Hepatic lipidosis can occur with pancreatitis in
islet β cells result in abnormmalities of glucose metabolism.
anorexic cats and contribute to hepatic enzyme activity
increases. Serum bilirubin concentration may be increased
in dogs and cats with pancreatitis, particularly those with
crine cells present in the islets, including α. cells, which
acute disease; potential causes include cholestasis (intra- or
secrete glucagon, & cells, which secrete somatostatin, and PP
cells, which secrete pancreatic polypeptide. However, the
· Hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia, often
most common functional abnormalities of the endocrine
with gross plasma lipemia, are common in dogs with pan-
pancreas involve the β cells, which comprise 60-80% of all
creatitis. Although the pathogenesis is not clear, altered lipo-
islet cells and secrete insulin.13 Both deficient and excessive
protein processing is suspected. and cholestasis may
insulin production may result in serious abnormalities of
contribute.'d7 Hypertriglyceridemia may be either a cause or 
glucose metabolism. Many factors in addition to the endo
an effect of pancreatitis.1zs Hypercholesterolemia, and less 
crine pancreas play key roles in glucose metabolism. This
 section reviews the major factors affecting glucose metabo-
· Serum and plasma protein concentrations are variable in
lism, discusses the causes of decreased blood glucose con-
patients with pancreatitis. Exudation of protein-rich fluid
centration (hypoglycemia) and  increased blood glucose
 into the peritoneal cavity, as a component of peritonitis, can
concentration (hyperglycemia). and describes tests for eval-
 decrease the serum protein concentration, but dehydration
lating the status of glucose metabolism.
tends to increase the serum protein concentration. In some
cases, these changes counterbalance each other.
Normal glucose metabolism
· Disseminated intravascular coagulation can be a sequela
Sources of blood glucose
to acute pancreatitis. Altera tions in hemostatic function tests
Glucose in blood is derived from three sources:
that occur with disseminated intravascular coagulation are
● Intestinal absorption. Dietary carbohydrates are broken
discussed in Chapter l6. Because bile flow is essential for
down and absorbed in the intestine. Intestinal absorption of
absorption of fat-soluble vitamins in the intestine, bile duct
 glucose can increase blood glucose concentrations in mono-
obstruction caused by pancreatic disease occasionally leads
 gastric animals for 2-4 hours after a meal.
to vitamin K deficiency. causing altered hemostasis and
● Hepatic production. Hepatic production of glucose results
abnormal coagulation test results.
from gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. Gluconeogenesis
is the formation of glucose from noncarbohydrate sources.
primarily amino acids (from protein) and glycerol (from fat)
The endocrine pancreas
in monogastric animals. Ruminants absorb volatile fatty
acids rather than carbohydrates, and gluconeogenesis from
The islets of Langerhans contain the cells of the endocrine
propionic acid is a major source of blood glucose in rumi-
pancreas (Fig. 27.1 ). There are a variety of specialized endo-
428
CHAPTER 27 Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas and Glucose Metabolism
● Kidney production. Although the liver is considered the
 primary source of glucose production, gluconeogenesis has
Insulin also accelerates the conversion of glucose to fat,
also been documented in renal epithelial cells. One study in
accelerates glucose oxidation, and promotes protein and gly-
dogs demonstrated the kidney is responsible for about 30%
cogen synthesis in muscle. The net effect of these actions is
of glucose turnover during fasting.'5 Renal gluconeogenesis
increased hepatic and peripheral uptake and use of glucose.
occurs in the proximal tubule, and is now understood to
with decreased hepatic synthesis of glucose.
have a significant effect on glucose metabolism in both
Glucagon is secreted by c cells of the pancreatic islets in
normal and abnormal physiological states.68
response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia. In direct contrast
to insulin, glucagon increases blood glucose concentrations
Regulation of blood glucose concentration
by stimulating hepatic gluconeogenesis and hepatic glycoge-
Blood glucose concentrations are dependent on multiple
interacting factors, including time since last meal, hormonal
Glucocorticoids increase blood glucose concentrations by
influences, and use of glucose by peripheral tissues such as
skeletal muscle. Time since the last meal is important only
inducing a state of insulin resistance by affecting the ability
in monogastric animals, in which food ingestion is followed
by an increase in the blood glucose concentration.
into cells.ibe The net effect of these actions is decreased
 Hormones affect the blood glucose concentration by regu-
peripheral use of glucose and increased hepatic synthesis of
lating hepatic production and peripheral use of glucose
glucose.
(Table 27.l). Insulin is secreted by pancreatic islet β cells.
Catecholamines (i.e., epinephrine and norepinephrine)
 Insulin lowers blood glucose concentrations by promoting
increase blood glucose concentrations by increasing hepatic
glucose uptake by liver, skeletal muscle, and fat; by inhibit-
glycogenolysis, inhibiting insulin secretion, and stimulating
ing gluconeogenesis in the liver; and by promoting the for-
growth hormone release.o The net effect of these actions is
mation and storage of liver glycogen. Glucose uptake into
decreased peripheral use of glucose and increased hepatic
myocytes and adipocytes is facilitated by a glucose transport
synthesis and release of glucose.
protein called GLUT-4, which is translocated to plasma
Growth hormone increases blood glucose concentrations
 membranes after insulin binds to cell surface insulin recep-
by inhibiting insulin-mediated uptake of glucose by hepato-
tors.'3 After a meal, approximately one-third of absorbed
cytes, muscle cells, and adipose cells: by increasing hepatic
glucose is stored as glycogen within the liver, and approxi-
production of glucose; and by exerting a post receptor influ-
ence within cells that inhibits the action of insulin on glucose
Table 27.1 Effects of various hormones on glucose metabolism and
metabolism.47.87 The net effect of these actions is decreased
blood glucose concentrations.
peripheral use of glucose and increased hepatic synthesis of
glucose.
Hormone
 Actions
Effect on blood
 Extreme physical activity might result in a decreased
[Glucose] 
blood glucose concentration because of increased use of
glucose by tissues such as skeletal muscle. In normal animals.
Insulin 
 Promnotes tissue glucose
Decrease
hormonal influences keep the blood glucose concentrations
uptake
stable during most types of physical activity.
Inhibits gluconeogenesis
Promnotes glycogen synthesis
Causes of hypoglycemia
Glucagon
 Prornotes gluconeogenesis 
Increase
Conditions that can cause hypoglycemia are listed in Table
 Promotes glycogenolysis
27.2.
Inhibits glycogen synthesis
● Drugs. Therapeutic insulin overdose may occur when
Glucocorticoids
 Promotes gluconeogenesis
Increase
treating an animal that has diabetes mellitus. Similarly, sul-
 Promotes glucagon release
fonylurea medications such as glipizide and glyburide, which
 Inhibits tissue glucose uptake
act by stimulating insulin secretion, may cause hypoglyce-
 Promote glycogenolysis
mia. An increased insulin concentration decreases gluconeo-
Catecholarmines
Increase
Inhibits insulin secretion
genesis and glycogenolysis and increases cellular uptake and
 Stirmulates growth hormone
use of glucose.
release
· Extreme exertion. Hypoglycemia may occur in hunting
dogs and endurance horses, if glycolysis demands more glucose 
Growth
Inhibits tissue glucose uptake
Increase
hormone
than gluconeogenesis or glycogenolysis can produce.106
 Inhibits insulin action 
 Promotes glucose production
· Glycogen storage diseases. These rare diseases are con-
genital deficiencies of the enzymes required for glycogenoly-
sis, causing intracellular glycogen accumulation and possibly
429
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Table 27.2 Causes of hypoglycemia.
and protein probably play an important role in this syn-
s5a
drome. Inadequate levels of hepatic enzymes for gluconeo-
genesis also may contribute.
Insulin overdose
 Sulfonylurea medications
● Lactational hypoglycemia. This syndrome, also known as
Extreme exertion
spontaneous bovine ketosis, occurs in cattle during periods
 Glycogen storage disease5
of marked milk production. Hepatic gluconeogenesis is
Hepatic insufficiency or failure*
unable to meet the demand for glucose production, and
Hypoadrenocorticism*
ketosis develops due to increased fat mobilization.
Hypopituitarism
● Neoplasia. Neoplasrms of the β cells of the pancreatic islets
Juvenile and neonatal hypoglycemia
(insulinomas) are the most common tumors associated with
Lactational hypoglycemia*
hypoglycemia. Insulinomas have been reported in dogs, cats.
 Neoplasia 
and ferrets.16.z Excess insulin production by the neoplastic
β-cell tumor (insulinoma)*
β cells causes increased glucose utilization by tissues and
Non-β-cell tumors 
decreased hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis.
 Pregnancy hypoglycemia
 Hypoglycermia may be sporadic, but is often of suffcient
Sepsis*
 Starvation or malabsorption 
magnitude to cause clinical signs of wealkness and seizures.
 Xylitol toxicosis
 Non-β cell tumors of several types have also been associated
with a paraneoplastic hypoglycemia. In dogs. many of these
+ Relatively cormmon.
tumors have been mesenchymal (leiomyoma, leiomyosar-
coma), but epithelial tumors (hepatic carcinoma, renal car-
cinoma, and others) and round cell tumors (lymphoma,
plasma cell tumor) have also been reported.s Proposed
mechanisms for the hypoglycemia include liver dysfunction,
hypoglycemia. A variety of speci fic enzyme deficiencies have
glucose utilization by neoplastic cells, and neoplastic cell
production of insulin-like growth factor.'3 In horses, hypo-
● Hepatic insufficiency/failure. Severe hepatic insufficiency
glycemia has been reported in association with hepatic and
or hepatic failure resulting from the loss of >70% of func-
renal neoplasia, peritoneal mesothelioma, and gastrointesti-
tional hepatic mass may cause hypoglycemia due to
nal stromal tumor.6.37,42.65.s6
decreased gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis. Other labo-
· Pregnancy hypoglycemia. A syndrome of hypoglycemia
ratory evidence of decreased hepatic function is expected to
and ketonemia may occur during late pregnancy in dogs and
be present, such as hypoabluminemia, decreased BUN con-
sheep.56.91 There is a decreased ability to produce glucose via
centration, and increased serum bile acid concentration (see
gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis, and lipolysis due to blunt-
Chapter 26, Laboratory Evaluation of the Liver).
ing of the normal responses to hypoglycemia. In sheep. this
· Hypoadrenocorticism. Hypoglycemia occurs 
inconsis-
is referred to as pregnancy toxemia, which may be related
tently in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism, likely caused by a
 to the number of fetuses and quality/quantity of feed. Preg-
lack of cortisol. Hypoglycemia is usually mild and probably
nancy hypoglycemia appears to be uncommon in dogs.
results from decreased gluconeogenesis and  increased
· Sepsis. Hypoglycemia occurs inconsistently with sepsis.
most often associated with endotoxemia. Experimentally.
· Hypopituitarism. Lack of ACTH secretion from the pitu-
hyperglycemia occurs early, followed by hypoglycemia.?
itary results in hypocortisolemia, which may cause mild
The causes of hypoglycemia that occurs in association with
hypoglycemia. Lack of growth hormone secretion may also
sepsis are not completely understood. Possible causes include
con tribute to hypoglycemia.
impaired gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis and increased
· Juvenile and neonatal hypoglycemia. Neonatal hypogly-
use of glucose by tissues, including leukocytes.
cemia is especially common in pigs. but it can occur in other
Hypoglycemia secondary to glucose consumption by
species. It is usually associated with poor nursing secondary
large numbers of hemotropic mycoplasmas, bacteria that
to diarrhea, dehydration, or hypothermia in the piglets, or
parasitize erythrocytes, has been reported in pigs. sheep.
agalactia in the sow.22.s Hypoglycemia during periods of
llamas, and calves. However, rapid bacterial glycolysis in
decreased food intake in neonates results from inadequate
vitro may also cause artifactually decreased blood glucose
storage pools of glycogen and protein, which could be used
concentrations.'3
for glucose production. Juvenile hypoglycemia is a syn-
· Starvation or malabsorption. Decreased glucose absorp-
drome that usually is seen in toy breed puppies younger
tion from the intestine is a rare cause of hypoglycemia.
than 6 months.1p.113 Clinical signs often are triggered by
Hypoglycemia only occurs after long-term starvation or mal-
stressors such as diarrhea, fasting. or parasitism. As in neo-
absorption, because gluconeogenesis helps to maintain a
430
CHAPTER 27 Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas and Glucose Metabolism
normal blood glucose concentration at the expense of other
doxical hyperglycemia that may occur in a diabetic animal
substances, principally protein.
in response to excess insulin administration. The actions of
● Xylitol toxicosis. Xylitol is used as a sugar substitute in
glucagon and glucocorticoids were described earlier (see
various products, and is a strong promoter of insulin release
Regulation of Blood Glucose Concentrationy.
in dogs. Severe hypoglycemia has been reported in dogs
· Physiologic. Mild hyperglycemia can occur secondary to
following ingestion of xylitol-containing sugar-free prod-
several physiologic responses. During diestrus, progesterone
ucts.23,24 xylitol also causes marked changes in liver lealkage
stimulates release of growth hormone, which decreases
enzymes, as described for diffuse hepatic necrosis (Chapter
tissue glucose utilization. Catecholamine release (epineph-
26)
rine and norepinephrine) associated with excitement, pain.
or strenuous exertion stimulates growth hormone release.
Causes of hyperglycemia
inhibits insulin secretion, and stimulates glycogenolyis. Cats
Conditions that can cause hyperglycemia are listed in Table
frequently exhibit transient hyperglycemia related to strug-
27.3.
gling during blood collection; the magnitude of the hyper-
· Drugs or toxins. A variety of drugs are associated with
transient mild hyperglycemia. The mechanisms of action
for 1.5-2 hours.75.s A stress response, caused by endogenous
 differ. Detomidine, xylazine, propanolol, and thyroxine
corticosteroid release, stimulates gluconeogensis, glucagon
inhibit insulin release. Progestins and morphine stimulate
release, and causes a state of insulin resistance. Corticoste-
growth hormone release; ketamine stimulates epinephrine
roid and/or catecholamine release likely play a role in many
release. Megestrol acetate acts as a steroid and also stimu-
different disease processes in which hyperglycemia occurs
lates growth horrmone release. The Somogyi effect is a para-
secondarily. Monogastric animals experience a normal post-
prandial increase in blood glucose concentrations that typi-
cally subsides within 4 hours. The magnitude of increase
Table 27.3 Causes of hyperglycemia.
may be either constrained within the reference interval or
result in an interpreted mild hyperglycemia.
Drugs or toxins 
● Diabetes mellitus. Diabetes mellitus is caused by a defi
Detomidine 
Ethylene glycol 
        
Glucocorticoids
action of insulin in target tissues, thereby resulting in abnor-
Glucagon
mal glucose metabolism. Altered protein and lipid metabo-
Insulin (Somogyi effect) 
lism also occurs in diabetes mellitus. Diabetes is typically
Intravenous glucose
associated with the greatest degrees of hyperglycemia.
Ketamine
Therefore, animals with diabetes mellitus usually have blood
Megestrol acetate 
glucose concentrations greater than the renal threshold
Morphine
resulting in glucosuria. Glucosuria occurs less commonly
 Progestins
with other causes of glucose intolerance. Diabetes mellitus
 Propanolol
has been classified according to the underlying cause as
Thyroxine
either type 1 or type 2, and by the dependence of the
affected animal on insulin therapy as either insulin depen-
Physiologic
Diestrus (progestins)
dent (IDDM) or noninsulin dependent (NIDDM). These two 
classification schemes overlap, causing confusion regarding
 Exertion/excitement/pain (catecholarnines)
 Postprandial (monogastrics)
the types of diabetes mellitus occurring in animals. Type 1
Stress (corticosteroids)
diabetes mellitus results from immune-mediated destruction
Pathologic
of pancreatic β cells, and animals with type 1 diabetes mel-
Diabetes mellitus
litus are insulin dependent. Type 1 diabetes is the most
Hepatocutaneous syndrome (dogs)
frequent cause of diabetes in dogs. but it has not been well
 Hyperammonemia (horses and cattle)
documented in cats.*8 Insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
Metabolic syndrome (horses) 
can also occur secondary to other disease processes that
Milk fever (cattle)
destroy β cells (such as pancreatitiss). or cause β cell hypo-
Moribund animals
plasia (genetic diabetes mellitus in Keeshond dogs."4 and
Neoplasia—acromegaly, glucagonoma,
juvenile pancreatic atrophy in greyhounds.'°) Type 2 diabe-
hyperadrenocorticism, pheochromocytoma,
tes mellitus is characterized by a sluggish insulin response
hyperthyroidism, hyperpituitarism 
to hyperglycemia (i.e., decreased capacity to produce insulin)
Pancreatitis
 Proximal duodenal obstruction (cattle)
and a poor tissue response to insulin (i.e., insulin resistance).
Animals with type 2 diabetes mellitus may be either insulin
or noninsulin dependent. This is the most common type of
431
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
which is a complex disorder that mimics Cushing's disease.57
Affected horses are typically obese and insulin resistant, and
are prone to develop laminitis.
· Milk fever. Hyperglycemia, along with hypocalcemia and
hypophosphatemia, is often present in cattle with milk fever
(parturient paresis).8"
Hypocalcemia suppresses  insulin
release;12° catecholamine and/or corticosteroid release in
"down" cows may also contribute to the hyperglycemia.
· Moribund animals. Hyperglycemia may occur in mori-
bund animals, usually ruminants. Likely causes include cat-
echolamine and/or corticosteroid release, and decreased
peripheral use of glucose.
● Neoplasia. A variety of neoplastic diseases can predispose
to development of diabetes mellitus. Acromegaly is typically
caused by a pituitary adenoma that secretes growth hormone.
and occurs most commonly in cats. Excess growth hormone
promotes insulin resistance. Glucagonoma is a pancreatic c.
50.0 um
cell tumor that secretes glucagon, which increases hepatic
glucose production. Hyperadrenocorticism, whether due to
pituitary or adrenal neoplasia, results in excess cortisol pro-
Figure 27.2 Pancreatic ammyloidosis. Amyloid deposition surrounds β
duction that increases hepatic gluconeogenesis and causes
cells and has enlarged this islet of Langerhans. Amyloid deposition is toxic
insulin resistance. Hyperadrenocorticism is a fairly common
to β cells and hampers insulin secretion.
concurrent disorder in dogs diagnosed with diabetes melli-
tus." Pheochromocytomas secrete catecholamines, which
inhibit insulin secretion and stimulate glycogenolyis. A small
diabetes mellitus in cats, but it can occur in dogs as well.8
      
Approximately 70% of cats with type 2 diabetes mellitus are
hyperglycemic, theorized to be due to insulin resistance; the
insulin dependent.30
mechanism is unknown." Hyperpituitarism may be due to
The pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes mellitus in cats is
pituitary hyperplasia or neoplasia, with excess secretion of
complex and incompletely understood. A consistent finding
growth hormone or ACTH that causes insulin resistance and
in over 90% of diabetic cats is deposition of islet amyloid.
 increased cortisol concentrations. Pituitary pars intermedia
derived from islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP, or amylin )72
dysfunction in horses causes increased ACTH secretion and
(Fig. 27.2). Pancreatic amyloidosis is toxic to β cells, causing
hyperglycemia."2
cell death and decreased insulin secretion.7? IAPP is secreted
· Pancreatitis. Destruction of β cells due to pancreatitis can
by β cells along with insulin, and states of insulin resistance
lead to development of insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.
(e.g., obesity) cause increased secretion of both insulin and
au j %o oi dn u asn uau al aq A s
 IAPP. In turn, circulating IAPP may contribute to peripheral
IDDM cases.48
 insulin resistance. Obesity causes insulin resistance in several
· Proximal duodenal obstruction. Cattle with proximal duo-
ways (down-regulates insulin receptors, impairs receptor
denal obstruction may have marked hyperglycemia, up to
affinity for insulin, causes postreceptor defects in insulin
1000 mg/dL."5 The proposed pathogenesis is a combination
action) and is considered a major risk factor for diabetes
of stress and decreased peripheral glucose utilization. By
melitus in cats.30
contrast, cattle with abomasal volvulus have a much milder
●Hepatocutaneous syndrome. This uncommon syndrome
hyperglycemia, usually attributed to stress.
in dogs is characterized by liver disease in combination with
superficial necrolytic dermatitis. Hyperglycemia is common,
Laboratory evaluation of glucose metabolism
but the pathogenesis is not clear.39
Blood glucose
· Hyperammonemia. Hyperglycemia may occur in horses
Measurement of the blood glucose concentration is the
and cattle with hyperammonemia that is unrelated to liver
initial step in evaluating glucose metabolism. After detection
disease (e.g., excess ammonia production in the intestine.
of either hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia, tests for more
lrea toxicosis, ammonia toxicosis). Proposed mechanisms
specific evaluation of glucose metabolism may be required.
include stimulation of gluconeogenesis and reduced tissue
Analysis of blood glucose concentration can be performed
uptake of glucose.2.31
 by a reference laboratory and is usually part of the standard
● Metabolic syndrome. Serum glucose concentrations may
biochemical profile. Serum or plasma is the sample required
be increased or normal in horses with metabolic syndrome.
by reference laboratories, and it must be separated from
432
CHAPTER 27 Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas and Glucose Metabolism
erythrocytes within 30 minutes of blood collection. Glycoly-
Serum insulin
Insulin levels can be determined in serum or heparinized
if the serum or plasma remains in contact with erythrocytes.
plasma. These are usually immunoassays using antibodies 
Sodium fluoride anticoagulant inhibits glycolysis and should
be used if serum or plasma cannot be separated from cells
good crossreactivity with canine insulin; assays should be
promptly. All in-clinic clinical chemistry analyzers also
validated for the species of interest. Serum insulin is stable
have glucose methods, either as single tests or included in
for a week if kept refrigerated, and for several months if
panels. Portable blood glucose meters (PBGMs) are also
frozen.106
available that allow rapid and repeated measurements of
    r   
whole blood glucose concentrations in clinic situations;
cemic animals when insulinoma is suspected. Because
some pet owners utilize these instruments to monitor dia-
animals with insulinoma may be euglycemic on a random
blood sample, it is important to document inappropriate 
been evaluated for use in animals; most of them provide
insulin levels at the same time that hypoglycemia is present.
Normally, insulin concentrations should be very low when
In most cases (but not all), glucose concentrations deter-
glucose concentrations are low. In dogs with a blood glucose
mined by PBGMs are lower than those determined by refer-
<60mg/dL, detection of insulin concentrations that are
ence methods. Therefore, it is important to consider test
above the reference interval (usually >20 μU/mL) is strong
 n  si n  
 evidence for insulinoma.? Insulinoma is possible in hypo-
patient.
glycemic dogs with insulin concentrations in the mid to
Because blood glucose concentrations in monogastric
upper reference interval (10-20μU/mL). Fasting. with
animals are increased for 2-4 hours postprandially, glucose
hourly evaluation of blood glucose concentrations, may be
concentrations should be measured after fasting. Dogs
required to achieve the desired hypoglycemic state for accu-
and cats should be fasted for 12 hours before sampling to
rate results. Dogs must be carefully monitored during this
avoid postprandial influences. Potentially hypoglycemic
 process to avoid life-threatening hypoglycemia. Following
animals should not be fasted before sampling. however.
the test, the dog should be fed several small meals over
because severe hypoglycemia may result. Horses usually
several hours. Calculated ratios (insulin : glucose or amended
are not fasted before collecting blood samples for glucose
insulin :glucose) are not reliable for diagnosis of insulinoma
analysis; however, blood glucose concentrations might
and are not recommended.
   u t r  e  a
 In theory. measurement of insulin levels in diabetic
energy supplements. It is not necessary to fast ruminants
animals could help to classify their disease as IDDM or
before blood glucose analysis, because they primarily absorb
NIDDM. Practically, however, this has not proved to be very
volatile fatty acids rather than glucose from the gastrointes-
useful. The vast majority of dogs have IDDM with low serum 
tinal tract
insulin concentrations. Most cats with type 2 diabetes mel-
Artifactual hypoglycemia may occur due to in vitro
litus (insulin resistant) also have low serum insulin and
consumption of glucose in cases of extreme leukocytosis
require insulin therapy. although some only transiently. Pro-
and marked erythrocyte parasitemia with hemotropic
longed hyperglycemia and glucose toxicity, which impairs β
mycoplasmas.
cell function, is thought to be responsible for this finding."
Urine glucose
Fructosamine
Urine glucose measurement is discussed in Chapter 23. Glul-
a  n       a
cosuria occurs when the blood glucose concentration exceeds
protein (i.e., a protein with attached carbohydrate). Fructos-
the renal threshold, which varies by species. Renal thresh-
amine is formed when glucose is linked irreversibly to amine
olds are between 180 and 220mg/dL in dogs.2" 200 to
groups of albumin and other proteins in the blood.? The
/ 0o1 pue ag'sasioy u! 1p/s007-081 ag's1 u1 1p/a 008
serum fructosamine concentration is an indicator of blood
dL in cattle." Concurrent measurement of blood glucose is
glucose concentrations during the previous 2-3 weeks
important when interpreting glucosuria; diabetic animals
(based on the average life-span of the proteins involved in
typically have both persistent hyperglycemia and glucosuria.
this complex).$ Fructosarmine provides more reliable infor-
 Glucosuria can occur in the absence of hyperglycemia if the
mation regarding the long-term state of glucose metabolism
renal glucose threshold is decreased. Decreased renal thresh-
than the blood glucose concentration, which may be tran-
olds usually result from proximal tubular abnormalities.
siently increased in some situations. Fructosamine, there-
which may be acquired or congenital. Acquired abnormali-
fore, has potential in establishing the diagnosis of diabetes
ties include those caused by ischemia, nephrotoxins, and
mellitus and in monitoring therapy for diabetics.
amyloidosis;21 congenital disorders include primary renal
 Serum fructosamine assays are available at reference labo-
glucosuria and Fanconi syndrome.8
ratories. Fructosamine appears to be quite stable in serum
433
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
kept refrigerated (~10 days) or frozen (~30 days).54.63 Hemo-
Decreased  fructosamine  concentrations have been
lyzed samples may give erroneous results, and should be
reported in normoglycemic ca ts with hyperthyroidism, lilkely
avoided. Hyperproteinemia and hyperbilirubinemia do not
due to increased protein turnover."4 Decreased fructosamine
appear to affect test results.s2
concentrations in the absence of hypoglycemia or hypopro-
teinemia have also been reported in some animals with
Increased fructosamine concentrafions
parasitic infections, including dogs with Angiostrongylus
Increased fructosamine concentrations are indicative of per-
vasorum'22 and sheep with Teladorsagia circumcincta? infec-
sistently increased blood glucose concentrations and, in dia-
tions. Increased protein turnover is suspected in these cases.
betic animals receiving insulin treatment, of a lack of
Decreased fructosamine concentrations were reported in
therapeutic control of blood glucose concentrations during
normoglycemic, normoproteinemic dogs (but not cats) that
the previous 2-3 weeks. Because hyperglycemia is relatively
were hyperlipidemic or azotemic.82
common even in well-controlled diabetics, the cut-off value
used for a determination of poor glycemic control is greater
Glycated hemoglobin
 r      
Glycated hemoglobin (GHb) is formed in erythrocytes by an
nondiabetic animals (typically 365μmol/L) 2.3
irreversible reaction between carbohydrates (especially
Fructosamine also is useful in distinguishing excitement-
glucose) and hemoglobin. Glycated hemoglobin forms con-
induced hyperglycemia from diabetic hyperglycemia in cats.
tinuously during the life span of an erythrocyte; therefore.
Fructosamine concentrations are usually within the refer
older erythrocytes usually contain more GHb compared with
ence interval in cats with hyperglycemia caused by excite-
younger erythrocytes. The amount of GHb that is formed is
ment, since hyperglycemia must be present for approxima tely
proportional to the blood glucose concentration during the
 n     
life span of the erythrocyte. The blood GHb concentration
detected. The reported sensitivity of increased fructosamine
reflects glucose status during a longer period of time than
concentration for detection of diabetes mellitus in cats is
does the serum fructosamine concentration, because of rela-
93%, with a specificity of 86%.1^ The reported sensitivity
and specificity of increased fructosamine concentration for
in dogs. 70 days in cats, 150 days in cattle and horses).52
detection of diabetes mellitus in dogs is 88% and 99%.
Increased GHb concentrations do not immediately return to
respectively.s3
normal after reestablishing more normal blood glucose con-
Mildly increased fructosamine concentrations have been
centrations, because this requires the removal of senescent
reported in some dogs with hypothyroidism; however, those
erythrocytes with high GHb concentrations. Such decreases
in GHb concentrations might be delayed for several weeks.
life due to decreased protein turnover is the proposed
Glycated hemoglobin can be used in the same situations as
mechanism.
fructosamine.26.271
However, fructosamine concentrations
change faster with changes in blood glucose concentrations.
Decreased fructosamine concenfrations
which may be an advantage in many situations.
Decreased fructosamine concentrations are expected with
Glycated hemoglobin is measured in EDTA-anticoagulated
persistent hypoglycemia. as occurs with insulinoma.
whole blood, and is stable for 7 days when refrigerated.2
However, because fructosamine is a measure of glycated
GHb will be decreased in anemic animals, due to decreased
 proteins, hypoproteinemia may be a cause of decreased fruc-
hemoglobin concentrations and/or increased numbers of
tosamine concentrations. In one study, normoglycemic dogs
reticulocytes present as part of a regenerative response.27
had decreased fructosamine concentrations that correlated
Conversely, GHb will be increased in polycythemic animals.
best with the degree of hypoalbuminemia, while normogly-
cemic cats had decreased fructosamine concentrations that
Serial glucose curve
correlated best with the degree of hypoproteinemia. Based
 In diabetic animals receiving initial insulin therapy. mea-
on these correlations, formulae have been suggested to
surement of blood glucose concentrations at 1-2 hour inter-
correct fructosamine concentrations for protein abnormali-
 a an ss o s a an  s
ties in dogs and cats. In these formulae, the reference inter
appropriateness of the insulin dosage. These results, which
val median value is used for the "normal" albumin and total
are known as the serial glucose curve, are analyzed to ensure
protein concentrations.
that the insulin therapy has lowered the blood glucose con-
centrations, that the lowest glucose concentration after
Dogs: Corrected fructosamine = fructosamine
len pue 'suei aiedoidde ue ui si (ipeu) iuaain unsui
X(normal albumin ÷ patient albumin)
the duration of the insulin effect is appropriate (Fig. 27.3).
Serial glucose curves are also useful when animals with
Cats: Corrected fructosamine = fructosamine
previously well-controlled IDDM show clinical signs of
x (normal total protein ÷ patient total protein)
hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia.
434
CHAPTER 27 Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas and Glucose Metabolism
500
are labor and time intensive and rarely used in clinical small
animal practice, but are occasionally performed in horses
(7p,6u)
400
that are suspected to have metabolic syndrome? and are
used in research setings.12 As discussed previously (see
300
Serum Insulin). it is rarely clinically useful to document
cose
insulin resistance in animals that have been diagnosed with
200
厂
diabetes mellitus.
Basically, these tests involve administration of a glucose
100
solution followed by blood collection at predetermined
intervals; blood samples are analyzed for glucose concentra-
tions and sometimes insulin levels. Intravenous tests are
8AM10122468PM10122468AM
considered superior to oral tests because gastrointestinal
factors are eliminated. Decreased glucose tolerance is sug-
Figure 27.3 Hypothetical serial glucose curves in three diabetic cat5
receiving insulin at 8 arn. Cat A appears well-controlled, with blood
gested if glucose concentrations fail to return to baseline
glucose concentrations reaching a nadir of about 125 mg/dL and staying
e shglyxa gie pouad anoutz e lao np/owooe pue 52l uaaiag
tional glucose turnover rate is low. Insulin response tests can
poor response to insulin, which may be related to insulin underdosage
also be performed,? and a test combining glucose tolerance
Cat C becomes rapidly hypoglycemic, with rebound hyperglycemia. This is
with insulin response (combined glucose-insulin test) has
known as the Somogyi effect, which is due to hormonal responses
been developed for horses.25
following excess insulin adrministration.
Other laboratory abnormalities associated with
diabetes mellitus
In diabetic dogs, the goal is to keep glucose concentrations
· CBC fndings may include increased PCV/HCT and
between 100 and 250mg/dL.2" In diabetic cats, the goal
increased plasma protein concentrations due to dehydration.
range is 100-300mg/dL." Ideally, the blood glucose nadir
The leukogram may indicate stress or inflammation.
should be 100-l25mg/dL for both dogs and cats. Many
· Azotemia and dilute urine. Glomerular lesions have been
factors must be taken into account when interpreting serial
reported in diabetic dogs and cats, but the occurrence of
glucose curves, including the type and duration of insulin
clinical renal disease in such animals is not well documented.
being administered, time of feeding. and stress and/or excite-
Urine specific gravity usually is low in animals with glucos-
ment induced by hospitalization during the procedure. Por-
uria. generally because of the osmotic effect of glucose
table blood glucose meters are sometimes used by owners
rather than from a defect in the ability of the tubules to
of diabetic pets to generate serial glucose curves at home.
concentrate urine. If dehydration is present, there may be a
under the supervision of their veterinarian, to avoid the
prerenal azotemia in addition to dilute urine, mimicking
renal failure. The serum phosphorus concentration also may
be increased in azotemic animals because of the decreased
Continuous glucose monitoring
glomerular clearance of phosphorus. Some diabetic animals
New technological developments are providing advances in
have hyperphosphatemia, but hypophosphatemia may 
glucose monitoring of diabetic animals. A continuous glucose
occur in others (discussed later).
monitoring system (CGMS) utilizes a subcutaneous sensor
· Pyuria, hematuria, and proteinuria. Urinary tract infec-
that measures interstitial fluid glucose concentrations and
tion is common in diabetic animals. Such infection can result
stores up to 288 measurements in a 24-hour period.12 Inter-
in increased numbers of leukocytes, erythrocytes, and bac-
stitial fluid glucose concentrations correlate well with blood
teria in the urine as well as in an increased concentration of
glucose concentrations. A commercially available CGMS has
protein. Increased urine protein concentration without evi-
been tested on dogs, cats, and horses.121 Use of this system
 dence of inflammation could result from glomerular damage.
avoids limitations associated with traditional serial glucose
which commonly occurs in humans with diabetes, but is not
curves such as repeated blood collection, patient restraint
well documented in animals with diabetes mellitus.
and hospitalization, and provides more detailed information
·Ketonuria. Ketones include acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate,
about glucose metabolism since measurements are taken
and acetone. Deficient insulin production in diabetes mellitus
every 5 minutes.
results in decreased incorporation of fatty acids into triglyc-
erides (i.e., decreased lipogenesis). Fatty acids then are con-
Glucose tolerance tests
verted to acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). Almost all
 Oral or intravenous glucose tolerance tests can be performed
acetyl-CoA is converted to acetoacetate in animals with
to provide more information about glucose metabolism in
severe diabetes mellitus. Some of this acetoacetate then is
animals suspected of having insulin resistance. These tests
converted to β-hydroxybutyrate and acetone. Increased
435
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
blood ketone concentration (i.e., ketonemia) and increased
increased liberation of fatty acids from adipose tissue, influx
urine ketone concentration (i.e., ketonuria) can result.
of these fatty acids into hepatocytes, and incorporation of
Ketones are acids that dissociate into hydrogen ions and
fatty acids into triglycerides. Activities of induced enzymes
respective unmeasured anions. Their metabolic production
also increase if these alterations result in hepatocyte swelling
therefore results in development of acidosis and increased
and cholestasis. Pancreatitis can cause diabetes mellitus as a
anion gap (see below). The common method of detecting
result of islet damage, and if active pancreatitis is present,
ketones used by urine dipsticks (nitroprusside reaction)
serum activities of PLI, amylase or lipase may be increased.
detects acetoacetate and acetone, but it does not detect β-
· Increased serum bilirubin concentration. Cholestasis sec-
hydroxybutyrate. In some ketoacidotic patients, production
ondary to the hepatocyte swelling that is associated with
of β-hydroxybutyrate can predominate, thereby resulting in
      
failure to detect ketonuria. Impaired peripheral use of ketones
hemolysis resulting from Heinz-body formation can occur
because of insulin deficiency also contributes to ketonemia
in diabetic cats and result in increased serum bilirubin
and ketonuria in diabetes mellitus. The renal threshold for
concentrations.
ketones is low, and ketonuria often precedes ketonemia.
· Hyperlipidemia. Increased blood concentrations of several
Causes of ketonemia and ketonuria, in addition to diabetes
lipids, including triglycerides, cholesterol, and free fatty
mellitus, include starvation, bovine ketosis., pregnancy
acids, result from decreased incorporation of triglycerides
toxemia in sheep. and hepatic lipidosis syndrome of cattle.
into fat deposits, decreased hepatic degradation of choles-
● Electrolyte abnormalities. Osmotic diuresis and ketonuria
 aa   u   
cause the loss of sodium, chloride, potassium, and phospho-
lipoproteins. Increased concentrations of these proteins
rus in the urine. Hyponatremia, hypochloremia, and less
often result in visible lipemia.
commonly, hypokalemia and hypophospha temia may result.
The serum potassium concentration may be normal or
Other laboratory abnormalities associated with
increased in diabetic animals, especially if the animals are
hyperinsulinism
acidotic, but the whole-body potassium concentration is
 In addition to hypoglycemia, the only laboratory abnormal-
often depleted. Potassium depletion results from hypoinsu-
ity that is frequently associated with hyperinsulinism is
linemia, which allows intracellular potassium to shift out of
hypokalemia, which may result from insulin-mediated shift-
cells and into blood; this potassium then is lost via the urine.
ing of extracellular potassium into cells.
This has an important therapeutic implication because
administration of insulin in treatment of the acute stage of
diabetes will drive potassium back inside cells, which may
cause severe hypokalemia. Phosphorus depletion results
References
from multiple factors, including increased renal excretion,
increased tissue catabolism, and in animals treated with
1. Agarwal N, Pitchumoni CS (1993) Acute pancreatitis: a mu]-
insulin, shifting of phosphorus from the serum into cells.
tisystem disease. Gasrroenterologist l: 1l 5-28.
Serum phosphorus concentrations of less than l.5mg/dL
2. Antonelli AC, Torres GAS, Mori CS, Soares PC, Maruta CA,
Ortolani EL (2009) Ammonia poisoning in cattle fed extruded
may occur in diabetic dogs and cats, especially after the
initiation of insulin therapy. Severe hypophosphatemia
or prilled urea: alterations in some chemistry components.
BrazilianJournal ofVeterinary Research and Animal Science 46:
69-76.
dysfunction, neurologic disorders, and abnormal muscle
 3. Appleton DJ, Rand JS, Priest J, Sunvald GD (200 1) Determina-
function.
tion of reference values for glucose tolerance, insulin toler-
● Metabolic acidosis (ketoacidosis). Ketones are acidic, and
amce, and insulin sensitivity tests in clinically normal cats. Am
increased concentrations lead to metabolic acidosis, which
J Ver Res 62: 630-6.
can be life threatening.
4. Armbruster DA (1987) Fructosamine: structure, analysis, and
· Increased anion gap. An increased anion gap usually
clinical usefulness. Clin Chem 33: 2153-63.
results from increased ketoacid concentrations in the blood.
 5. Baird GD (1982) Primary ketosis in the high-producing dairy
Increased blood lactate concentration also can contribute to
cow: clinical and subclinical disorders, treatment, prevention,
this gap.
and outlook. J Dairy Sri 65: 1-10.
6. Baker JL, Aleman M, Madigan J (200l) Intermittent hypogly-
· Hyperosmolarity. Hyperosmolarity usually occurs  in
cemia in a horse with anaplastic carcinoma of the kidney.
animals with extremely high blood glucose concentrations
J Am Ver Med Assoc 218: 235-7.
(>600mg/dL). A serum osmolarity of >350mOsm/L can
7. Bakos Z, Krajcsovics L, Toth J (2008) Successful medical treat-
cause neurologic and gastrointestinal abnormalities.
ment of acute pancreatitis in a horse. Ver Rec l62: 95-6.
● Increased hepatic and pancreatic enzyme activities. Meta-
8. Bellah JR, Bell G (1989) Serum amylase and lipase activities
bolic alterations in hepatocytes can lead to the leakage of
after exploratory laparotomy in dogs. Am J Ver Res 50:
       
1638-41.
436
CHAPTER 27 Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas and Glucose Metabolism
9. Brennan CL, Hoenig M, Ferguson DC (2004) GLUT4 but not
and dogs with naturally developing diabetes mellitus, pancre-
GLUrTl expression decreases early in the development of feline
atic beta-cell neoplasia, hyperadrenocorticism, and anemia.
obesity. Domest Anim Endocrinol 26: 29l-301.
J Am Ver Med Assoc 21l: 723-7.
10. Brenner K, Harkin KR, Andrews GA, Kennedy G (2009) Juve-
28. Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004) Beta-cell neoplasia: insulin-
nile pancreatic atrophy in Greyhounds: 12 cases (1995-2000).
oma. In: Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd
J Ver Intern Med 23: 67-71.
ed., pp. 616-44. Saunders, St. Louis.
11. Brobst D, Ferguson AB, Carter JM (1 970) Evaluation of serum
29. Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004) Canine Diabetes mellitus. In:
amylase and lipase activity in experimentally induced pancre-
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed.. pp.
atitis in the dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 157: 1697-1702.
486-538. Saunders, St. Louis.
12. Brobst DF (1997) Pancreatic function. In: Clinical Biochemistry
30. Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004) Feline diabetes mellitus. In:
of Domesric Animals (eds.), Kaneko JJ, Harvey JWBruss ML, 5th 
Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed..pp.
ed., pp. 353-66. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
539-79. Saunders, St. Louis.
13. Burkhard MJ, Garry F (2004) Artifactual hypoglycemia associ-
31. Fermandez JM, Croom WJ, Jr., Johnson AD, Jaquette RD,
ated with hemotrophic mycoplasma infection in a lamb. Vet
Edens Fw (1988) Subclinical ammonia toxicity in steers:
Clin Patho! 33: 244-8.
effects on blood metabolite and regulatory hormone concen-
14. Casella M, Wess G, Reusch CE (2002) Measurement of capil-
trations. J Anim Sri 66: 3259-66.
lary blood glucose concentrations by pet owners: a new tool
32. Fittschen C, Bellamy JE (1984) Prednisone treatment alters
in the management of diabetes mellitus. J Am Anim Hosp Assor
the serum amylase and lipase activities in normal dogs without
38: 239-45.
causing pancreatitis. Can J Comp Med 48: 136-40.
15. Cersosimo E, Judd RL, Miles JM (1994) Insulin regulation of
33. Forman MA, Marks SL, De Cock HE, et al. (2004) Evaluation
renal glucose metabolism in conscious dogs. J Clin Ynvesr 93:
of serum feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity and
2584-9.
helical computed tomography versus conventional testing for
16. Chen S (2008) Pancreatic endocrinopathies in ferrets. Ver Clin
the diagnosis of feline pancreatitis. J Ver Interm Med 18:
North Am Exot Anim Pracr 1l: 107-23.
807-15.
17. Cohen TA, Nelson RW, Kass PH, Christopher MM, Feldman
34. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Van Winkle TJ, et al. (1992) Glycogen storage
EC (2009) Evaluation of six portable blood glucose meters for
disease type IV: inherited defciency of branching enzyme
measuring blood glucose concentration in dogs. J Am Ver Med
activity in cats. Pediarr Res 32: 719-25.
Assoc 235: 276-80.
35. Garry F Hull BL, Rings DM, Hoffsis G {1988) Comparison of
18. Corazza M, Tognetti R, Guidi G, Buonaccorsi A (1994) Urinary
naturally occurring proximal duodenal obstruction and
alpha-amylase and serum macroamylase activities in dogs with
abomasal volvulus in dairy cattle. Ver Surg 17: 226-33.
proteinuria. J Am Ver Med Assoc 205: 438-40.
36. Geokas MC, Reidelberger R, O'Rourke M, Passaro E, Jr..
19. Crenshaw KL, Peterson ME, Heeb LA, Moroff SD, Nichols R
Largman C (1982) Plasma pancreatic trypsinogens in chronic
{1996) Serum fructosamine concentration as an index of gly-
renal failure and after nephrectomy. Am J Physiol 242:
cemia in cats with diabetes mellitus and stress hyperglycemia.
G177-182.
37. Gold JR, Warren AL, French TW, Stokol T (2008) What is your
20. De Cock HE, Forman MA, Farver TB, Marks SL (2007) Preva-
e u sseu oeday e po ieaws uonssadu Asdoia 2sisoule
yearling Thoroughbred flly. Vet Clin Pathol 37: 339-43.
Ver Patho! 44: 39-49.
38. Greco DS (2ool) Congenital and inherited renal disease of
21. DiBartola SP, Tarr MJ, Parker AT, Powers JD, Pultz JA (1989)
small animals. Ver Clin Norrh Am Small Anim Pracr 3l: 393-9.
39. Gross TL, Song MD, Havel PJ, Ihrke PJ (1993) Superficial 
cases (1976-1986). J Am Ver Med Assoc 195: 358-64.
necrolytic dermatitis (necrolytic migratory erythema) in dogs.
22. Drolet R, Morin M, Fontaine M (1984) Hypoglycemia: a factor
Ver Pathol 30: 75-81.
associated with low survival rate of neonatal piglets infected
 40. Grulke S, Deby-Dupont G, Gangl M, Franck T, Deby C, Serteyn 
with transmissible gastroenteritis virus. Can J Comp Med 48:
D {2003) Equine trypsin: purification and development of a
282-5.
radio-immunoassay. Vererinary Research 34: 317-30.
23. Dunayer EK (2004) Hypoglycemia following canine ingestion
41.
Guija de Arespacochaga A, Hittmair KM, Schwendenwein I
of xylitol-containing gum. Ver Hum Toxicol 46: 87-8.
(2006) Comparison of lipase activity in peritoneal fluid of dogs
 24. Dunayer EK, Gwaltney-Brant SM (2006) Acute hepatic failure
with different pathologies—a complementary diagnostic tool
lua u uosa [x y panenosse Ayedonleo pue
dogs. J Am Ver Med Assor 229: 1113-17.
119-22.
25. Eiler H, Frank N, Andrews FM, Oliver JW, Fecteau KA (2005)
42. Haga HA, Ytrehus B, Rudshaug IJ, Ottesen N (2008) Gastro-
Physiologic assessment of blood glucose homeostasis via com-
intestinal stromal tumour and hypoglycemia in a Fjord pony:
bined intravenous glucose and insulin testing in horses. Am J
case report. Arta Ver Scand 50: 9.
Ver Res 66: 1598-1604.
43. Haney DR, Christiansen JS, Toll J (2006) Severe cholestatic
 26. Elliott DA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Neal LA (1997) Glycosy]-
liver disease secondary to liver fluke (Platymosomum concin-
numy infection in three cats. Journal of the American Animal
control in diabetic cats. J Ver Inrern Med 1l: 161-5.
Hospital Association 42: 234-7.
27. Elliott DA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Neal LA (1997) Glycosy]-
44. Hess RS, Saunders HM, Van Winkle TJ, Shofer FS, Washabau RJ:
ated hemoglobin concentrations in the blood of healthy dogs
Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic
437
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
abnormalities in dogs with fatal acute pancreatitis: 70 cases
65. LaCarrubba AM, Johnson PJ, Whitney MS, Miller MA, Lat-
{1986-1995). J Am Ver Med Assor 213: 665-70.
-osse auoapus ssA nouni pue enuan[aodh (9oo] r iaun
45. Hess RS, Saunders HIM, Van Winkle TJ, Ward CR (2000) Con-
ciated with peritoneal mesothelioma in a horse. J Ver Intern Med
current disorders in dogs with diabetes mellitus: 22l cases
20: 1018-22.
66. Leung PS, Ip SP (2006) Pancreatic acinar cell: its role in acute
46. Hill RC, Van Winkle TJ (1993) Acute necrotizing pancreatitis
pancreatitis. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 38: 1024-30.
and acute suppurative pancreatitis in the cat. A retrospective
67. Lifton SJ, King LG, Zerbe CA (1996) Glucocorticoid deficient
study of 40 cases (1976-1989). J Ver Inrerm Med 7: 25-33.
hypoadrenocorticism in dogs: 18 cases (1986-1995). J Am Ver
47. Ho KK, O'Sullivan AJ, Hoffman DM (1996) Metabolic actions
Med Assoc 209: 2076-81.
of growth hormone in man. Endocr J 43 Suppl: S57-63.
 68. Marsenic O (2009) Glucose control by the kidney: an emerging
48. Hoenig M (2002) Comparative aspects of diabetes mellitus in
target in diabetes. Am J Kidney Dis 53: 875-83.
dogs and cats. Mol Cell Endocrinol 197: 221-9.
69. Mia AS, Koger HD, Tierney MM (1l978) Serum values of
49. Hoenig M, Peterson ME, Ferguson DC (1992) Glucose toler-
saop pue saop ainieu aueau ul asedi oneaoued pue ase aue
sies piouady Asnoaueiuds u uoaas unsu pe aue
with experimental pancreatitis. Am J Ver Res 39: 965-69.
Res Ver Sri 53: 338-41.
70. Mohamed T, Sato H, Kurosawa T, Oikawa S, Nitanai A (2003)
50.Hudson EB, Strombeck DR {1978) Effects of functional
Utrasonographic imaging of experimentally induced pancre-
nephrectomy on the disappearance rates of canine serum
atitis in cattle. Ver J 165: 31424.
amylase and lipase. Am J Ver Res 39: 13l6-21.
 71. Naylor JM, Kronfeld DS (1985) In vivo studies of hypoglyce-
51. Jacobs RM, Swenson CL, Davenport DJ, Murtaugh RJ (1988)
mia and lactic acidosis in endotoxic shock. Am J Physio! 248:
Sensitivity and specificity of canine serum total amylase and
E309-16
isoamylase activity determinations. Can J Ver Res 52: 473-5.
 72. O'Brien TD (2002) Pathogenesis of feline diabetes mellitus. Mo!
52. Jain NC (1993) Erythrocyte physiology and changes in disease.
Cell Endocrino! 197: 213-19.
73. Parent J (1982) Effects of dexamethasone on pancreatic tissue
Philadelphia, PA.
and on serum amylase and lipase activities in dogs. J Am Ver
 r s e s a   i   
Med Assoc 180: 743-6.
diabetes mellitus in non-healthy middle-aged to older dogs.
74. Parry BW, Crisman MV (199l) Serum and peritoneal fluid
Zentralb! Vererinarmed A 4l: 480-4.
amylase and lipase reference values in horses. Equine Ver J 23:
54. Jensen AL (1 992) Serum fructosamine in canine diabetes me]-
390-1.
litus. An initial study. Ver Res Commun l6: 1-9.
75. Plotnick AN, Greco DS (1995) Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
55. Jiang G, Zhang BB (2003) Glucagon and regulation of glucose
in dogs and cats. Contrasts and comparisons. Ver Clin North Am
metabolism. Am J Physiol Endocrino! Merab 284: E671-8.
Small Anim Pracr 25: 563-70.
56. Johnson CA (2008) Glucose homeostasis during canine preg-
76. Polzin DJ, Osbome CA, Stevens JB, Hayden DW (1983) Serum
nancy: Insulin resistance, ketosis, and hypoglycemia. Therio-
amylase and lipase activities in dogs with chronic primary
genology 70: 1418-23.
renal failure. Am J Ver Res 44: 404-10.
[d as a a  (   
77. Quigley KA, Jackson ML, Haines DM (200l) Hyperlipasemia
Cushing's syndrome. Ver Clin North Am Equine Pracr 18:
g auaia esedoau oeday no oeanued yim saop g 
271-93.
tumor lipase production. Ver Clin Parho! 30: 11420, 2001.
58. Johnson PJ, Wiedmeyer CE, Messer Iv NT (2009) Conditions
78. Rallis TS, Koutinas AF Kritsepi M, Moraitou KT (1 996) Serum
of the equine pancreas. Equine Vererinary Education 2l: 26-9.
lipase activity in young dogs with acute enteritis or gastroen-
59. Jolly RD, Walkley SU (1997) Lysosomal storage diseases of
teritis. Ver Clin Parhol 25: 65-8.
animals: an essay in comparative pathology. Ver Pathol 34:
79. Ralston SL (2002) Insulin and glucose regulation. Ver Clin North 
52748.
Am Equine Pracr 18: 295-304.
60. Kaneko J1 (1l997) Carbohydrate metabolism and its diseases.
80. Rand JS, Kinnaird E, Baglioni A, Blackshaw J, Priest J (2002)
In: Clinical Biochemisrry of Domesric Animals (eds.), Kaneko JJ,
Hans ui panesse s sies u eanarad ssas ais
Harvey JW, Bruss ML, 5th ed., pp. 45-81. Academic Press, San
and increased concentrations of lactate and norepinephrine.
Diego, CA.
J Ver Inrermn Med 16: 123-32.
61. Kimmel SE, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ {200l) Incidence and
81. Reusch CE, Gerber B, Boreti FS (2002) Serum fructosamine
 prognostic value of low plasma ionized calcium concentration
 s  sr a sho n s
in cats with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases (1996-1998). J Am Ver
26: 531-6.
Med Assoc 219: 1105-9.
82. Reusch CE, Haberer B (200l) Evaluation of fructosamine in
62. Kitchell BE, Strombeck DR, Cullen J, Harrold D (1986) Clinical
dogs and cats with hypo- or hyperproteinaemia, azotaemia,
and pathologic changes in experimentally induced acute pan-
hyperlipidaemia and hyperbilirubinaemia. Ver Rer 148:
creatitis in cats. Am J Ver Res 47: 1170-3.
370-6.
63. Koskinen P Irjala K, Vikari J, Panula-Ontto R, Matikainen MT
83. Reusch CE, Liehs MR, Hoyer M, Vochezer R (1993) Fructos-
(1987) Serum fructosamine in the assessment of glycaemic
amine. A new parameter for diagnosis and metabolic control
control in diabetes mellitus. Scand J Clin Lab Invesr 47: 285-92.
in diabetic dogs and cats. J Ver Inrern Med 7: 177-82.
64. Kramer JW, Nottingham S, Robinette J, Lenz G, Sylvester S.
84. Reusch CE, Tomsa K (1999) Serum fructosamine concentra-
Dessouky MY (1980) Inherited, early onset, insulin-requiring
tion in cats with overt hyperthyroidism. J Am Ver Med Assor 215:
diabetes mellitus of Keeshond dogs. Diaberes 29: 558-65.
1297-1300.
438
CHAPTER 27 Laboratory Evaluation of the Pancreas and Glucose Metabolism
85. Robinson JL, Duee PH, Schreiber O, er al. (198l) Development
creatic lipase immunoreactivity in serum of dogs. Am J Ver Res
of gluconeogenic enzymes in the liver of fasting or suckling
64: 1237-41.
newborm pigs. J Dev Physiol 3: 191-201.
103. Steiner JM, Williams DA (2005) Feline exocrine pancreatic
86. Roby KA, Beech J, Bloom JC, Black M (1990) Hepatocellular
disease. In: Texrbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine (eds.), Ettinger
carcinoma associated with erythrocytosis and hypoglycemia in
SJ, Feldman EC, 6th ed., pp. 1489-92. Elsevier, Inc., St. Louis,
a yearling filly. J Am Ver Med Assor 196: 465-7.
MO.
87. Rosenfeld RG, Wilson DM, Dollar LA, Bennett A, Hintz RL
104. Steiner JM, Wilson BG, Williams DA (2004) Development and
-qnan pue a ym nnd u yoa (61)
analytical validation of a radioimmunoassay for the measure-
nant DNA-derived human growth hormone cause insulin
s    d h r 
resistance at a postreceptor site. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 54:
Can J Ver Res 68: 309-14.
1033-8.
105. Stickle JE, Carlton WW, Boon GD (l980) Isoamylases in clini-
88. Rothenbacher H, Lindquist WD (1963) Liver cirrhosis and
cally normal dogs. Am J Ver Res 4l: 506-9.
106. Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Glucose, ketoamines, and
eus. J Am Ver Med Assoc 143: 1099-1102.
related regulatory hormones. In: Fundamentals of Veterinary
89. Russell KE, Roussel AJ (2007) Evaluation of the ruminant
Clinical Pathology. 2nd ed., pp. 707-37. Blackwel, Ames, IA.
serum chemistry profile. Ver Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 23:
107. Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Lipids. In: Fundamentals of
403-26.
Veterinary Clinical Pathology. 2nd ed., pp. 763-82. Blackwell.
90. Sandstrom B, Westman J, Ockerman PA (1969) Glycogenosis
Ames, IA.
of the central nervous system in the cat. Acta Neuropathof 14:
108. Strombeck DR, Farver T, Kaneko JI (1981) Serum amylase
194200.
and lipase activities in the diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs. Am
91. Schlumbohm C, Harmeyer J (2008) Twin-pregnancy increases
susceptibility of ewes to hypoglycaemic stress and pregnancy
109. Syme HM, Scott-Moncrieff JC (1998) Chronic hypoglycaemia
toxaemia. Res Ver Sri 84: 286-99.
usp eaug sid ae (o puz 'h nus 7e
SmafAnim Pracr39: 348-51.
equine Cushing's disease. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 18:
110. Toor AJv, Linde-Sipman JSvd, Ingh TSGAMvd, Wensing T.
237-70.
 Mol JA (1991) Experimental induction of fasting hypoglycae-
93. Simpson KW, Simpson JW, Lake S, Morton DB, Batt RM
(199l) Effect of pancreatectomy on plasma activities of
Veterinary Quarterly 13: 16-23.
 amylase, isoamylase, lipase and trypsin-like immunoreactivity 
111. Valberg SJ, Ward TL, Rush B, et al. (200l) Glycogen branching
in dogs. Res Ver Sei 51: 78-82.
enzyme deficiency in quarter horse foals. J Ver Inrerm Med 15:
94. Stear MJ, Eckersall PD, Graham PA, McKellar QA, Mitchell S.
572-80.
Bishop SC (2ool) Fructosamine concentration and resistance
112. Van Weyenberg S. Hesta M, Buyse J, Janssens GP (2008) The
to natural, predominantly Teladorsagia circumcincta infection.
effect of weight loss by energy restriction on metabolic profile
Parasitology 123: 21l-18.
and glucose tolerance in ponies. J Anim Physiol Anim Nurr (Ber!)
95. Stein JE, Greco DS (2002) Portable blood glucose meters as a
92: 538-45.
means of monitoring blood glucose concentrations in dogs and
-A . ()  [uas   1
cats with diabetes mellitus. Clin Tech Small Anim Pracr 17:
caemia in a Yorkshire terrier and in a Chihuahua. Vererinary
70-2.
Quarterly 9: 172-6.
96. Steiner JM (2003) Diagnosis of pancreatitis. Ver Clin Norrh Am
114. Vyhnal KK, Barr SC, Hornbuckle WE, er al. (2008) Eurytrema
Smal Anim Pracr 33: 1181-95.
procyonis and pancreatitis in a cat. J Feline Med Surg 10: 384-7.
97. Steiner JM, Berridge BR, Wojcieszym J, Williams DA (2002)
115. Waitt LH, Cebra CK, Tormquist SJ, Lohr CV (2006) Panniculitis
Cellular immunolocalization of gastric and pancreatic lipase in 
various tissues obtained from dogs. Am J Ver Res 63: 722-7.
Diagn Invest 18: 405-8.
98. Steiner JM, Finco DR, Gumminger SR, Williams DA (2001)
Lapland dog. Ver Q 7: 187-90.
pa ua ia r ainn euan pan Aeauadxa u so
117. Watson PJ, Roulois AJ, Scase T, Johnston PE, Thompson H,
15: 311 (abstract).
Herrtage ME (2007) Prevalence and breed distribution of
99. Steiner JM, Lees GE, Willard MD, Teague SR, Williams DA
-iy u uouxa o-sd e sued 
(2003) Serum canine pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
opinion dogs. J Small Anim Pracr 48: 609-18.
(cPLI) concentration is not altered by oral prednisone. J Ver
118. Wess G, Reusch C (2000) Capillary blood sampling from the
Intern Med 17: 444 (abstract).
ear of dogs and cats and use of portable meters to measure 
100. Steiner JM, Medinger TL, Williams DA (1996) Development
glucose concentration. J Small Anim Pracr 4l: 60-6.
and validation of a radioimmunoassay for feline trypsin-like
119. Wess G, Reusch C: Evaluation of five portable blood glucose
immunoreactivity. Am J Ver Res 57: 1417-20.
meters for use in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 216: 203-9.
101. Steiner JM, Newman S, Xenoulis P, et af. (2008) Sensitivity of
120. Wiedmeyer CE, DeClue AE (2008) Continuous glucose moni-
toring in dogs and cats. J Ver Inrern Med 22: 2-8.
dence of pancreatitis. Ver Ther 9: 263-73.
121. Wiedmeyer CE, Johnson PJ, Cohn LA, Meadows RL (2003)
102. Steiner JM, Williams DA (2003) Development and validation
Evaluation of a continuous glucose monitoring system for use
of a radioimmunoassay for the measurement of canine pan-
in dogs. cats, and horses. J Am Ver Med Assorc 223: 987-92.
439
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
122. Willesen JL, Jensen AL, Kristensen AT, Kjelgaard-Hansen M,
127. Xenoulis PG, Steiner JM (2008) Current concepts in feline
Jessen R, Koch J {2006) Serum fructosamine concentrations
pancreatitis. Top Companion Anim Med 23: 185-92.
128. Xenoulis PG, Steiner JM (2010) Lipid metabolism and hyper-
J Ver Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 53: 266-9.
lipidemia in dogs. Ver J 183(1y: 12-21.
123. Williams DA, Batt RM (1988) Sensitivity and specificity of
129. Xenoulis PG, Suchodolski JS, Steiner JM (2008) Chronic pan-
creatitis in dogs and cats. Compend Conrin Educ Ver 30: 166-80;
 the diagnosis of canine exocrine pancreatic insuffciency J Am
quiz 180-61.
Ver Med Assoc 192: 195-201.
130. Yu R, Hongxiang H, Melmed S (2005) Insulin secretion and
124. Williams DA, Steiner JM (2005) Canine exocrine pancreatic
action. In: Endocrinology: Basic and Clinical Principles (eds.).
disease.In: Textbookof Verterinary Internat Medicine (eds.), Ettinger
Melmed S, Conn PM, 2nd ed., pp. 31l-19. Humana Press,
SJ, Feldman EC, 6th ed., pp. 1482-8. Elsevier, Inc., St. Louis,
Totowa, NJ.
MO.
131. Zni E, Glaus TM, Minuto F Arvigo M, Hauser B, Reusch CE
125. Woerle HJ, Meyer C, Dostou JM, et al. (2003) Pathways for
(2007) Paraneoplastic hypoglycemia due to an insulin-like
glucose disposal after meal ingestion in humans. Am J Physio!
growth factor type-ll secreting hepatocellular carcinoma in a
Endocrinol Merab 284: E716-25.
dog. J Ver Inrern Med 21: 193-5.
126. Wollheim CB, Sharp GW (198l) Regulation of insulin release
by calcium. Physiol Rev 6l: 914-73.
440
28
Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion
and Intestinal Absorption
Dawn Seddon
New Zealand Veterinary Pathology
intestinal tract to absorb adequately digested nutrients and
Introduction
results from a variety of small intestinal lesions. Clinical
signs of these two syndromes can be similar, including
Diarrhea, vomiting. and weight loss are clinical signs that
increased fecal volume and poorly formed feces; however.
are frequently seen with diseases of the digestive system.
the treatment for these conditions differs. This chapter
These signs are not, however, indicative of a specific disease
describes the use of laboratory tests to differentiate mal-
or cause. Labora tory tests that specifically evaluate the diges-
digestion from malabsorption in animals showing signs of
tive system can provide important diagnostic information in
weight loss, and to differentiate between EPI and other small
these cases. Because many underlying disease processes can
intestinal disorders. In addition, several other laboratory
secondarily affect the gastrointestinal tract, basic laboratory
tests to evaluate the digestive system are discussed.
tests such as a CBC, biochemical profile, urinalysis, and
routine fecal examination are usually performed in animals
with evidence of gastrointestinal disease prior to more spe-
Maldigestion and malabsorption
cialized tests.
in dogs and cats
Eventually biopsy of the affected area of the GI tract may
be required to obtain a definitive diagnosis, but it must be
Because the treatment and prognoses differ in maldigestion
borne in mind that there are a number of functions of the
and malabsorption, distinguishing these two syndromes is
bowel such as motility, absorption, secretion, permeability.
important in small animals. Since malabsorption may result
visceral sensitivity. and oral tolerance that may be compro-
   r    
mised without evidence of structural or morphological
regardless of which syndrome is the primary disease process.
anomalies.3 The choice of laboratory tests to evaluate the
 digestive system depends on whether clinical signs are sug-
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPl) or
gestive of acute or chronic disease
maldigestion
There are a number of breed-specific predispositions to
Although EPI can occur at any age, it is usually recognized
various GIT disturbances. Knowledge of these diseases may
in young dogs (l-5 years of age). Dogs are thin, have a
help in the assimilation of a differential list but should not
 a aa a p 'ae 
be used in isolation to make a definitive diagnosis. These are
rancid, gray stools (steatorrhea). often with diarrhea.
listed in Table 28.1.
 Steiner7 reports that lesions suggesting feline exocrine pan-
Two important syndromes that cause signs of chronic gas-
creatic insufficiency (EPl) have been found to be 0.2% of
trointestinal disease are maldigestion and malabsorption.
the feline pancreata that he has examined. The most fre-
Maldigestion is a failure to adequately digest food and
quently reported clinical signs of EPI in cats include loss of
usually results from extensive atrophy of exocrine pancre-
weight, copious amounts of loose stools and oily soiling of
atic acinar cells, causing inadequate secretion of digestive
the hair coat.77
enzymes. This is known as exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
A number of specific conditions are recognized:
(EPI), which results secondarily in the inadequate absorp-
● Idiopathic pancreatic acinar atrophy is the most common
cause of EPI in dogs but has not been reported in cats.8
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
441
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
 Table 28.1 Common breed-specific predispositions to variou5
 Table 28.2 Causes of rmalabsorption syndromes in dog5
 gastrointestinal dlisorcders found in dogs and cats.
 Disease syndrome
Breeds associated with
 Gastrointestinal disorder
Breed
 Disease syndrome and
comments
 Inflammatory bowel disease
German shepherds
(IBD )28
 Shar Peis 
 Chronic inflammatory small 
Yorkshire terriers 
Basenjiss57
intestinal enteropathies
Basenj57
Soft-coated Wheaten terriers43
 Eosinophilic enteritis
Siarnese cats
 Norwegian Lundehund 
Lymphocytic-plasmmacytic enteritis
Lymphangiectasia
Yorkshire terriers
 Granulomatous enteritis
Rottweilers
 Norwegian Lundehunds30
Histoplasmosi5
 Pythiosis
 Protein losing enteropathies
Basenji
 Giardliasi5
(PLE)
Chinese Shar-Pei
Soft-coated Wheaten terriers (the
 Protothecosis
latter have also been documented 
Lymphangiectasia
with protein-losing nephropathy34
Intestinal lyrnphoma / 
 Occult blood may be useful to
 Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency 
 German shepherds
adenocarcinoma
 evaluate gut bleeding in these
cases
(heritable)
Rough collies
 Defective brush-borcdler enzyrnes
 Smmall intestinal bacterial
Young, large-breed dog5.
Villous atrophy
 overgrowth (antibiotic-
especially Gerrman shepherds
 responsive dliarrhea)
Wheat sensitive enteropathy
Hereditary in lrish setters23
 Bacterial overgrowth 
 Lymphoplasmacytic enteritis and
Basenj7.57
 hypergammaglobulinemia
 Histiocytic ulcerative colitis
Boxers
(HUC)27
French bulldogs
● Infection with the fluke Eurytrema procyonis, has also been
Mastiffs
 Alaskan malarnute
reported to cause EPI in cats without previous evidence of
Doberman pinscher12
The serum TLI assay (discussed later) is the most common 
 Gluten-sensitive enteropathy
Irish setter (clinical onset between
test used to diagnose EPI. There are no consistent hemato-
4-7 months of age)423,24
logical or biochemical changes with maldigestion and
amylase and lipase values are usually normal in cases of EPI.
Undigested fats may be found in the feces, but this is an
 inconsistent finding.
· Juvenile pancreatic acinar atrophy is thought to be caused
by hereditary immune-mediated lymphocytic pancreatitis
and has been reported in German shepherd dogs and rough-
Malabsorption
coated collies.la.86
 There are many possible underlying causes of malabsorp-
● Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency may be acquired in dogs
tion, including inflammatory, infectious, and neoplastic pro-
and cats secondary to chronic pancreatitis due to atrophy
cesses. A list of possible causes of malabsorption syndromes
and /or fibrosis of the pancreas. There may be subsequent
in dogs can be seen in Table 28.2. Specific function testing
development of diabetes mellitus if there is concurrent islet
for intestinal absorption is not always necessary as syn-
cell destruction." Chronic pancreatitis occurs more com-
dromes such as osmotic diarrhoea can usually be recognized
monly in cats than dogs.7 and chronic pancreatitis is thought 
clinically and signs generally tend to cease when the animal
to be the most common cause of EPI in cats.89
is fasted. Osmotic diarrhea is associated with water retention
● Pancreatic duct obstruction can occur in dogs and cats and
in the GIT, which results from the presence of osmotically
- a  s n n   
active solutes in the intestine that are not absorbed. TLI
tine. This is usually associated with acute inflammation but
testing can be used to differentiate osmotic diarrhea due to
animals do not necessarily develop maldigestion. However.
 malabsorption from that due to maldigestion? (see later).
some cases of pancreatic neoplasia that cause obstruction of
Examples of osmotic and secretory diarrheas can be found
the pancreatic duct may lead to pancreatic atrophy.7.s9
in Table 28.3.
442
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
Table 28.3 Exarmples of osmotic and secretory diarrhea5.
Table 28.4 Causes of protein losing enteropathy in horse5.
 Osmotic Diarrheas
 Secretory Diarrheas
 Syndrome
Examples
Johne's disease
Salrmonellosis (depends on 
 Cellular Infiltrates 
 Granulomatous enteritisid
 Granulormatous colitis 
 protein loss, i.e., higher
 Eosinophilic gastroenteritits4
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
protein loss = higher gap)
enterocolitis14.58
Intestinal lymphosarcoma 
 Enterotoxic colibacillosis
Lymphocytic, plasmmacytic or monocytic
Lymphangiectasi5
Endotoxemia
Biochemical or genetic
Congenital or acquired lactase 
Protein-losing enteropathies 
abnormalities
deficiency (lactose intolerance)61
Proximal enteritis (horses)
Monosaccharide transport defects
Magnesium cathartics 
 Other malcdigestion/malabsorption 
Metabolic
 Congestive heart failure, intestinal 
syndromes 
ischemia 
Microbiological
 Chronic infectious granulomatous
 Bacterial 
enterocolitis due to tuberculosis5o
 Paratuberculosis31
Salmonellosis
Rhodococcus equi
A variety of specialized tests, discussed later in this
Lawsonia intracelularis6,3.40
chapter, may be useful in cases of suspected malabsorption.
Multiple abscessation 
Diagnostic tests such as endoscopy and intestinal biopsy
Clostridium62
rather than tests for intestinal absorption are usually recom-
Fungal (may be secondary
Aspergillus fumigatuss2
diagnosis of malabsorption include the breath hydrogen test
to antibiotic'6 or 
Histoplasma capsulatum16
corticosteroid therapy)
There are no consistent hematological or biochemical
Viral (rotavirus, coronavirus)
 Villous dammage or atrophy10
changes in cases of malabsorption, but more chronic cases
 Parasitic
Strongylus vuigaris larvae,2 and small
may have decreased serum protein concentrations due to
 strongyles—-Strongyloicdes westeri
protein losing enteropathy.
(foals) causing ischemia and damage
A failure of oral tolerance may result from food allergy
due to migration
that can cause acute or chronic gastrointestinal disease.
Cryptosporidia
which is difficult to differentiate from inflammatory
 bowel disease (IBD) without dietary elimination-challenge
Neoplastic
Intestinal mura lymphoma50
Leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma35 
tests. Dietary trials should be a routine part of all gastroin-
Squamous cel carcinoma60 
testinal work-ups,* but details are beyond the scope of this
 Adenocarcinoma26
text.
Nutritional
Dietary-induced enteropathy
Zinc deficiency
Irmmune mediated
Ammyloid A-associated
Maldigestion and malabsorption in horses
gastroenteropathy25
Toxic
Heavy metal toxicity
Maldigestion alone is a rare cause of malassimilation in
horses and maldigestion syndromes are uncommon in
Pancreatitis
horses as compared with other domestic species. EPI is
not recognized in cattle and horses, but Carlson° reported
a few cases in ponies and draught horses where horses
showed chronic weight loss and intermittent colic. Defini-
Maldigestion and malabsorption
tive diagnosis of chronic pancreatic necrosis was made on
in ruminants
necropsy.
Malabsorption is more common in horses, and many
In ruminants, maldigestion syndromes are poorly under-
horses with malabsorptive disease develop protein losing
stood and are generally uncommon. Main causes of maldiges-
enteropathy and subsequent hypoproteinemia. A list of
 tion may be associated with changes in the rumen microflora
causes of protein losing enteropathies in horses can be found
or gastric function, overgrowth of small intestinal bacteria.
in Table 28.4.
or lactase deficiencies.5 variations in bile salt concentrations 
443
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
may exacerbate diarrhea in milk-fed neonates, but this does
ations in bacterial flora lead to overgrowth and sporulation
not interfere with digestion in the adult ruminant.
of some species.'D
Malabsorption syndromes in cattle are poorly docul-
The preferred fecal collection method is by means
mented, but villous atrophy in calves secondary to viral
of digital rectal examination, but fecal loops are more
infection (rotavirus, coronavirus), or cryptosporidia leads to
 practical for smaller animals where digital collection is
maldigestion and malabsorption. Maldigestion results from
inappropriate."0
villous destruction with subsequent hydrolytic enzyme defi-
Rectal lavage may be useful for cytology. but the tech-
ciency (such as lactase).52 Other causes of malabsorption
nique results in less fecal material with relatively more
include congestive heart failure, which may result in local-
mucous secretion from the mucosal surface, and thus the
ized or generalized ischemia, lymphatic obstruction, parasit-
amount of fecal material may be insufficient for some tech-
niques. Flush samples have high yields of motile protozoa
malnutrition, tuberculosis, and Johne's disease (the latter in
and bacteria as these organisms are usually more ubiquitous
ruminants over 2 years of age).
at the mucosal surface, whereas eggs and cysts are more
Voided fecal samples provide larger samples, which are
Screening tests in veterinary practice
required for fecal flotation and sedimentation techniques.
 Defecation should occur in uncontaminated areas, followed
Several tests can be performed in a veterinary practice on
 by timely collection and appropriate storage.
animals with clinical signs and histories that are suggestive
Adequate amounts of feces are required for various tests:
of digestive system disease. The results of these tests can be
1-2 g feces is required for fecal floatation or sedimentation,
supportive of, but are not always definitive for a specific
2-3g feces are necessary for fecal culture," and up to 10g
diagnosis or etiology. Further confirmatory tests may need
of feces should be used for the Baermann technique,3,95
to be performed at a reference laboratory (discussed later).
Feces can be refrigerated for up to 24 hours for floatation or
sedimentation techniques,' but can be preserved in forma-
Fecal assessment
lin for longer periods. Fecal antigen (mainly for PCR) can be
preserved by freezing feces' but culture requires transport
a differential list based on signalment, history, and clinical
medium.39
signs. The options for fecal testing surpass simple flotation
for parasite ova, and it is essential to select appropriate tests
Fecal parasites
for specific etiologies and to interpret them based on their
Fecal examination for confirmation of potential GI parasites
relative sensitivity and specificity for the specific disease
should be a routine part of laboratory testing in animals with
process.10
chronic diarrhea. Fecal examination should preferably be
 In small animals with diarrhea, fecal examination should
performed on fresh feces, but if there is a delay for more
include assessment for intestinal parasites (including Giardia.
than 2 hours after collection, the feces should be refrigerated
coccidia, hookworms and whipworms) and culture for
at 4°c. Basic methods for the detection of parasitic
potentially pathogenic bacteria (including Salmonella and
ova, larvae, oocysts, cysts, and trophozoites are discussed
Campylobacter).? In ruminants, Yersinia should also be con-
here, but a parasitology textbook should be consulted for
sidered in addition to the previously mentioned bacterial
more detailed descriptions and interpretations of these
pathogens. There are numerous other nematodes and
techniques.
pathogens that are more species and age specific but these
are beyond the scope of this text.
Wet preparations
Feces start deteriorating from the time a stool is passed
Wet mounts can be used to detect motile parasites, and are
and cells undergo degenerative changes, which makes iden-
performed by mixing a small amount of feces with a few
tification difficult. Organisms such as Giardia and trichomo-
drops of isotonic saline. Direct smears should be carried out
nads are fragile and undergo rapid deterioration with time.
on fresh feces, which is ideally less than 5 minutes old.ss
refrigeration, or processing, and fecal samples that are more
A small sample should be mixed with a drop of warm
than 5 minutes old are inadequate for the detection of these
saline on a glass slide with a wooden applicator stick, which
is then covered with a cover glass. The smear preparation
than 2 hours old, and if there is a delay in examination, the
can then be examined on low power (xlo) for eggs. cysts.
sarmple should be refrigerated.? Nematode eggs undergo
and larvae. Other organisms may be found using higher
development or hatch, which makes identification difficult.
magnification (x40). Motile organisms seen on wet mounts
Hookworm eggs tend to hatch within 24 hours in warm
can also be assessed on dry mount, stained slides, but it is
humid weather, giving rise to motile larvae. Toxascaris eggs
important not to make dry smears too thick.' A list of
embryonate within a few days in older fecal samples.?4 vari-
potential fecal pathogens identifable on wet and dry fecal
444
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
 Table 28.5 Potential fecal pathogens identifiable on wet and dry mounts with other selected tests available for dliagnosis.
 Wet Preparations
Parasites
Other tests available for diag nosis
 Protozoa
Trophozoites of Giardia&37
 Zinc sulfate centrifugation
Coproantigen ELISA kit11.37
Snap Giardia from IDEXX (Snap Giardia Antigen Test Kit; IDEXX Laboratories, Westbrook,
ME)
 Prospect T kit (Prospect T Giardia Microplate Assay; Remel Microbiology Products, Lenexa.
KS).63
Tritrichomonas foetuss
In pouch culture systems18
 Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)for T fetus antigen in feces3
Balantidium
Entamoeba sp.8
 Entamoeba histolytica antigen in enzyme-linked irmmunosorbent assay (ELISA)47
coccidial oocysts&41
Cryptosporidium*
 Modified Ziehl-Neelsen stain (stain red)
Imnmunofluorescent antibody staining (MeriFluor Cryptosporidium Direct Immunofluorescence
Test Kit)3,42,46,51,63
 ProSpecT@ Cryptosporidium Microplate Assay36
Coproantigen ELISA kit137
 Polymerase chain reaction PCR)15
 Nematodes
 Strongyloides larvae&.20
Fecal floatation
Nanophyetus saimincola ova.48
Fecal floatation
Bacteria
Campylobacter29
 Culture, PCR
mounts, including selected tests available for diagnosis can
The typical fecal flotation technique involves mixing feces
be seen in Table 28.5.
with water, removing large pieces of debris by straining the
mixture, centrifuging the strained feces, followed by mixing
Fecal flotation and sedimentafion
the resulting sediment with flotation solutions composed of
In many cases, low concentrations of parasites preclude their
varying concentrations of sugar or salts, including sodium 
detection in direct fecal smears, and fecal flotation is required
chloride,39 magnesium sulfate (35%),0 zinc sulfate
for examination of parasitic ova and oocysts. Fecal floatation
(33%),10,95 or sodium nitrate .3956 Flotation solutions are com-
is the method of choice for the detection of whipworm eggs
mercially available. The fecal sediment/flotation solution
(Trichuris vuipis). In dogs with large intestinal disease, pres-
mixture is then centrifuged for 5-l0 minutes or is allowed
ence of Trichuris can only be ruled out by testing at least 3
to stand for 30 minutes. The correct specific gravitry (s.g.)
fecal samples, as whipworms produce eggs sporadically and
should be maintained for flotation solutions to be effective.39
in low numbers.4 Giardia cysts are also shed interrmittently.
-nos uoeiog ioadns e s! (oz' I jo s's ue ya) aiens suz
and thus for improved sensitivity, examination of feces from
tion for maintainence of the morphology of Giardia cysts as
three?2 nonconsecutive stools is required over a period of
compared with other floatation solutions.46 sheather's solu-
6-10 days.45
tionid,is a sugar solution with a specific gravity high enough
A further list of other test methods available for the detec-
to float any ova. It is considered superior for for isolation of
tion of Giardia can be found in Table 28.6.
most eggs and oocysts as it generally causes little distortion
Parasites from other organ systems may also be detected
and it does not crystallize, but it does however tend to distort
by fecal floatation such as ova of Capillaria aerophila. (a
Giardia and some lungworm larvae.10.06
lungworm of cats) Oslerus osieri (tracheal worm of dogs). and
A modifed Sheather's solution with a higher specific
Filaroides hirthi (a lungworm of dogs).
     i   
445
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Table 28.6 Other test methods available for detection of Giardia.
isal
 Sensitivity and
Specificity
ELISA
 Antigen
Sensitivity 91 .2 %
(ProSpecT@ Microplate
Specificity
ELISA
 greater than 99.4% 19
Prospect T Giardia
 Microplate Assay:
Remel Microbiology
 Products, Lenexa, KS
 Zinc sulfate centrifugation
Organism
 Sensitivity 85.3 %42
Specificity
 greater than 99.4% 19
Snap Giardia Test Kit;
 Antigen
Sensitivity 85.3% 42
Figure 28.1 The occult blood test. This test is positive for occult blood,
IDEXX Laboratories,
92 %19
 as indicated by the blue color on the filter pad.
Westbrook, ME
Specificity
greater than 99.4% 19
tation techniques. The Baermann technique is the most
sensitive for the detection of fecal larvae. The technique
involves placing warm water in a glass funnel that is plugged
by a stopcock or rubber hose clamped at its end. A small
amount of feces is wrapped in a double layer of gauze and
Pa osed is ggdds ni se yns sia iaeau 
placed in the water for 8 hours. During this time, larvae that
and oocysts float to the surface of the mixture as they have
are present in the feces pass into the water, and descend to
a lower density than the flotation solution. They can be
the bottom of the funnel. After 8 hours, a small aliquot of
harvested by touching a coverslip to the surface. Microscopic
fluid is collected from the base of the funnel and centrifuged.
observation of the material collected (xl0 objective) reveals
The resulting sediment is then examined microscopically for
the presence of parasitic ova or oocysts, but the technique
the presence of larvae. This method can be used for detec-
can be modified for counting ova and oocysts to assess their
tion of various larvae such as lungworm (ie, Aelurostrongyius
concentra tions in feces.
and Filaroides) and small intestinal threadworms (i.e., Stron-
The centrifugation flotation technique is reported to have
gyloides). Hookworm eggs (ie, Ancylostoma and Uncinaria) can
less false-negative results and to recover more parasite eggs.
hatch in fresh feces, producing active larvae.39
cysts, and oocysts than passive (gravitational) flotation tech-
niques (e.g., Ovassay@, Fecalyzer@, Ovatector@).20
Fecal occult blood
Fecal sedimentation is superior for the detection of fluke
The test for occult blood is a simple test, which is available
ova, even though they float in flotation solutions such as
for in-practice use. The test detects the pseudoperoxidase
zinc sulfate. Sedimentation can also be used for detection of
activity of fecal hemoglobin and picks up minute amounts
 embryonated nematode eggs. such as Physaloptera spp. and
of fecal blood at concentrations as low as 20x to 50x times
Spirocerca lupi,' and the method involves mixing feces with
less than those where blood is visible grossly.?7 A loss of
water or another appropriate floatation solution, straining 
30-50% of the blood volume into the GI tract can occur
off large pieces of debris, and centrifuging the strained feces
without gross blood being visible in the feces. The test pro-
at 1200 rpm (280xg) for 5 minutes. Centrifugation of the
cedure involves application of the feces to the test paper, and
mixture sediments the fluke ova, and the presence or
when blood is present, the peroxidase activity results in the
absence of the parasite ova can then be demonstrated by
formation of a blue color (Fig. 28.1).
microscopical examination of a few drops of the sediment.
There are two types of fecal occult blood test available.
Saline is superior for sedimentation of fluke eggs. as they
The modified guaiac slide test is based on the detection of a
hatch in water.39
conjugate product called quinone by chemical oxidation of
 Some GI parasites (e.g. Strongyloides sp.) produce larvae
guaiaconic acid, and the orthotolodine tablet test is based on
rather than ova. These larvae are not easily detected using
the oxidation of tetramethylbenzidine. In both tests, a posi-
flotation methods, but they may be detected using sedimen-
tive fecal blood is evidenced by the development of a blue
446
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
color. In dogs. some authors report a higher threshold for
ing on how dilute/watery the stool sample is at the time of
sampling.
In a study by Rice et al.,l the o-tolidine test was shown to
Examination of stained fecal smears can be useful for the
be more specific as compared to the guaiac test, but these
detection of numerous pathogens such as trophozoites of
tests appear to have similar sensitivities. The clinical applica-
Balantidium coli,Entamoeba histolytica, and Giardia.
tions of the fecal occult blood test include testing animals
Thin fecal smears may be stained with routine hematology
with unexplained acute or chronic diarrhea, those with
stains (e.g., Wright-Giemsa or Diff-Quik stain [Dade Diag-
loose stools, or in cases of microcytic anemias, where the
nostics of P.R., Inc., Aquada, PR]). Bacterial pathogens such
 cause of chronic blood loss is not apparent.
as Campylobacter species. clostridial spores, inflammatory
The test can also be used to monitor animals that are at
cells (neutrophils and macrophages) and occasionally other
risk of developing GI hemorrhage due of treatment with
intracytoplasmic intestinal pathogens such as Histoplasma
ulcerogenic  drugs  (e.g.,  nonsteroidal  anti-inflammatory
and Leishmania)?s can be seen with routine stains. Bacteria
compounds [NSAIDs]} or those with a history of GI
and cell morphology are best assessed with oil immersion at
neoplasia.27
500 to 1o00x magnification. Special stains may be required
The fecal occult blood test is extremely sensitive, and thus
for different organisms, e.g., Cryptosporidium stains red with
false positive results may be seen with meat or fish diets
a modified Acid Fast stain. Various stains such as iodine (for
which contain myoglobin and hemoglobin, and some veg-
Giardia). methylene blue (Entamoeba histolytica). or acid
etable diets including plants such as brassicas.6 The guaiac
slide test is reported to be more lilkely to give false positive
of some organisms.
results than the orthotolodine tablet test, but this difference
 In birds, Gram positive cocci and bacilli predominate in
also depends on the composition of different diets." It is
cloacal films from noncarnivorous birds, and thus Gram
important to observe strict dietary restriction for at least 3-5
stains may be useful in these species. In avian feces, occa-
 days priorto performing the occult blood test as this decreases
the number of false-positive results.1p.32 Recommended feed
even partial Gram positive rods) per looox oil are regarded
restrictions include meat-free, low-peroxidase diets (e.g.-
as normal. Gram negative bacteria (bacilli) that are present
rice or pasta with cottage cheese or egg as a protein source).
in large numbers, increased numbers of filamentous gram
Cimetidine is reported to cause a false-positive hemoccult
positive bacteria or increased numbers of Candida-like yeasts,
 reaction in gastric juice but has not been shown to be associ-
protozoa, or parasite ova are regarded as abnormal. Staining
ated with false-positive hemoccult reactions in feces.55
cloacal smears with carbol fuchsin or iodine may facilitate
 Positive results on the fecal occult blood test in the absence
detection of Giardia on cytology.'3
of grossly visible blood in the feces suggests the possibility
The initial step in fecal cytology is assessment of the bacte-
of upper or lower (colon) GI tract inflammation, ulceration.
rial flora, which should be mixed in normal small domestic
or neoplasia. Blood from the upper GI tract is usually
animals (Fig. 28.2).
digested and is not always grossly visible in the feces, but
blood from the lower GI tract is undigested, and is normally
evident grossly. Loss of large amounts of blood in the upper
GI tract can cause rapid transit times, and occasionally.
results in grossly visible blood in the feces. At least three
tests for fecal occult blood should be carried out' to make
a definitive diagnosis, as the sensitivity of the test increases
when three tests are done as compared with a single test
result. In a study by Smith,7l the fecal occult blood test in
ruminants (Hematest, Miles Laboratories, Inc, PO Box 70.
Elkhart, IN 46515) was reported to have a sensitivity of 77%
and a specificity of 97% for abomasal ulceration, which
were conf rmed at surgery or necropsy.70.71
Fecal cytology
 Fecal cytology has the potential to provide definitive diag-
noses for some animals with signs of GI disease, although
there are mixed opinions on the usefulness of fecal
cytology.
Figure 28.2 Wright-Giermsa-stained fecal smmear from a dog showing a
Single smears may not be entirely representative and
mixture of bacteria representing the mixed bacterial flora typical of
there may be a variation of cells or organisms seen depend-
normal animals. x1000.
447
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Figure 28.3 Wright-Giemsa-stained fecal smear from a dog showing an
Figure 28.4 Wright-Giemnsa-stained fecal smear frorm a dog showing an
overgrowth of Clostridium sp. (arrows) that are recognized in the
overgrowth of Campylobacter sp., which are recognized by a distinctive
sporulated forrm (" safety pin " form, arrowhead). x1000
"sea gull" morphology (arrows). x1000.
 If there is an obvious predominance of a single type of
bacterium, this organism may be pathogenic, and bacterial
culture is indicated. In animals with maldigestion or malab-
sorption, mixed flora is usually observed. Clostridium and
Campylobacter spp. can predominate and cause GIT disease.
Clostridia are bacilli, which, in the sporulated form have
a "safety pin" appearance (Fig. 28.3) and can be identified
microscopically. The spore causes distension of the bacillus.
paiaans uaaq seu l ieaio pue ualos sieadde uaun oa
by some that more than five sporulated bacteria per loo0x
oil immersion field are excessive and suggestive of clostridial
overgrowth. However, recent studies have documented a
poor correlation between fecal endospore numbers and the
presence of enterotoxin.47 Healthy cats can have large
numbers of C. perfringens endospores in their stools, and thus
one should be aware of the possibilty of overinterpreting the
presence of C. perfringens endospores in fecal smears obtained
from cats with diarrhea.4 Campylobacter sp. are recognized
e oumous bop e wog seaws jenay pauiers-eswai-lum sez aaniis
by their "seagull" or "W" shape (Fig. 28.4) Pathogenic pro-
Giardia organism (arrow). x1000.
tozoa (e.g., Giardia sp.) may occasionally be seen in direct
fecal preparations (Fig. 28.5). Fecal films or scrapings from
the colon may also reveal other infectious agents (e.g..
the terminal colon. Invasive bacteria (e.g., Salmonella and
fungal organisms such as histoplasmosis, Aspergillus, Pythium.
Campylobacter sp.) should be considered as possible etiologi-
and Candida).32
cal agents when neutrophils are present in feces.
Small numbers of epithelial cells (Fig. 28.6) can be found
Eosinophils are also abnormal in fecal films and, when
in fecal films from normal animals. The presence of neutro-
present, are suggestive of eosinophilic colitis or chronic
phils (Fig. 28.7) in fecal flms are abnormal and are sugges-
endoparasitism. They may also be associated with GI lym-
tive of inflammation' of the colon. Viral disease is a
phoma and mast cell tumor. Occasionally malignant lym-
consideration in puppies with hemorrhagic diarrhea if fecal
phocytes can be seen in cases of gastrointestinal tract
lymphoma.32
ate as they undergo degenerative changes during their
Grindem et al.e suggest that fecal cytology may be of use
migration into the lumen of the small intestine, in transit to
in horses for the evaluation of variations to the GI flora or
448
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
liferative disorders and granulomatous gastroenteritis (the
latter may be associated with mycobacteriosis, histoplasmo-
sis, or parasitic larvae).5* Eosinophilic gastroenteritis may be
part of a complex multisystemic epitheliotropic syndrome
which may be associated with eosinophilic dermatitis and
eosinophilic granulomatous pancreatitis.4,.5
 Rectal biopsies in healthy horses may often contain eosin-
ophils, thus making a definitive diagnosis of eosinophilic
infltrative disease difficult.z Ciliated protozoa such as Trit-
richomonas and nonciliated protozoa such as Eimeria have
been associated with chronic diarrhea in horses, but their
pathogenicity is uncertain.
Eimeria leuckarti has been reported in North American
horses and a study demonstrated a prevalence in foals in
Kentucky, but the organism appears to be relatively harm-
less and clinical significance is questionable.8
Figure 28.6 Wright-Giemmsa-stained fecal smear from a dog. Epithelial
 Rectal scrape cytology
snoydiowe pue euainea jo Aauen e yim pasadsiatui ae (mone) slia
 Rectal wall scrapes?2 may be useful in cases with suspected
material. Small numbers of epithelial cells are a normal finding in fecal
infectious diseases of the gastrointestinal tract (e.g., Aspergil-
smear5. x1000
Ius, Candida, Histoplasma, Pythium, Prototheca, and Leishma-
nia) or infiltrative disease such as inflammation or neoplasia.
Cell harvest from the rectal wall can be obtained by means
of moistened cotton swabs. a gloved fingernail, or spatula
(similar to those used for conjunctival scrapes). Slides are
made by gently rolling the harvested material onto glass
slides,32 which are subsequently stained with Diff-Quik or
Wright-Giemsa stains.
Cytology of biopsy samples
Intestinal biopsies? can be used to make scrape or irmpres-
sion smears for cytologic preparations. These can then be
used to make rapid or tentative diagnoses of various disease
syndromes such as malignant lymphoma (lymphosarcoma)
or inflammatory infiltrates such as lymphoplasmacytic or
eosinophilic enteritis.
Negative results do not rule out any differentials and full 
sample in most cases for definitive diagnosis and confirma-
Figure 28.7 Wright-Giemsa-stained fecal smear from a dog. Large
tion of the cytological findings.37
numbers of degenerate neutrophils are present (arrows). Neutrophils are
abnormal in fecal srmears from all species. x1000.
Digestion/absorption screening tests
Historically there have been numerous screening tests per-
formed on feces to try to evaluate maldigestion and/or mal-
for the identification of precise etiological agents, which
absorption. These tests have become obsolete as they are
may cause gastrointestinal disease. These authors prefer
subjective, imprecise, and interpretation is complicated by
Romanowsky stains over Gram stains for detection of the
numerous factors amongst which include the variation asso-
presence of inflammatory cells or infectious agents during
ciated with different diets and intestinal transit times. They
the initial evulation of smears, as Romanowsky stains give
have low sensitivity and specificity for diagnosis of GI
better differentiation than Gram stains. With Gram stains.
 disease, and are regarded by current leading experts and
most cellular structures tend to stain Gram negative (red).
researchers as diagnostically useless and are not recom-
Fecal cytology may also be used to make a tentative diagno-
mended for clinical use.23z.sn Some of these tests include
sis of chronic inflammatory bowel disease in horses. These
microscopic examination for fecal starch, fat, and muscle
infltrative bowel diseases include eosinophilic lymphopro-
protein, and tests for fecal proteolytic activity. This latter test
449
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
is fraught with numerous false positive and negative results
● Oral supplementation with pancreatic extracts (generally
due to the daily fluctuations in fecal protease activity and
extracted from porcine pancreatic tissue) do not interfere
the presence of protease inhibitors in the feces, and is not
with TLI assays or affect results.s0
recommended even as a crude screening test.34.93
Normal dogs have serum TLI concentrations >5μg/L (5-
 The plasma turbidity test for fat absorption has poor sen-
35μg/L). Serum TLI concentrations are dramatically
sitivity (i.e., 80% or more of ingested fat is still absorbed in
decreased in dogs with EPI (<2.5 μg/L)." In dogs with clinical
dogs with EPI). There can also be marked variation in the
signs of maldigestion due to EPI, the diagnostic sensitivity.
degree of lipemia that develops and in the length of time
specificity and accuracy of fasting serum TLI is high
required for lipemia to develop in normal animals.
(approaching 100%).9) values between 2.5 and 5.0 μg/L are
seldom associated with signs of EPI, but may reflect subclini-
destruction secondary to ongoing immune-mediated lym-
Tests in a reference laboratory
phocytic pancreatitis).s7 The TLI can decrease from the
"gray" zone to a confirmatory level within a few weeks. In
Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLl)
these cases the TLI assay should be repeated after one month
Serum TLI (canine and feline specific TLI respectively)* is
ensuring that food is withheld for l2-15 hours prior to blood
regarded as the most sensitive and specific laboratory test
sample collection.
available for diagnosing exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
') auoz ,ent, siun un shsan rog sasn anqissod sauio
(EPI)." It should be part of any standard work-up for canine
5.0μg/L) include:
small intestinal diarrhea.3 Trypsin-like immunoreactivity
● The dog is in the process of recovering pancreatic function 
assay (TLI) utilizes species-specific antibody that detects cat-
after an episode of pancreatitis, and the results may be
ionic trypsin and trypsinogen, which are bound to protease
normal at retesting.
inhibitors.7 Immunoassays are currently available for dogs
· The sample had a normal TLI when collected but was
and cats. In healthy animals, trypsinogen is constantly pro-
exposed to excessive heat during transit. Results may be
duced by pancreatic acinar cells and small amounts leak
normal at retesting.
continually into the peripheral circulation, and thus most of
● Food was not withdrawn for an adequate length of time
the serum TLI measured is trypsinogen. Trypsinogen is con-
  an  a a   on rd
verted in the small intestine to trypsin, which is the active
EPI.
form of the proteolytic enzyme, but this is not reabsorbed
 In cats, values ≤8.0μg/L are diagnostic for EPI.75,91
into circulation. In animals with EPI, TLI levels are severely
Values between 8.0 and 12.0μg/L are equivocal and
decreased due to the marked depletion of functional exo-
 retesting in a month (as for dogs) is recommended.78
crine pancreatic tissue. EPI can be treated successfully, which
TLI concentrations are reported to be normal in cases
results in the resolution of the changes that usually occur in
where EPI is due either to obstructive pancreatic duct tumors
the small intestine, and thus EPI should be ruled out as a
 or to congenital deficiencies of the enzymes other than
differential before considering a diagnosis of primary intes-
trypsinogen.22
tinal disease.
 Diseases causing decreased GFR are reported to increase
EPI can also cause cobalamin (vitamin B,z) malabsorption.
TLI,7° and could potentially mask an abnormally low serum
which
in
turn,
can6
encumber  interpretation
of
 TLI concentration.
serum cobalamin levels and thus the diagnosis of intestinal
Assays for serum cobalamin (vitamin B,z) and folate are
disease.2
strongly recommended whenever serum TLI is assayed as
The following information should be considered when
serum vitamin abnormalities are common in dogs and espe-
performing TLI:
cially cats with EPI.
● Animals should be fasted for a minimum of 12 hours prior
to collection of a blood sample, as recent feeding may falsely
elevate TLI levels.
Fecal elastase 1
· 1 mL of nonhemolyzed serum is preferred, but EDTA or
A fecal Elastase l ELISA test (ScheBo?, BiotechUS) was
heparinized plasma may be used.7^ Severe lipemia will inter-
developed and claims a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity
fere in the radioimmunoassays commonly used for the mea-
 of 98% for detection of canine pancreatic insufficiency.72
surement of TLI.80.,91
 The one advantage of this test over cTLI testing is this
● Serum TLI is stable for several days at room temperature
test does not require a l2-hour fast, but a disadvantage is
and for several years when frozen. Serum samples for TLI
that a feces sample is required. There are also marked
analysis can thus be sent to a laboratory through the mail.
daily variations in fecal elastase results., with no clear cut
but high temperatures will destroy TLI. Samples should be
differentiation in results between subclinical and control
stored at 4°℃ or -20°℃.7
dogs.87
450
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
 Fecal α-proteinase inhibitor concentration (α,-Pl)
Secretions of pepsin and gastric acid (HCl) in the stomach
Many gastrointestinal disorders can be associated with
mediate the release from dietary proteins. Free cobalamin
protein loss. In small animals the most common causes of
then binds to specialized proteins (known as R proteins),
GI protein loss include inflammatory bowel disease, intesti-
which in turn, renders cobalamin unavailable for absorp-
 nal lymphoma, and lymphangiectasia.2
tion. This complex passes into the small intestine, where it
α1-Proteinase inhibitor (Pl) is a protein in feces that is not
subsequently becomes digested by pancreatic proteases.
degraded by digestive or bacterial proteinases. It is lost at
which in turn releases the vitamin B,z." Intrinsic factor is
about the same rate as albumin and other plasma proteins
ue ge'sio pu sop un saud au aq ad paoo
into the GI lumen.5’ αl-Proteinase inhibitor is normally
also by the gastric mucosa in dogs.7 and consequently binds
found in plasma, lymph, and interstitial fluid but is not
to the free vitamin Biz. This vitamin B,z-intrinsic factor
 complex is later absorbed in the distal small intestine, espe-
cats with gastrointestinal protein loss, increases in fecal α,PI
cially the ileum.238
concentrations may be seen before the protein loss become
The three main causes for decreased serum Biz (cobala-
 severe enough to observe hypoalbuminemia.50
min) concentrations are:
In dogs and cats, confirmation of gastrointestinal protein
● Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency: Either cobalamin is not
loss, i.e., protein losing enteropathy (PLE), can be made by
released from R proteins because of insufficient secretion of
measurement of fecal cl -proteinase inhibitor by means of a
bicarbonate rich fluid into the duodenum, or there is
validated ELISA assay.51
decreased intrinsic factor production, especially in cats as
There are daily fluctuations in fecal c,-PI levels and pref-
they lack gastric intrinsic factor.6 Low serum cobalamin
levels are an indication for checking serum TLI.
more realistic approach involves collection and evaluation
● Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO); especially
of three individually voided fecal samples.' Fecal blood is
anerobes. The amount of cobalamin bound to intestinal bac-
reported to falsely increase α,-PI. Fecal samples should be
teria is increased, decreasing free cobalamin for absorption.
frozen immediately and shipped to the reference laboratory
SIBO has been defined as >lo' colony forming units/mL of
frozen, ' on dry ice for testing. Time and increased tempera-
duodenal juice)."? However, this definition is controversial
ture decrease concentrations." Samples kept at room tem-
 as healthy dogs may have bacterial counts higher than this.32
perature for 72 hours were shown to have only 66% of the
· Decreased absorption of cobalamin in the ileum of dogs
prestorage concentrations.5' Currently, this assay is only
and cats due to diseases damaging the ileum. Underlying
available through the Gastrointestinal Laboratory at Texas
diseases include many types of inflammatory bowel disease
 ASM University (College Station, TX).51
and neoplasia.
Additionally. congenital selective cobalamin malabsorp-
Serum vitamin Biz and folate
tion and cobalamin deficiency has been documented in
In dogs and cats that have unexplained weight loss or
border collies,579 giant schnauzers, 235 Australian shepherd
chronic small intestinal diarrhea, serum vitamin Biz and
dogs, and beagles with defective ileal cobalamin-intrinsic
folate concentrations may be useful to evaluate intestinal
factor receptor.
function,6.32 but it must be remembered that a precise etio-
 In an ongoing study at the GI lab at Texas A&M, they
logical diagnosis based on these tests results is unlikely.32
Serum is the preferred sample for both vitamin Biz and
from Shar Peis with GI disease have serum cobalamin B,z
folate assays, but EDTA plasma may be used for folate only
levels below the reference interval, z9,32 but these dogs do not
in some assays.7 Assays should be validated for the species
appear to have abnormal pancreatic function. They also E
of interest
report that in nearly half of these dogs tested, the serum
Cobalamin is stable in serum for 12 hours at 8°C, and for
cobalamin has not been detected by normal methods.32
up to 8 weeks at -20°℃. Folate is stable for 24 hours at 4°℃
Increased levels of serum cobalamin concentrations are
A n 0 adxg '.0- 1 5 g 0n d rog pu
    i so   n
supplementation of cobalamin, or they can also arise
      
cobalamin.
Serum vitamin B12
Cobalamin is a large molecule that cannot traverse the intes-
Serum folate
tinal epithelial barrier either by diffusion or by carrier-
Folate is ingested in the diet (green leafy plants) in the form
mediated transport, and thus vitamin Biz (cyanocobalamin/
of folate polyglutamate. It is conjugated with glutamic acid
cobalamin) has a highly complex homeostasis which pri-
residues but is poorly absorbed. In the proximal small intes-
tine, folate polyglutamate is deconjugated by folate decon-
patic recirculation.
jugase enzyme to folate monoglutamate,7s which is then
451
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
absorbed by specific folate carriers in the proximal small
with small intestinal disease, that is. if pancreatic insuffi-
intestine, especially the jejunum. Enteric bacteria also
ciency (EPI) has been excluded.2
produce folate.
A decrease in serum concentrations of both vitamin B12
The main cause of decreased serum folate concentrations
and folate suggests severe, chronic diffuse disease involving
is the decrease of intestinal folate absorption due to proximal
the entire small intestine (generalized malabsorption).
srmall intestinal disease. Many potential underlying causes
 Decreased vitamin Biz and folate concentrations have
are possible, such as inflammatory bowel disease or infiltra-
been reported in cats with EPI. In a study by Simpson," in
tive neoplasia such as lymphoma. Ingested antigens are in
more than 50% of the cats tested at the time that presented
increased concentrations in the lumen of the proximal small
with GI disease, the cobalamin concentration was below
intestine and this area is thus vulnerable to damage by spe-
normal, and some of the cats with GI lymphoma were also
cific diets, e.g. gluten enteropathy in Irish setters.24 Overuse
found to have concurrently low folate levels.67
of antibiotics with subsequent sterilization of the intestine
It is hypothesized that the reduced serum vitamin B2
can also lead to decreased serum folate levels.
concentration results from decreased secretion of pancreatic
A functional folate deficiency may also occur in cases of
intrinsic factor, which is necessary for vitamin B, absorption
cobalamin deficiency, and serum folate concentrations may
in cats. Decreased folate concentrations are thought to result
be normal or be potentially increased in those animals due
from concurrent intestinal disease with EPI and the resultant
to the decreased utilization of folate.79
 decrease in folate absorption. Detection of decreased vitamin
There are several potential causes for increased serum
B,z and folate concentration in cats warrants consideration
folate concentrations, including excess supplementation or 
of EPI in addition to intestinal disease.
high dietary intake. Many different bacterial species synthe-
A decrease in vitamin Biz with normal folate concentra-
size folate and thus srmall intestinal bacterial overgrowth can
tion but normal pancreatic function suggests distal small
lead to significant increases in serum folate concentrations.
intestinal disease, whereas decreased folate with normal B2
Bacterial overgrowth may result secondary to EPl, or a
concentrations suggests proximal small intestinal disease. A
variety of underlying intestinal diseases that cause defects in
decrease in vitamin B,z with or without increased folate in
the mucus barrier or decreased peristalsis. IgA deficiency in
dogs (due to bacterial overgrowth) suggests EPI, and testing
German shepherds has also been associated with intestinal
TLI is indicated. If both vitamin B,z and folate concentrations
bacterial overgrowth.3
are increased, vitamin supplementation prior to sampling is
Greater folate absorption occurs at lower pH, which could
the most likely explanation, because there is no disease
be caused either by excess gastric acid secretion or decreased
process that should give rise to this change.
bicarbonate secretion. The latter can be seen in cases of EPI.
A summary of the interpretation of vitamin B,z and folate
levels is described in Table 28.7.
Interpretation of vitamin Bz and folate
A list of other tests that may be used for the evaluation
concentrations
 of gastrointestinal disease can be seen in Table 28.8.
Results are only meaningful if pancreatic function is normal
and if the condition is sufficiently chronic for body reserves
Cobalamin in large animals
of vitamin B,z and folate to have been depleted. Dietary
Cobalt is required for synthesis of cobalamin by ruminal
intake is a consideration as prolonged anorexia can affect
bacteria, and thus cobalt deficiencies in ruminants can result
serum concentrations. Misleading results can occur in cats or
in decreased serum cobalamin.74 Cobalamin deficiencies are
dogs with EPI and in patients who have bacterial overgrowth
shown to have repercussions on production in large animals.
or are receiving vitamin supplements. In a survey by Hall
with manifestations of diarrhea, weight loss, ill thrift, pica.
Et al.,3 the authors reported that 74% of dogs with EPI had
etc.69
decreased vitamin B,z and 32% had increased folate.33
The combination of decreased vitamin B,z and increased
 Table 28.7 Summary of the interpretation of vitamin Bi2 and folate
folate concentrations with normal pancreatic exocrine func-
levels.
tion suggests small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO),32
also known as antibiotic responsive diarrhea or bacterial
IBO——↓ Vitammin B12. folate ↑
dysbiosis.5
 EPI—-slight ↓ Vitarmin B2 folate norrmal / ↑
 In dogs, decreased B,z and increased folate concentrations
Cats EPI—most ↓ Vitamin B12. >50% folate ↓
have a low sensitivity (5%) for detecting bacterial over-
Vitamin supplemmentation——↑ Vitamin Bi2. folate ↑
Severe, diffuse long-standling Sl disease -
growth, but have high specificity (almost 100%).66
usually ↓ Vitarmin B2, folate ↓
 SIBO is not a clinical condition that is commonly seen in
Upper Sl disease—usually normal B2. folate low 
cats, but serum cobalamin concentrations can be decreased
Malabsorption—low folate
due to binding by intestinal bacteria. In cats, low concentra-
tions of serum cobalamin are most frequently associated
452
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
 Table 28.8 Other tests that may be useful for the evaluation of gastrointestinal disease.
 Test type
Purpose of test
Fecal PCR or bacterial or fungal
Evaluation of microorganisms associated diarrhea and or vomition such as Campylobacter pp. 3246,$
pue aggo eyays o suies suaoued etap wnpuso e'suahuad wnpuso
Salmonella 5pp.1 32,45,46a:8 Helicobacter,4a, 6a Heterobilhazia Americana,23 Tritrichomonas,227a Histoplasma
capsulatum2
Fecal antigen detection mmethods 
Evaluation of microorganisms associated with diarrhea and/r vomition, e.g. ELSA for viruses (panvo10.32
rota), Giardia,32 and Cryptosporidium antigen
ELISA for fecal bacterial enterotoxin5
Clostridium perfringens10 and Clostridium diffile10.46a
 Serum pepsinogen
 bunon u! siselbeuaiso joy isal bujuaauns pue stueuiunu u! eoahewep/uoeanin jesewoge joj bujuaains
calves <2 years of age
Serum gastrin 
 Evaluation for Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison syndrorme)66
Hydrogen breath test73,75.83
 Investigation of bacterial overgrowth and carbohydrate malabsorption secondary to EPl in dogs and 
Cats 3da.52a
Abdominal ultrasound 
Evaluation of GIT/abdominal abnormalities
Intestinal biopsy 
 Evaluation of etiology of GIT disease32/causes of malabsorption/maldigestion2
Evaluation of ruminal fluid
Ruminal bacteria
It is important to ensure that the first part of the ruminal
 Predominant ruminal bacteria are Gram negative but these
 content is not contaminated with saliva (which has an alka-
may be replaced by Gram positive organisms in cases of
line pH).
ruminal acidosis.19
Ruminal pH varies according to the type of feed, and time
interval between feeding and sampling. The maximal
Normal rumen chloride
decrease in pH occurs 5-6 hours post prandially due to
<30 mEq/L (10-25 mEq/L)(mmol/L) in cattle and <15 mEq/L)
 production of volatile fatty acids. pH increases on exposure
(mmol/L) in sheep),19
and that of the abomasum is
to air and thus should be measured immediately after
>90 mEq/ L)(mmol/L).64
sampling.19
Increases in rumen chloride are associated with abomasal
Normal rumen pH is quoted to be between 5.5 and 7.2.
reflux of HCl, ileus, or high salt intake.19.69 
Acidosis is evidenced by a pH less than 5.5-6.0 (usually
 Absorption tests
due to grain overload or high concentrate diets),4l although
The functional assessment of small intestinal disease in
 an animal with lactic acidosis with protracted anorexia may
small animals by measuring absorption of various substrates
have a normal rumen fluid pH if there is persistent saliva
such as glucose, lactose, and starch have, for the most part,
production.6
been discarded.32 This is because concentrations of plasma 
Alkalosis is associated with pH above 7 (8-10) and is due
glucose after dosing of these compounds depends on more
to high protein diets, saliva contamination of rumen content,
than mucosal hydrolysis of starch and lactose, and absorp-
 or rumen putrefaction due to rumen stasis.19
tion of glucose, malking these tests unreliable.*2 Other insen-
Microscopic examination of rumen fluid includes evaluation
sitive tests which have also become redundant include
of the types of bacteria and types and motility of the proto-
zoa present. It is important to mix the sample adequately
 D-xylose testing in small animals and triglyceride absorption
prior to examination.
tests.32
 Protozoal motility can be evaluated on wet preparations
 Some of these absorption tests however, are still used in
gea idax aq pnos ien iamod mo 1e 
large animals, such as xylose absorption, and is occasionally
Numbers and morphology can be examined on wet
 Used in horses when malabsorption is suspected.63,65 This has
mounts without stains (or by adding a drop of Lugol's iodine
  'sin  o    
to the rumen content) on a slide and covered with a cover-
used to assess chronic weight loss in horses.62
slip. Normally a minimum of five to seven active protozoa
 Both tests are influenced by the rate of gastric emptying.
 should be seen per low power field.19
 small intestinal transit time, diet and fasting period. Both
453
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
tests require adequate fasting prior to testing. but this may
The D-xylose absorption test is insensitive, and thus a
be contraindicated in debilitated animals.
normal D-xylose absorption test does not rule out
Xylose absorption tests depend largely on absorption of
malabsorption.
xylose whereas glucose absorption tests depend on intestinal
D-Xylose absorption curves can be affected by many
absorption and utilization of glucose by hepatocytes and
factors not directly related to malabsorption such as diet,
other tissues. Theoretically the xylose absorption test is pre-
 anorexia, age, decreased renal clearance, infections, anermia.
ferred because xylose is not a normal metabolite, although
hypoxia, and in foals, the IgG concentration. D-Xylose
the test has a number of disadvantages. The test is more
absorption can be falsely decreased (i.e., a falsely flattened
expensive, xylose assays are less accessible, and may be dif-
curve or delay in reaching peak value) with delayed gastric
ficult to interpret.1 Results are also affected by diet (horses
emptying. bacterial overgrowth causing intraluminal bacte-
 on high energy diets show lower absorption curves). The
rial breakdown of xylose, and sequestration of xylose in
glucose absorption test is more practical as glucose is readily
patients with abnormal extravascular fluid accumulation
available, less expensive, and assays are more accessible.
(e.g., edema, hydrothorax, or ascites).
Glucose absorption tests can be used in monogastrics and
preruminant calves to assess intestinal absorption, but
 cannot be used in adult ruminants as sugars are degraded in
Oral glucose absorption/tolerance test (OGTT)
the rumen.
in horses
Protoco162.79
Oral D-xylose absorption tests in horses
● The animal is fasted overnight (l8-24 hours). and a base-
Protocol:
line (0 hour) blood sample for glucose is taken into a sodium
● The animal is fasted for 12-18 hours.11
fluoride tube.
· D-Xylose is administered orally via nasogastric tube at a
● Glucose (20% solution) is administered at 1g/kg body
dosage of 0.5-1.0g/kg (10% solution) in horses.19
weight via nasogastric tube.
● Blood samples are collected into heparinized tubes for D-
● Blood samples for glucose determination are collected into
xylose determinations, and are collected before D-xylose
sodium fluoride tubes at 30, 60, 90, 120 and 180 minutes
administration and at 30 minute intervals for up to 5 hours
after glucose administration.
(30, 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, and 300 minutes) after adminis-
Normal horses should show increases in blood glucose
tration. For routine diagnostic purposes, the 60- through
concentrations of greater than 85-100% above the baseline
180-minute samples are the most important.
concentration at 120 minutes.7281 Results may be affected
D-xylose concentrations should represent a bell-shaped
by a number of factors such as age and diet,36ss bacterial
curve, but should peak at greater than 20-30 mg/dL (1.34-
 overgrowth, delayed gastric emptying (excitement),43 small
2.01 mmol/L) at 90-180 minutes (Fig. 28.8)." In normal
intestinal obstruction, reduced intestinal circulation, and
horses, peak values should be greater than l5mg/dL
sequestration in ascitic fluid. Anorexia or prolonged fasting
(1.00mmol/L) above baseline values. In normal foals the
may delay or decrease peak glucose concentrations, causing
xylose peak is reached at 30-60 minutes, but peak concen-
flatter curves due to decreased peristalsis.
trations are reported to vary with age.'" A flattened D-
The specificity of the oral glucose tolerance test was
xylose absorption curve is suggestive of malabsorption.19
assessed in 42 cases of horses with chronic weight loss.43
Specificity was found to be very good in cases with normal
OGTT and was found to correlate well with normal histo-
pathological findings of the small bowel, but severe infiltra-
28
tive disease of the small intestine (such as lymphoma or
24
 granulomatous enteritis) were associated with a complete
Serum
26
 malabsorptive response.43
D-xylose
Histopathological findings correlate poorly with a partial
concentration 16
(mg/dL)
malabsorption response.
NORMAL
Tests for maldigestion in horses
.ABNORMAL
Oral lactose tolerance test in horses
Maldigestion syndromes are infrequently observed in horses
30
60
180
240
as compared with other species. In foals and young adults less
Time (minutes)
than 3 years of age, lactase enzyme (which is found in the
Figure 28.8 The D-xylose absorption curves from normal and abnormal
brush border of the small-intestinal enterocytes), hydrolyzes
horses. A normal D-xylose absorption curve in a horse peaks at greater
than 20-30 mg/dL at 90-180 minutes after D-xylose administration.
before absorption occurs. Acquired lactase deficiency can be
454
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
seen in foals and preruminant calves, secondary to a number
● Samples for blood glucose determinations are collected in
of causes of intestinal mucosal damage. These include viral
sodium fluoride tubes at 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 minute intervals
(rotavirus), protozoal, or bacterial enteritis (C. dijficile entero-
and then hourly for 6 hours.
colitis in foals)s or other less specific ca uses of small intestinal
Normal horses are reported to should show increases in
 disease.7 Preruminant calves and lactose-deficient foals may
blood glucose concentrations of approximately 30mg/dL
develop osmotic diarrhea due to the presence of osmotically
         ()
active particles (lactose) and subsequent retention of water
should return to pretreatment levels within 3 hours. This
and electrolytes in the small intestine.
 pattern of response closely approximates results obtained by
These two types of diarrhea may be difficult to differenti-
 oral glucose absorption tests.31
ate clinially.60
 The lactose tolerance test does not distinguish maldiges-
tion from malabsorption, but is used principally in foals to
Other laboratory abnormalities associated
identify lactase deficiency and for young foals and calves
with digestive system diseases
with diarrhea or poor growth. The test is inappropriate for
adult ruminants and horses (the latter greater than three
Laboratory test abnormalities associated with gastrointesti-
years of age as they are lactose-intolerant).
nal disease vary with the area of the system affected, the
disease etiology, and the speed of onset and duration of the
disease. Common abnormalities associated with acute or
Protocops.79
· Grain and hay should be withdrawn from the dam and
chronic diarrheas are discussed here.
foal for 18 hours and water removed 2 hours prior to testing.
 Muzzling of the foal is recormmended 4 hours prior to testing
Other laboratory abnormalities associated with
acute or chronic diarrhea (more than three weeks'
and the foal should remain muzzled for the duration of the
 duration) or vomiting
test. A baseline (o hour) blood sample for glucose is taken.
● Lactose monohydrate (20% solution) is dosed at 1g/kg
1. Increased hematocrit, hemoglobin concentration, and
body weight via nasogastic tube.19
erythrocyte count, as well as increased plasma and serum
● Blood samples for glucose assay are collected into sodium
protein concentrations, can occur with acute diarrhea or
fluoride tubes at 30. 60 and 90 minute (120 minutes
vomiting. These occur due to the loss of fluid via the GI tract
optional) intervals after lactose administration.
and the resulting dehydration and hemoconcentration.
2. Variable abnormalities in the leukocyte concentration can
 In healthy foals, the glucose concentration is quoted to be
150-250% of baseline concentration at 60 or 90 minutes;4&.81
occur with acute diarrhea. If the diarrhea results from an
or should peak at least 35 mg/dL (1.94 mmol/L) greater than
infectious agent that produces toxins, then sequestration of
the baseline concentration.* Maldigestion or malabsorption
neutrophils as well as strong tissue demand can result in
will usually result in an inappropriate increase in the blood
marked neutropenia and leukopenia with or without a left
shift. Less severe endotoxemia or tissue demand can result
glucose concentrations after the administration of lactose. If
the lactose tolerance test is abnormal, then either a glucose
in neutrophilia with a left shift.
or D-xylose absorption test is recommended to evaluate for
·Eosinophilia may or may not be seen with
possible malabsorption. Casein hypersensitivity and lactose
hypersensitivity—allergy or intestinal parasitism, intesti-
intolerance can be differentiated by evaluation of the foal's
nal mast cell tumor, GI lymphoma, hypoadrenocoticism,
response to enzymatically treated and untreated milk. A
eosinophillic enteritis, or hypereosinophilic syndrome.
definitive diagnosis of lactase deficiency can be confirmed
· Lymphopenia may be seen with immunodeficiency.
by direct measurerment of mucosal lactase activity in the
stress or lymphangiectasia.21232
intestinal tissue, but this is rarely performed in practice, as
● Thrombocytopenia, coagulopathies, and DIC may be
features of endotoxemia secondary to sepsis.
3. Acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities can occur in
animals with diarrhea or vomiting. These abnormalities.
Starch digestion test in horses
however, are variable and unpredictable. Assessment of
This is a test of small intestinal and pancreatic function.
acid-base and serum electrolyte status is important in such
animals. In patients with secretory diarrheas, loss of Na, Cl,
Protoco!'
and occasionally K can result in decreased serum concentra-
· The horse is fasted for 18 hours after which a baseline
tions of these electrolytes. Hypokalemia is common in horses
sample for blood glucose is taken into a sodium fluoride
with long-standing colic with impaction of the large colon,
tube.
 or in horses that have been anorexic for a few days.19
● Cornstarch is dosed at 1 kg in 4L of water or 2g/kg body
Increases in potassium with pseudohypoadrenocorticism
weight via nasogastric tube.
(pseudoaddisons) is noted in dogs with secretory diarrhea.
455
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
especially with whipworm (Trichuris) infection.ie1s Bicar-
differentiate EPI from other disorders. Serum amylase and
bonate is also lost in diarrhea, which can cause a metabolic
         
acidosis. This in turn can result in a shift of K from intracel-
but these decreases usually are not recognized as being sig-
lular to extracellular spaces as well as retention of K by the
nificant. Increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activities
kidneys. Potassium shifts can lead to a normal or increased
and decreased cholesterol concentrations occasionally are
serum K concentration despite a loss of K in the feces. Vom-
seen in dogs with EPI.
iting animals may lose significant amounts of HCl in the
Other laboratory abnormalities that can occur with mal-
vomitus, which often leads to hypochloremia and metabolic
absorption syndrome include:
alkalosis. If the vomitus includes alkaline small intestinal
1. Microcytic anemia associated with iron deficiency, which
contents, however, such animals may have normal acid-base
commonly results from chronic blood loss via the GI tract.12
results or metabolic acidosis. Metabolic allkalosis in vomiting
Chronic GI blood loss can be associated with a variety of
animals is associated with obstructive GI disease, due to loss
underlying conditions including neoplasia and parasites.
of HCl without loss of alkaline intestinal contents. No sig-
2. An inflammatory leukogram, which may be suggestive
nificant association was found by Boag et al.,' between elec-
of significant inflammation or deep ulceration in the intes-
trolyte or acid base abnormalities and the site of foreign
tinal wall.
body: metabolic alkalosis with hypochloremia (dispropor-
3. Neutropenia with or without a left shift. If, in addition,
tionate to sodium) and hypokalemia can be seen with both
neutrophils are toxic, then endotoxin absorption from the
proximal and distal gastrointestinal foreign bodies. Linear as
GI tract secondary to Gram negative enteritis, intestinal
stasis, septicemia, severe bacterial peritonitis secondary to
be associated with lowered sodium concentrations.?
intestinal perforation, or viral enteritis are possible.
A disproportionate decrease in chloride as compared to
4. Eosinophilia, which may be associated with eosinophilic
sodium may also be associated with left displacement of the
 nnin  n i   
abomasum (LDA) in ruminants with allkalosis and hypoka-
 of eosinophilic gastroenteritis.1232 Lack of eosinophilla does
lemia. This may be accompanied by paradoxic aciduria.1s
not rule out these differentials. Hall?2 states that in his expe-
4. Increases in blood urea nitrogen (serum urea) and creati-
rience less than 50% of cases of biopsy-proven eosinophilic
nine can result, secondary to dehydration (i.e., prerenal
enteritis have peripheral eosinophil and that mild eosino-
azotemia)
philia can also be seen with other forms of IBD.32
5. Increased activities of hepatic leakage enzymes (mainly
5. Abnormal serum protein, albumin, or globulin concen-
ALT (alanine aminotransferase) or ALP (alkaline phospha-
trations. Serum albumin and globulin concentrations are
tase) in small animals and GLDH (glutamate dehydroge-
nase) in large animals) can occur with acute diarrhea.
In these cases, both albumin and globulin concentrations
possibly because of hepatocyte damage resulting from toxins
are usually decreased. In other types of malabsorption
absorbed from the injured GI tract.
or maldigestion, the only decrease, if any. occurs in the
Serum amylase and lipase may be variably increased with
albumin concentration. An exception is immunoprolifera-
gastrointestinal disease in dogs, including gastrointestinal
space occupying lesions such as foreign body or neoplasia.
tions increase as part of an immune response. Similar
6. Hypocholesterolemia, although nonspecific, may be
immunoproliferative enteropathies with hyperglobulinemia
present in some cases of intestinal disease. Many dogs with
may occur in other breeds of dogs. especially German
 PLE have hypocholesterolemia, which may be secondary to
shepherds.
lymphangiectasia,32 and presumably results from fat malab-
6. Prolonged prothrombin (PT) times, prolonged activated
sorption associated with failure of chylomicron transport.
partial thromboplastin times (APTT), and prolonged acti-
7. Panhypoproteinemia can be seen with protein losing
vated clotting times (ACT) due to vitamin K deficiency may
enteropathies (PLE).1232 This should be differentiated from
be seen in animals with malabsorption syndrome. A sus-
hypoalbuminemia secondary to protein losing nephropa-
pected vitamin K-deficient bleeding syndrome has been
thies and liver failure.32
reported in cats with malabsorption syndrome. Malabsorp-
8. Horses with severe colic may show coagulation defects
tion of vitamin K, which is a fat-soluble vitamin, probably
characterized by low levels of antithrombin Ill and pro-
plays an important role in this syndrome, but the vitamin K
longed PT and APTT.17
s   si o s   
hepatic diseases, thereby resulting in decreased production
Other laboratory abnormalities associated with
of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors: possible antibiotic
 EPl or malabsorption syndrome
therapy. thereby altering small intestinal bacterial flora
Hematologic and serum biochemical tests usually are not
and reducing bacterially derived vitamin K, production;
helpful in establishing the diagnosis of EPl. Routine hema-
and in some cases, severe dietary fat restriction, thereby
reducing vitamin K uptake still further, because it is depen-
456
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
dent on fat absorption. Before these changes are seen, the
18. DiBartola SP, Johnson SE, Davenport DJ, Prueter JC, Chew DJ,
activity of vitamin K dependent clotting factors decrease to
Sherding RG (1985) Clinicopathologic findings resembling
less than 35% of normal by which time these animals are
markedly deficient and should receive parenteral vitamin K
disease. J Am Ver Med Assor 187: 60-3.
19. Done SH, Radostits OM (2007) Veterinary Medicine: A Textbook of
supplementation.23
the Diseases of Cartle, Horses, Sheep, Pigs, Goats, loth ed., pp. xxi.
2156. Elsevier Saunders, New York.
20. Dryden MW, Payme PA, Smith V (2006) Accurate diagnosis of 
References
Giardia spp and proper fecal examination procedures. Ver Ther
7: 4-14.
1. Anderson N, Armour J, Jarrett WF, Jennings FW, Ritchie JS.
21. Dukes HH, Swenson MJ, Reece WO (1993) Dukes′ Physiology of
Urquhart GM (1 965) A field study of parasitic gastritis in cattle.
Domesric Animais, 1lth ed., pp. xi, 962. Comstock, Ithaca.
Ver Rec 77: 1196-1204.
22. Dunn JK (l999) Textbook of Small Animal Medicine, pp. xii,
la. Batchelor DJ, Noble PJ, Cripps PJ, er al. (2007) Breed associa-
1065. W.B. Saunders, London.
tions for canine exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. J Ver Inrern
23. Edwards DF Russell RG (1987) Probable vitamin K—deficient
Med 21: 207-14.
bleeding in two cats with malabsorption symndrome secondary
2. Batt RM (2009) Laboratory diagnosis of intestinal disease in
to lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis. J Ver Inrern Med 1:
'uue [eAoy 'sia1 Pa 61-01 dd '1 0N 61 "oA sies pue s3op
97-101.
3. Batt RM, Barnes A, Rutgers HC, Carter SD (199l) Relative IgA
23a. Flowers JR, Hammerberg B, Wood SL, et al. (2002) Heterobil-
deficiency and small intestinal bacterial overgrowth in German
harzia americana infection in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 220:
shepherd dogs. Res Ver Sei 50: 106-11.
193-6.
4. Batt RM, McLean L, Carter MW (1987) Sequential morphologic
24. Fox JN, Mosley JG, Vogler GA, Austin JL, Reber HA (1981)
and biochemical studies of naturally occurring wheat-sensitive
Pancreatic function in domestic cats with pancreatic flu ke infec-
enteropathy in Irish setter dogs. Dig Dis Sei 32: 184-94.
ton. J Am Ver Med Assoc 178: 58-60.
5. Batt RM, McLean L, Riley JE {l988) Response of the jejuna]
 25. Fyfe JC (1993) Feline intrinsic factor (IF) is pancreatic in origin
mucosa of dogs with aerobic and anaerobic bacterial over-
and mediates ileal cobalamin (CBL) absorption. Journal of Ver-
growth to antibiotic therapy. Gut 29: 473-82.
erinary Internal Medicine 7: 133-5 (abstract).
6. Batt RM, Morgan JO (1982) Role of serum folate and vitamin
26. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Hall CA, et al. (199 l) Inherited selective intes-
B12 concentrations in the differentiation of small intestinal
tinal cobalamin malabsorption and cobalamin deficiency in
abnormalities in the dog. Res Ver Sri 32: 17-22.
dogs. Pediarr Res 29: 24-31.
6a. Beutin L (l999) Escherichia coli as a pathogen in dogs and
27. Gilson SD, Parker BB, Twedt DC (1990) Evaluation of two com-
cats. Ver Res 30: 285-98.
mercial test kits for detection of occult blood in feces of dogs.
7. Boag AK, Coe RJ, Martinez TA, Hughes D (2005) Acid-base and
Am J Ver Res 51: 1385-7.
electrolyte abnormalities in dogs with gastrointestinal foreign
27a. Gookin JL, Birkenheuer AJ, St John V, Spector M, Levy MG
bodies. J Ver Inrern Med 19: 8l6-21.
8. Bowman DD, Georgi JR (2009) Georgis' Parasitology for Veterinar-
of dogs with diarrhea. J Parasito! 91: 939-43.
ians, 9th ed., pp. ix, 451. Saunders/Elsevier, St. Louis, MO.
28. Greene CE (2006) Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed.,
9. Bowman DD, Lymn RC, Eberhard ML (2003) Georgis' Parasitology
pp. xxix, 1387. Saunders Elsevier, St. Louis, MO.
for Vererinarians, 8th ed., pp. ix, 422. Saunders, St. Louis, MO.
29. Grutzner N, Bishop MA, Suchodolski JS, Steiner JM (2010)
10. Broussard JD (2003) Optimal fecal assessment. Clin Tech Smal!
Association study of cobalamin deficiency in the Chinese Shar
Anim Pracr 18: 218-30.
Pei. J Hered 101(2): 211-17.
 11. Brown CM ( 1992) The diagnostic value of the D-xylose absorp-
30. Guilford WG (200l) GI function tests: why clinicians should use 
tion test in horses with unexplained chronic weight loss. Br Ver
them. World Small Anima! Veterinary Association World Congress.
J148: 41-4.
30a. Guilford WG, Strombeck DR (1996) Strombeck's Small Anima!
12. Burrows CF (1983) Chronic diarrhea in the dog. Ver Clin North
'x dd '() y a p  'a pie oaas
Am Small Anim Pracr 13: 521-40.
978. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1996.
13. Campbell TW, Ellis C (2007) Avian and Exoric Animal Hematology
31. Gutzwiller A, Blum JW (1996) Effects of oral lactose and xylose
and Cyrology, 3rd ed., pp. ix, 287. Blackwell Pub., Ames, Iowa.
loads on blood glucose, galactose, xylose, and insulin values in
14. Carter GR (20ol) International Veterinary Information Service:A
healthy calves and calves with diarrhea. Am J Ver Res 57:
Concise Guide to Infecrious and Parasitic Diseases of Dogs and Cats.
560-3.
Intermational Veterinary Information Service, Ithaca, NY.
32. Hall EJ (1 999) Clinical laboratory evaluation of small intestinal 
15. Cook AK, Gilson SD, Fischer WD, Kass PH (1992) Effect of
function. Ver Clin North Am Small Anim Pracr 29: 441-69.
diet on results obtained by use of two commercial test kits for
33. Hall EJ, Bond PM, McLean C, Batt RM, McLean L (1991) A
detection of occult blood in feces of dogs. Am J Ver Res 53:
survey of the diagnosis and treatment of canine exocrine
1749-51.
pancreatic insufficiency. Journal of Small Animal Pracrice 32:
16. Cowell RL, Tyler RD (2002) Diagnostic Cyrology and Hematology of
613-19.
the Horse, 2nd ed., pp. ix, 260. Mosby, St. Louis, MO.
 34. Hill FW, Kidder DE (1970) The estimation of daily faecal trypsin
17. Dallap BL (2004) Coagulopathy in the equine critical care
levels in dogs as an indicator of gross pancreatic exocrine insuf-
patient. Ver Clin North Am Equine Pract 20: 231-51.
ficiency. J Small Anim Pracr 1l: 191-5.
457
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
35. Hoskins JD (2001) Veterinary Pediatrics: Dogs and Cats from Birth
53. Murphy D, Reid SW, Love S (1997) The effect of age and diet
to Six Monrhs, 3rd ed., pp. xiv, 594. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
om the oral glucose tolerance test in ponies. Equine Ver J 29:
36. Jacobs KA, Bolton JR (1982) Effect of diet on the oral glucose
467-70.
tolerance test in the horse. J Am Ver Med Assor 180: 8846.
54. Murphy KF German AJ, Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA,
37. Jergens AE, Moore FM, Haymes JS, Miles KG (1992) Idiopathic
Hall EJ (2003) Fecal alphal-proteinase inhibitor concentration
inflammatory bowel disease in dogs and cats: 84 cases (1987-
in dogs with chronic gastrointestinal disease. Ver Clin Pathol 32:
1990). J Am Ver Med Assor 20l: 1603-8.
67-72.
38. Johnson LR (1994) Physiology of the Gastrointestinal Tract, 3rd ed.,
 54a. Neiger R, Simpson KW (2000) Helicobacter infection in dogs
pp. xx, 2 v. (2202, 2242). Raven Press, New York.
and cats: facts and fiction. J Ver Inrern Med 14: 125-33.
55. Norfleet RG, Rhodes RA (1982) Cimetidine therapy does not
Western Veterinary Conference.
affect fecal occult blood testing. J Clin Gastroentero! 4: 419-20.
40. Koenig A, Slater M (2002) Comparison of fecal al-Proteinase
 56. O'Grady MR, Slocombe JO (1980) An investigation of variables
inhibitor concentration in fecal samples obtained via spontane-
in a fecal flotation technique. Can J Comp Med 44: 148-57.
ous defecation and rectal palpation. Journal of Vererinary Interma!
57. Outerbridge CA, Myers SL, Giger U (1996) Hereditary cobala-
Medicine 16: 329 (abstract), 2002.
min deficiency in Border Collie dogs. Journal of Vererinary Inter-
40a. Latimer KS, Mahaffey EA, Prasse KW, Duncan JR (2003)
nal Medicine 10: 169 (143-95).
Duncan ePrasse'sVeterinary Laboratory Medicine:Clinical Pathology.
58. Patt H (1986) Chronic inflammatory and lymphoproliferative
4th ed., pp. xii, 450. Yowa State Press, Ames.
lesions of the equine small intestine. J Comp Parhol 96:
41. Leedle JA, Coe ML, Frey RA (1995) Evaluation of health and
671-84.
ruminal variables during adaptation to grain-based diets in beef
59. Pratt PW, Mansmann RA, McAllister ES, Catcott EJ (1982)
cattle. Am J Ver Res 56: 885-92.
Equine Medicine and Surgery. 3rd ed., p. 2 v. (1417). American
42. Lindberg R, Nygren A, Persson SG (1996) Rectal biopsy diag-
Veterinary Publications, Santa Barbara, CA.
nosis in horses with clinical signs of intestinal disorders: a ret-
60. Reed SM, Bayly WM, Sellon DC (2004) Equine Internal Medicine.
rospective study of 116 cases. Equine Vet J 28: 275-84.
2nd ed., pp. xvi, 1659. W.B. Saunders, St. Louis, MO.
43. Mair TS, Hillyer MH, Taylor FG, Pearson GR {1 991) Small intes-
61. Rice JE, rhle SL (l994) Efects of diet on fecal occult blood
Ayas a jo nuassasse ue as a u ugdsqee 
testing in healthy dogs. Can J Ver Res 58: 134-7.
of the oral glucose tolerance test. Equine Ver J 23: 344-6.
62. Roberts MC, Hill FW (1973) The oral glucose tolerance test in
44. Marks SL (2000) Diagnostic and therapeutic approach to cats
the horse. Equine Ver J 5: 171-3.
with chronic diarrhoea. J Feline Med Surg 2: 105-9.
63. Roberts MC, Norman P (1979) A re-evaluation of the D (+)
45. Marks SL (2000) Gastrointestinal parasitology: Update on diag-
xylose absorption test in the horse. Equine Ver J 1l: 239-43.
nostic and therapeutic options. Fall Meering of American Associα-
64. Rosenberger G (198l) Clinical Examination of Catle p. cm. Parey:
tion of Feline Practitioners.
Saunders, Berlin, Philadelphia.
46. Marks SL, Houston R (2009) Intestinal parasites in dogs and
65. Rumetsch G, Horber H (1982) [D(+)-xylose absorption test in
cats, Vol. 19, No. 1, 46-8 ed. rVIS, Royal Canin, Veterinary Focus.
the horse: repeatability, effect of dosage and normal values].
46a. Marks SL, Kather EJ, Kass PH, Melli AC (2002) Genotypic and
Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 29: 28-35.
phenotypic characterization of Closridium perfringens and Clos-
66. Rutgers HC, Batt RM, Elwood CM, Lamport A (1995) Small
533-40.
disease. J Am Ver Med Assorc 206: 187-93.
47. Marks SL, Melli A, Kass PH, Jang SS, Barkhoodarian A, Hirsh
66a. Sancak AA, Rutgers HC, Hart CA, Batt RM (2004) Prevalence
DC (l999) Evaluation of methods to diagnose Clostridium
of enteropathic Escherichia coli in dogs with acute and chronic
perfringens-associated diarrhea in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assor 214:
diarrhoea. Ver Rec 154: 101-6.
357-60.
66b. Shaw DH (1988) Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison Symdrome) in
48. Martens RJ, Malone PS, Brust DM (1985) Oral lactose tolerance
the dog and cat. Can Ver J 29: 448-52.
test in foals: technique and normal values. Am J Ver Res 46:
  
2163-5.
AnnualForum of the AmericanCollegeofVeterinary Internal Medicine
49. Maxie MG, Jubb KVF (2007) Pathology of Domesric Animals, 5th
Conference,2003
ed. Elsevier Saunders, Edinburgh; New York.
68. Simpson KW, Morton DB, Batt RM (1989) Effect of exocrine
- [ 6)    0  0 
 pancreatic insufficiency on cobalamin absorption in dogs. Am J
protease inhibitor (al-Pl) for the diagnosis of canine protein-
Ver Res 50: 1233-6.
losing enteropathy. J Ver Int Med 1l: 115 (abstract).
68a. Simpson K, Neiger R, DeNovo R, Sherding R (2000) The rela-
51. Melgarejo T, Wiliams DA, Asem EK (1998) Enzyme-linked
tionship of Helicobacter spp. infection to gastric disease in dogs
immunosorbent assay for canine alpha l-protease inhibitor. Am
and cats. J Ver Inrerm Med 14: 223-7.
J Ver Res 59: 127-30.
69. Smith BP (2002) Large Animal Internal Medicine, 3rd ed., pp. lii.
52. Moon HW (1978) Mechanisms in the pathogenesis of diarrhea:
1735, [1734] of plates. Mosby, St. Louis, MO.
a review. J Am Ver Med Assoc 172: 443-8.
 70. Smith DF, Munson L, Erb HN (1983) Abomasal ulcer disease in
52a. Muir P, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Cripps PJ, Brown PJ (1996)
adult dairy cattle. Corne/l Ver 73: 213-24.
 71. Smith DF Munson L, Erb HN (1986) Predictive values for clini-
tration of oxytetracycline and metronidazole. Ver Rec 138:
cal signs of abomasal ulcer disease in adult dairy cattle. Preven-
635-9.
tive Vererinary Medicine 3: 573-80.
458
CHAPTER 28 Laboratory Evaluation of Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
72. Spillmann T, Wittker A, Teigelkamp S, er al. (200l) An immu-
85. Weese JS, Parsons DA, Staempfli HR {1999) Association of
noassay for canine pancreatic elastase l as an indicator for
Clostridium difficile with enterocolitis and lactose intolerance
exocrine pancreatic insuffciency in dogs. J Ver Diagn Invest 13:
in a foal. J Am Ver Med Assoc 214: 229-32.
468-74.
86. Wiberg ME, Saari SA, Westermarck E (1999) Exocrine pancre-
73. Spohr A, Guilford WG, Haslett SJ, Vibe-Petersen G (1999) Use
atic atrophy in German Shepherd Dogs and Rough-coated
Collies: an end result of lymphocytic pancreatitis. Ver Patho! 36:
disaccharide malabsorption in healthy adult dogs. Am J Ver Res
530-41.
60: 83640.
87. Wiberg ME, Westermarck E: Subclinical exocrine pancreatic
74. Stangl GI, Schwarz FJ, Jahn B, Kirchgessner M (2000) Cobalt-
insufficiency in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assorc 220: 1l83-7.
deficiency-induced hyperhomocysteinaemia and oxidative
88. Willard MD, Tvedten H (2004) Small Animal Clinical Diagnosis by
status of cattle. Br J Nurr 83: 3-6.
Laborarory Merhods, 4th ed., p. xi 432. Saunders, St. Louis.
75. Steiner JM (2003) New Developments in Gastrointestinal Function
89. Wiiams D (1995) Feline exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. In:
Testing in Smal! Animais. World Small Animal Veterinary Associa-
tion, 28th.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
76. Steiner JM, Broussard J, Mansfield CS, Gumminger SR, Wil-
90. Williams DA (1998) Cobalamin and folate in feline malabsorp-
liams DA (2o0l) Serum canine pancreatic lipase immunoreac-
tion. Proc. 16th ACVIM Forum 534 San Diego. CA 1998. pp.
tivity concentrations in dogs with spontaneous pancreatitis.
5346.
Journa! of Vererinary Interna! Medicine 15: 274{abstract).
91. Williams DA, Batt RM (1988) Sensitivity and specificity of
77. Steiner JM, Williams DA {1999) Feline exocrine pancreatic
radioimmunoassay of serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity for
disorders. Ver Clin North Am Small Anim Pracr 29: 551-75.
the diagnosis of canine exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. J Am
78. Steiner JM, Williams DA, Moeller EM, Melgarejo T (2000)
Ver Med Assoc 192: 195-201.
 Development and validation of an enzyme-linked immunosor-
92. Williams DA, Batt RM, McLean L (1987) Bacterial overgrowth
in the duodenum of dogs with exocrine pancreatic insuffciency.
61: 620-3.
J Am Ver Med Assoc 19l: 201-6.
79. Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Fundamentals of Vererinary Clini-
93. Williams DA, Reed SD, Perry L (1990) Fecal proteolytic activity
cal Pathology. 2nd ed., pp. ix, 908, [916] of plates. Blackwel]
in clinically normal cats and in a cat with exocrine pancreatic
Pub., Ames, Iowa.
insufficiency. J Am Ver Med Assor 197: 210-12.
80. Suchodolski JS, Steiner JM (2003) Laboratory assessment of
94. Williams DA, Zajac A {l98O) Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal Parasit-
gastrointestinal function. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 18:
ism in Dogs and Cars p. 54. Ralston Purina Company St. Louis,
203-10.
MO.
 81. Sweeney RW (1987) Laboratory evaluation of malassimilation
95. Zajac A, Conboy GA, Sloss MW (2006) American Association of
in horses. Ver Clin Norrh Am Equine Pracr 3: 507-14.
Veterinary Parasitologists: Veterinary Clinical Parasitology. 7th ed.
82. Tietz NW, Finley PR, Pruden EL (1990) Clinical Guide to Labora-
pp. xi, 305. Blackwell Pub. Professional, Ames, Yowa.
rory Tests, 2nd ed., pp. xxiv, 931. Saunders, Philadelphia.
96. Carlson GP (1982) The exocrine pancreas. In: Mansmann RA,
83. Washabau RJ, Strombeck DR, Buffington CA, Harrold D (1 986)
McAllister ES, Pratt PW (eds.). Equine Medicine and Surgery. 3rd
 Evaluation of intestinal carbohydrate malabsorption in the dog
ed. Santa Barbara, Calif, American Veterinary, p. 643.
by pulmonary hydrogen gas excretion. Am J Ver Res 47:
1402-6.
84. Watson PJ (2003) Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency as an end
stage of pancreatitis in four dogs. J Small Anim Pracr 44:
306-12.
459
29
Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma
and Serum Proteins
Robin W. Allison
Oklahoma State University
Laboratory evaluation of plasma and serum protein concen-
extracellular hemoglobin, and metal ions (e.g. iron,
trations is a part of both basic hematology and biochemistry
aui ui pasnpoid aie sunqo aul jo Aoteu aul io (addon
testing in animals. Protein alterations occur commonly as
liver, with the exception of immunoglobulins (antibodies)
secondary changes in a large number of diseases, and may
that are produced in lymphoid tissues. Globulins typically
be the major abnormal finding in a few disease processes.
are classifed as alpha, beta, or gamma on the basis of their
Measurement of plasma or serum protein concentrations
electrophoretic mobility. (The separation and measurement
often yields important information that can be helpful in
of these globulins are discussed later.) A relatively small
narrowing the list of diseases to be considered and, in some
number of globulins are present in sufficient quantities to
cases, in revealing the presence of a specific disease. This
affect the electrophoretic pattern. Some of the major con-
chapter discusses the types of proteins that are norrmally
tributors to each fraction are listed below.
present in plasma and serum, the methods for analyzing
The alpha globulin fraction includes cl-fetoprotein, C-
these proteins, and the significance of abnormal protein
acid glycoprotein (orosomucoid),. C,-antitrypsin (protease
con cen tra tions.
inhibitor), C,-antichymotrypsin (protease inhibitor), C-
lipoprotein (HDL; transports lipid). ceruloplasmin (trans-
ports copper). haptoglobin (binds hemoglobin).
C2
Classification of plasma proteins
macroglobulin (protease inhibitor), and serum amyloid-A.76.81
The beta globulin fraction includes βz-lipoprotein (LDL;
The two major types of proteins in plasma are albumin and
transport lipids), transferrin (transports iron), ferritin (iron
the globulins. Albumin is one of the smallest of these pro-
storage), complement components (C3 and C4), and fibrino-
teins and the single most abundant, accounting for approxi-
 gen (in plasma but not serum),.76.s1 Immunoglobulin mole-
mately 75% of the oncotic pressure (colloidal osmotic
cules of the IgM and IgA type occasionally migrate in the
pressure) of plasma within the vasculature, which regulates
beta fraction. The gamma globulin fraction is composed pri-
water from diffusing from the blood into the tissues.41
marily of immunoglobulins (all types). Immunoglobulins
Albumin is an important carrier protein and plays a role in
are produced by plasma cells in the lymphoid tissues in
the transport of free fatty acids, bile acids, bilirubin, calcium.
response to antigenic stimulation. C-reactive protein
hormones, and drugs.6? Albumin is synthesized by the liver.
migrates in this fraction in dogs. but migrates between the
enters the blood, and is catabolized by most tissues. The
beta and gamma fractions in horses.78.90
half-life of a circulating albumin molecule varies in different
species. ranging from approximately 8 days in dogs to
Acute phase proteins
approximately 20 days in horses.21,55
Concentrations of a number of plasma proteins change sig
Globulins are a heterogeneous group of proteins that are
nificantly during the acute systemic response to inflamma-
variable in size, but usually larger than albumin. Hundreds
tion; collectively these proteins are referred to as acute-phase
of different types of globulins are present in plasma, includ-
proteins (APP). The magnitude of this response typically
ing the immunoglobulins (e.g.. IgG, IgM, IgA). complement
does not cause hyperproteinemia. It is detected by either
proteins, clotting factors, many different enzymes, and a
the protein electrophoretogram pattern, or less commonly
variety of proteins that carry lipids, vitamins, hormones.
by measurement of selected protein concentrations. The
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
460
CHAPTER 29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and Serum Proteins
acute-phase response occurs due to release of a variety of
factually increase the refractometer estimate of total protein.
cytokines (e.g. IL-l, IL-6, and TNF-c) from the site of
Hyperbilirubinemia  and  hemolyzed serum typically  do
inflammation. These cytokines affect the production
not interfere with the total protein estimate, although
of APP by the liver. The plasma concentrations of most APP
hemolysis may obscure the line of demarcation on the
increase; these proteins are called positive acute-phase pro-
refractometer.30
teins, and they generally reach maximal serum concentra-
The total protein concentration of serum is measured roll-
tions within a day or two after initiation of the response.
tinely in reference laboratories and in-clinic chemistry ana-
Concentrations of some APP actually decrease; these are
      
called negative acute-phase proteins. The specific pattern
biuret method, which detects peptide bonds and is consid-
and magnitude of protein alterations during the acute-phase
ered very specific. The serum total protein concentration
response is species-specific; however, the concentration of
obtained by this method will be less than the plasma protein
serum albumin (a negative acute-phase protein) is consis-
estimation from a refractometer, due in part to the absence
tently decreased by 10-30%.6 Transferrin, measured in
of fibrinogen from serum. Differences in protein measure-
serum as the total iron-binding capacity (TIBC). is another
ments performed by different methods (refractometry versus
negative acute-phase protein. The positive acute-phase pro-
spectrophotometry) should be expected, even for the same
teins are globulins; important ones in veterinary species
type of sample. In avian species, marked differences in total
include haptoglobin, fibrinogen, C-reactive protein, serum
protein concentrations have been found depending upon
amyloid-A, and α,-acid glycoprotein.p63 Serum amyloid-A
the methodology used, with lower values determined with
is a major APP of dogs, cats, pigs, and horses; haptoglobin is
the biuret method versus refractometry.49.72 Use of method
a major APP of cattle, sheep. and pigs: C-reactive protein is
and species-specific reference intervals are necessary for
a major APP of dogs, horses, and pigs.
accurate interpretation.13
Albumin concentration
Measurement of plasma and
The albumin concentration is routinely measured spectro-
serum proteins
bromcresol green (BCG). However, BCG is not specific for
Plasma versus serum
albumin and may bind to some globulins. As a result, the
The two types of samples commonly used for clinical bio-
BCG method may overestimate the albumin concentration
chemistry analyses are plasma and serum. Plasma is the
when it is very low (<l g/dL). Other dye-binding methods
liquid portion of blood that has not clotted, thus the blood
sometimes used in human laboratories (BCP HABA
must be collected in an anticoagulant. Plasma contains all
methods) are unreliable for accurate measurement of
the proteins described earlier. Serum is the liquid portion of
albumin concentrations in animals due to species variations.
the blood that remains after clotting. When a blood sample
Albumin concentrations measured by the BCG method may
is collected without use of an anticoagulant, the subsequent
be overestimated as much as 1.2 g/dL in canine heparinized
clotting in that sample results in the conversion of all fibrin-
plasma samples compared to serum samples, especially
ogen to fibrin. Therefore, serum is devoid of fibrinogen, but
when fibrinogen concentrations are increased; this interfer-
contains albumin and the remaining globulins.
ence may be eliminated by changes in the specific method
protocol.?7 In avian species, albumin concentrations mea-
Total protein concentration
sured by the BCG method often correlate poorly with results
The total plasma or serum protein concentration can be
obtained by electrophoretic methods (discussed later) 50.72.73
estimated using a refractometer. Protein molecules in plasma
or serum increase the refractive index of that fluid in pro-
Globulin concentration
portion to their concentration. However, there are other
Calculated globulin concentration
molecules potentially present in plasma or serum that can
The serum total protein and albumin concentrations are
increase the refractive index and artifactually increase the
measured routinely as part of serum biochemical profles.
estimated protein concentration. Substances most likely to
The globulin concentration as reported on these profiles is
not measured, however but rather is calculated by subtract-
in lipemic serum), cholesterol, urea, and glucose.3 Note that
 n n     an 
marked elevations in cholesterol concentrations will not
con cen tra tion.
result in visible lipemia, but can artifactually increase the
protein estimate. Plasma protein may be falsely increased by
Serum protein electrophoresis
0.6 g/dL by serum urea concentrations of 300 mg/dL or
Both serum albumin and globulin concentrations can be
glucose concentrations of 7o0 mg/dL.76 Synthetic colloid
solutions, sometimes given as volume expanders, will arti-
1). Electrophoresis is performed by placing a small amount
461
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
quantified by ultraviolet light absorbance. Potential advan-
tages of capillary zone electrophoresis include smaller sample
size, better resolution and reproducibility, and the ability to
automate the procedure. The visual appearance of the elec-
trophoretogram produced by this method differs from that
of traditional methods, and quantitative results may also
differ; thus experience and method-specific reference inter-
vals are necessary for proper interpretation of results.31
Qualitative and semiquantitative estimation of
immunoglobulin concentrations
 Several different types of rapid screening tests for the esti-
mation of immunoglobulin concentrations are available.
These tests may be utilized in large animal clinical practice
when other methods are not available, and they can provide
qualitative or semiquantitative estimates of immunoglobulin
Albumin
       
α
C2
β
(especially calves, foals. and crias) for possible failure to
Figure 29.1 An electrophoretogram from a serum protein
ingest colostrum or to absorb immunoglobulins from colos-
electrophoresis separation
tion and is referred to as failure of passive transfer (FPT).
These tests are not as sensitive or specific as more sophisti-
of serum near one end of a supporting substance such as
cated tests such as radioimmunodiffusion (RID; considered
cellulose acetate or agarose gel. An electrical current is
the gold standard). but the results are usually available
applied, causing the serum proteins to migrate at variable
immediately and allow for treatment decisions to be made
rates as determined by the net negative charge and size of
without delay. Results are most valid as indicators of ade-
each type of protein. Staining of the gel reveals the various
quate passive transfer or FPT when tests are performed
protein bands, which are then scanned by a densitometer to
within a few days of birth. General guidelines have been
produce an electrophoretogram (i.e., a hard copy depiction
established for minimum IgG concentrations that indicate
of the distribution of the proteins) (Fig. 29.1).
adequate passive transfer; >800mg/dL for foals and
Modern scanning densitometers also calculate the concen-
 >1000 mg/dL for calves and crias.14,s4.87
tration of protein in each fraction after the operator inputs
the total protein concentration of that sample. This method
Total protein measurement by refractometry
separates globulins into several fractions, including alpha.
Immunoglobulins absorbed from colostrum are the major
beta, and gamma globulins. Albumin and globulin concen-
determinant of the total serum protein concentrations in
trations that are derived using this method do not necessarily
neonates. Total protein concentrations in calves increase by
match those obtained using spectrophotometric methods.
approximately 2g/dL after the ingestion of colostrum.60
The number of fractions separated by serum protein electro-
Measurement of the total protein concentration by refrac-
phoresis varies both with the species and with the type of
tometry. therefore, has been evaluated as an indicator of
serum immunoglobulin concentration and as a gauge for the
capable of resolving more protein fractions than low resolu-
adequacy of passive transfer.
tion agarose or cellulose acetate gels. Albumin and the alpha,
In calves, use of the serum total protein concentration as
beta, and gamma globulin fractions can be separated in speci-
an indicator for the serum immunoglobulin concentration 
mens from all species with all types of support substances. In
has been evaluated using different cut-off values or decision
some species, the alpha, beta, and gamma globulins are sepa-
thresholds. A serum total protein concentration of 5.2g/dL
rated into alpha, and alphaz, beta, and betaz, or gamma, and
correlates with an IgG concentration of loo0 mg/dL and
gamma, fractions, respectively. (Causes for altered concen-
adequate passive transfer.84 A decision threshold of either
trations of these protein fractions are discussed later.)
5.0 or 5.5g/dL classifies >80% of calves correctly: however.
      
sensitivity and specificity of these thresholds are different.84
phoresis, has recently been developed and is now beginning
Sensitivity and specificity of the 5.0g/dL threshold are
to be investigated for use with animal sera.4.1.24 In this
0.59 and 0.96, respectively. indicating few normal calves
method protein fractions are separated in solution within a
would be incorrectly classified as FPT (false positives). Sen-
narrow-bore capillary exposed to high voltage. No staining
sitivity and specificity of the 5.5 g/dL threshold are 0.94 and
of proteins is required; protein fractions are detected and
        
462
CHAPTER 29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and Serum Proteins
incorrectly classified as normal (false negatives). Because
appears to correctly predict the highest percentage of calves
many sick calves with FPT are also dehydrated, which results
with FPT (~86%); thus some recommend using only the
in a relative hyperproteinemia, the higher decision thresh-
18% sodium sulfite solution.8
old may be more appropriate for those individuals.ss
● Zinc sulfate turbidity test 3s.7 Immunoglobulins are precipi-
 In crias, one study found that serum total protein concen-
tated from serum by zinc sulfate over a wide range of zinc
trations of <4.5 g/dL measured by refractometer indicated
sulfate concentrations. This test is most useful in calves; a
FPT, and concentrations >5.5 g/dL indicated adequate passive
procedure is presented in Appendix 29.2. Like the sodium
transfer; however concentrations berween those values
sulfite precipitation test, a positive reaction (i.e., turbidity)
could not be accurately interpreted.&6
in sera with low immunoglobulin concentrations occurs
In foals, using the serum total protein to estimate IgG
when a solution with a high zinc sulfate concentration is
concentration appears to be unreliable and is not recom-
used, but not when a solution with a low zinc sulfate con-
 mended as a sole indicator of FPT.14 The poor performance
centration is used. In sera with high immunoglobulin con-
of serum total protein might result, in part, from wide varia-
centrations, turbidity occurs when zinc sulfate solutions of
tions in precolostral protein concentrations in foals
lower concentrations are used. Thus, different sensitivities
and specificities for detecting FPT result when different con-
Turbidity and coagulation assays
centrations of zinc sulfate are used (see Appendix 29.2). The
These tests are based on the ability of different substances
highest proportion of calves correctly classified as having
to either precipitate or form insoluble complexes with serum
FPT (i.e., true immunoglobulin concentration <looo mg/dL)
immunoglobulins. Solutions used in these assays can be
occurs when either 350 or 400 mg/L concentrations of zinc
made in the clinic or purchased in kit form from several
sulfate are used (83% and 88% correctly classified, respec-
different manufacturers. In general these are inexpensive
tively).3s The actual concentrations most appropriate for this
and rapid assays that are easy to perform, but sensitivity and
i r      a rin
specificity for the diagnosis of FPT varies considerably when
is most important in the specific situation.
different cut-off values are used. Additionally. because
A procedure for the zinc sulfate turbidity test in foals is
assessment of the degree of turbidity or coagulation present
presented in Appendix 29.3; commercial kits are also avail-
is subjective, results can vary between users
able (Equi-Z, VMRD Inc., Pullman, Washington). Observing
● Sodium sulfte precipitation fest." The sodium sulfite precipi-
any visible turbidity in the reaction solution after l hour of
tation test is based on the fact that immunoglobulins can be
incubation is a good indication that the foal has a serum
selectively precipitated from serum using concentrations of
immunoglobulin concentration of >400 mg/dL. This proce-
anhydrous sodium sulfite ranging from 14% to 18%. A
dure, however, does not distinguish foals with immuno-
higher sodium sulfite concentration is required to cause
globulin concentrations of between 400 and 800 mg/dL,
precipitation in serum containing lower immunoglobulin
which are considered evidence for partial failure of passive
concentrations. Sera with very low immunoglobulin con-
transfer. Correlations between zinc sulfate turbidity results
centrations do not undergo precipitation when mixed with
and those of more specific tests for immunoglobulin concen-
any sodium sulfite solutions in the 14-l8% range. Fibrino-
trations in foals are not strong.
gen is also precipitated by these concentrations of sodium
● Glutaraldehyde coagulation test.37 The glutaraldehyde coag-
sulfite; thus serum, rather than plasma samples, should be
ulation test is based on the ability of glutaraldehyde to form
used. This test is useful for calves and crias, but does not
insoluble complexes with immunoglobulins, resulting in
coagulation of the test mixture. Glutaraldehyde also forms 
sodium sulfite precipitation test in ruminants is presented in
insoluble complexes with fibrinogen; therefore, serum 
Appendix 29.l; test kits are also commercially available
rather than plasma is preferred. This test has been evaluated 
(Bova-S and Llama-S, VMRD, Pullman, Washington). In this
in neonatal calves and foals. A procedure for this test in
test, the immunoglobulin concentration is determined by
ruminants is presented in Appendix 29.4; commercial kits 
judging the presence or absence of precipitation in three
are also available (Gamma-Check-B, Plasvacc USA Inc.,
concentrations of sodium sulfite: 14%, 16%, and 18%. The
Templeton, California). but are unreliable when used with
test can distinguish three ranges of immunoglobulin concen-
whole blood.s In neonatal calves, use of a 10% glutaralde-
trations: <500 mg/dL, 500-1500 mg/dL, and >1500mg/dL.
hyde solution results in no coagulation in almost all calf sera
Using the <500 mg/dL limit malkes the test more specific for
with immunoglobulin concentrations of less than 400mg/
detecting FPT (e.g.. calves negative for precipitation are
dL and complete or partial coagulation in almost all calf sera
lilkely to have FPT), but less sensitive for detecting FPT (e.g.
with immunoglobulin concentrations of greater than
will miss some calves with FPT). Using the 1500 mg/dL limit
600 mg/dL. Calves with immunoglobulin concentrations of
makes the test more sensitive for detecting FPT, but reduces
between 400 and 600 mg/dL have results that vary from no
the specificity (e.g., will indicate FPT in calves with adequate
coagulation to complete coagulation. However, the accepted
transfer of immunoglobulin). Using the <500 mg/dL limit
cutoff limit for adequate passive transfer in calves is 1ooo mg/
463
SEcTloN Iv Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
dL, thus this test has poor sensitivity (FPT in calves with
 in the presence of thrombin (thrombin time) and requires
immunoglobulin concentrations between 400 and 1000mg/
instrumentation that is somewhat expensive for routine use
dL will not be identified).
in clinical practice. Such measurement of plasma fibrinogen
A procedure for performing the glutaraldehyde coagula-
concentrations also requires citrated plasma that has been
harvested from a mixture of nine parts fresh, whole blood
kit is also available (Gamma-Check-E, Plasvacc USA Inc.,
and one part 3.8% sodium citrate anticoagulant. Special
Templeton, California). In horses, FPT is defined as serum
evacuated blood collection tubes containing sodium citrate
IgG concentrations <200 mg/dL, and partial FPT occurs at
anticoagulant are available for this purpose; these tubes
dehyde coagulation test distinguishes three ranges of immu-
of blood to anticoagulant. This method is not routinely used
noglobulin concentrations: >800 mg/dL, 400-800 mg/dL,
to measure plasma fibrinogen concentrations, but may be
and <400 mg/dL. Reported sensitivities and specificities for
included in a coagulation profile.
detection of IgG concentrations <400 mg/dL have ranged
In clinical practice situations, the most common method
ap 104 pr1:A1aaadsa1 '%68 01 08 pue %001 01 56 wo1
for measuring plasma fibrinogen concentration is heat pre-
tion of IgG concentrations <800mg/dL, sensitivities and
cipitation. This method is less expensive than the method
specificities have ranged from 93 to 100% and 59 to 94%.
described earlier and requires minimal equipment; it is sum-
respectively.1l1i7 Lower test specificity using the 800 mg/dL
marized in Appendix 29.6. The heat precipitation method
cutoff value indicates a greater chance of false positive
provides an estimate of the plasma fibrinogen concentration
results (diagnosing FPT in a normal foal), suggesting the
that is adequate for evaluation of hyperfibrinogenemia, but
need for additional confirmatory tests prior to treatment.
lacks the analytic sensitivity needed for evaluation of hypo-
fibrinogenemia. (The significance of abnormal fibrinogen
Antibody-based detection kits
concentrations is discussed later.)
A number of manufacturers have developed commercial kits
for detection of FPT in foals and calves that use antibody-
based methods (e.g. latex agglutination, enzyme-linked
Abnormal protein concentrations
immunoassays). Examples include the Quick Test? calf or
foal IgG kits (Midland Bio-Products, Boone, Iowa), Foal-
 Both decreased and increased total protein concentrations
check (Centaur, Overland Park, Kansas), and SNAP Foal
test (Idexx, Westbrook, Maine). Accuracy, sensitivity and
These findings may result from alterations in the albumin
specificity of these assays vary with the individual test and
or globulin concentrations (or both). In plasma, an increased
cutoff values.14.17.1s These commercially available tests are not
concentration of fibrinogen, which is a globulin, can occa-
necessarily superior to the screening tests described earlier.
To minimize false negative results and ensure detection of a
pretation of altered protein concentrations depends on
 determining which major protein constituents of the serum
have high sensitivity. In foals, the glutaraldehyde coagula-
or plasma are abnormal. A decreased or increased albumin
tion test may be equal or superior to commercially available
or globulin concentration does not always result in detect-
semiquantitative tests in terms of sensitivity (depending on
able alterations of the total protein concentration. Therefore.
the cutoff value used) 1l.17 However, more specifc confirma-
albumin and globulin as well as total protein concentrations
 tory tests may be desired in some situations.
should be assessed. Causes of decreased or increased total
 Measurement of immunoglobulin concentrations
protein, albumin, globulin, and fbrinogen concentrations
by reference laboratories
are summarized here. It is often helpful to consider altera-
tions in albumin and globulin concentrations together for
Reference laboratories offer more sophisticated antibody-
based methods for quantitating specific immunoglobulins
interpretation.
(e.g., radial immunodiffusion, immunochemistry). Use of 
Causes of decreased protein concentrations
these methods is indicated when a detailed examination
Decreased total protein concentrations can result from
regarding the status of the immune system is desired. These
methods are more expensive, however, and the results
decreased concentrations of albumin, globulin, or both. A
usually are delayed (incubation periods of 18-24 hours are
diagnostic algorithm for evaluating variations in these
required) compared with those of the screening methods
decreases is presented in Figure 29.2.
discussed earlier.
Hypoalbuminemia with hypoglobulinemia
Fibrinogen concentration
Concurrent hypoalbuminemia and hypoglobulinemia can
Plasma fibrinogen concentrations can be determined by two
result from overhydration (e.g.. excessive fluid therapy.
methods. One assesses the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin
    s     
464
CHAPTER 29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and Serum Proteins
HYPOALBUMINEMIA
HYPOALBUMINEMIA and
HYPOGLOBULINEMIA
ONLY
HYPOGLOBULINEMIA
ONLY
Assess diet,
Diarrhea?
First assess for over-hydration
Neonate?
GI
if on IV fluids, exudative skin
parasites
No
Yes
lesions, Gl parasites
VO
Mes
Proteinuria?
Consider PLE,
Regenerative
Other inherited
FPT
(see Ch. 23)
malabsorption,
anemia?
or acquired
Yes
maldigestion
Blood
immunodeficiency
No
No
Yes
loss
Consider PLN
Diarrhea?
Yes,
Evidence of
Consider PLE
hepatic failure?
No
(see Ch. 26}
No
Yes
Body cavity
effusion present?
Consider
yes
Fluid analysis
hepatic biopsy
Consider causes of
Consider causes of selective
albumin and globulin
hypoalbuminemia and
loss with I globulin
hypoglobulinemia
production
Figure 29.2 An algorithr for evaluation of decreased serum protein concentrations. FPT = failure of passive transfer: PLE = protein losing enteropathy:
 PLN = protein losing nephropathy. Refer to text for details.
The latter is much more common and occurs in the follow-
the rate of protein synthesis. In some instances a concurrent
ing disorders:
immune response causes increased instead of decreased
· Blood loss. This results in proportional loss of all blood
globulin concentration; gastrointestinal lymphoma may also
constituents. Albumin and globulin, therefore, are lost in
be associated with hyperglobulinemia.52
concentrations equal to their concentrations in the blood.
· Severe skin disease. Generalized exudative skin disease or
After blood loss, fluid moves from the extravascular space
burns can result in loss of plasma proteins due to increased
to the intravascular space and dilutes the remaining blood
constituents, including the proteins (and erythrocytes). It is
increase globulin concentration.
important to remember that this water shift takes time to
● Effusive disease. This results in the accumulation of body-
develop. and will not be evident for the first few hours fol-
cavity fluids with high protein concentration that can result
lowing acute hemorrhage. Hypoproteinemia due to blood
in decreased serum albumin and globulin concentrations.76
loss is generally caused by external (rather than internal)
Such decreases depend on the degree of increased vascular
hemorrhage, and may also be caused by bloodsucking para-
permeability accompanying these disorders.
sites (external or internal).
● Protein-losing enteropathy. This may result from a variety
of generalized intestinal lesions, including inflammatory
Selective hypoalbuminemia
bowel disease, lymphangiectasia, infectious diseases, neopla-
Decreased albumin concentration that is not accompanied
sia, severe prolonged starvation or cachexia, and gastroin-
by decreased globulin concentration can result from either
decreased production or increased loss of albumin. If the
whenever protein leakage into the intestinal lumen exceeds
globulin concentration is concurrently increased, total
465
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
protein concentration may be within the reference interval
inflammation. Globulin concentrations are typically mildly
despite hypoalbuminemia.
Decreased production of albumin can occur in the follow-
thesis. Beca use albumin and globulin concentrations change
ing disorders:
 in different directions, total protein concentrations may be
● Hepatic failure. The liver is the site of albumin production.
within the reference interval.
Because of the liver's reserve capacity, most types of liver
 Increased loss of albumin can occur in the following
damage do not result in decreased albumin production. If
disorders:
more than 60-80% of the functional liver capacity is lost,
· Glomerular disease. Because albumin molecules are small
however, decreased albumin production and hypoalbumin-
and more negatively charged than globulin molecules, they
emia can occur. In such cases, other evidence of hepatic
leak more readily through damaged glomerular membranes.
failure is also present (see Chapter 26). Serum globulin
Severe glomerular disease, therefore, can result in selective
concentrations are not usually decreased because immuno-
hypoalbuminemia. Both urinary protein concentrations and
globulin production in lymphoid tissues is not hampered;
globulin concentrations may actually be increased in patients
with glomerular disease.33
with hepatic failure (discussed later).
● Gastrointestinal parasitism (discussed earlier).
· Starvation or cachexia. Marked malnutrition or starvation
● Diseases listed as being possible causes of hypoalbumin-
results in less hepatic protein production due to a deficiency
emia with hypoglobulinemia (discussed earlier). Loss of both
of available amino acids. In cachectic states associated with
albumin and globulin typically occurs with these diseases.
neoplasia or chronic infections, a prolonged negative protein
but a concurrent immune response may cause increased
balance causes increased catabolism of body proteins that
production of globulins resulting in normal to increased
exceeds protein production. Body fat and muscle mass are
globulin concentration. These diseases also should be con-
lost in both cases, resulting in weight loss. Usually these
sidered when hypoalbuminemia with normal to increased
conditions result in selective hypoalbuminemia; rarely there
 globulin concentration is detected.
is concurrent hypoglobulinemia.
● Gastrointestinal parasitism. This can cause hypoalbumin-
emia by at least two mechanisms. If the parasites absorb
Selective hypoglobulinemia
significant amounts of nutrients, including amino acids, the
Hypoglobulinemia in the absence of hypoalbuminemia
animal is deprived of the amino acids needed to produce
usually results from a decreased beta or gamma globulin
albumin. If the parasites attach to the gastric or the intestinal
concentration. A decreased alpha globulin concentration
wall and consume the host's blood, albumin and globulin
alone does not result in a decreased globulin concentration.
are lost. Gastrointestinal parasitism seldom results in a defi-
A selective decrease in beta or gamma globulin concentra-
tions is usually due to a decreased immunoglobulin concen-
globulinemia. Fecal examination for parasite ova is helpful
tration. Such a decrease can occur in the following
in establishing the diagnosis of this potential cause of
disorders:
hypoalbuminemia.
● Failure of Passive Transfer (FPT). Ingestion of colostrum
· Intestinal malabsorption or maldigestion. Decreased
and absorption of immunoglobulins from colostrum are
albumin production can occur if intestinal malabsorption
termed passive transfer. Because most animals are born with
results in deficient absorption of amino acids. Animals with
minimal immunoglobulin concentrations, this process plays
malabsorption syndrome often have a history of chronic
 n    n  
diarrhea or loose stools. If malabsorption syndrome is con-
during the neonatal period. Failure to ingest colostrum or
sidered a possible cause of hypoalbuminemia, tests to verify
to absorb immunoglobulins from colostrum is termed failure
this syndrome should be performed (see Chapter 28)
 of passive transfer (FPT) and is well documented in domestic
 Inadequate digestion of dietary proteins can result from
 animals.1487.ss Several screening tests are available to assess
exocrine pancreatic insuffciency (EPI). in which amino
the adequacy of passive transfer (discussed earlier)
acids are not liberated by protein digestion in the intestine
and, therefore, are not available for absorption, thus result-
ciency involving B lymphocytes or plasma cells can result in
ing in amino acid deficiency and decreased albumin produc
low concentrations of immunoglobulins and, in some cases,
tion. Animals with EPI often have a history of chronic
hypoglobulinemia. Immune deficiencies resulting in low
diarrhea or loose stools. If EPI is suspected, tests to verify
 globulin concentration has been reported in foals (e.g..
this disease should be performed (see Chapter 28). Hypo-
severe combined immunodeficiency. selective IgM deff-
globulinemia does not typically occur with malabsorption/
maldigestion syndromes.
maglobulinemia,  agammaglobulinemia),14  calves 
(e.g
·Inflammation. Because albumin is a negative acute
selective IgG2 deficiency. severe combined immunodefi-
phase protein, albumin synthesis is decreased during acute
ciency, transient hypogammaglobulinemia),76 and puppies
466
CHAPTER 29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and Serum Proteins
(e.g. severe combined irmmune deficiency, selective IgA
Hyperalbuminemia
deficiency, selective IgM deficiency, selective IgA and IgG
The primary cause of hyperalbuminemia is dehydration.
deficiency). 6
Loss of plasma water results in a relative increase in albumin.
which may be of sufficient magnitude to cause hyperpro-
 Causes of increased protein concentrations
teinemia. Globulin concentration also may be increased in
Increased total protein concentration can result from
some patients with dehydration (discussed later).
increased concentrations of albumin, globulin, or both.
Rarely, administration of drugs (glucocorticoids) has been
An increased albumin or globulin concentration, however,
associated with mild transient hyperalbuminemia.59
does not always produce detectable increases in total protein
concentration. A diagnostic algorithm for evaluating the
Hyperalbuminemia with hyperglobulinemia
 ' a  as si ss sae n s
Concurrent increases in albumin and globulin concentra-
clinical practice, serum protein electrophoresis is often
tions most commonly result from dehydration, which causes
reserved for patients with moderate to severe hyperglobu-
d o   n   ra  5
linemia (>5g/dL), for which an underlying cause for inflam-
fractions. The albumin :globulin ratio is not altered, because
mation or chronic antigenic stimulation has not been
both fractions are concentrated equally. The hematocrit is
identified (discussed later),
often increased as well, unless there was a preexisting
HYPERALBUMINEMIA
HYPERALBUMINEMIA and
HYPERGLOBULINEMIA
ONLY
HYPERGLOBULINEMIA
ONLY
Dehydration
Dehydration
Dehydrated?
Also consider causes of
selective hyperglobulinemia
Yes
No
Normal
Rehydrate and recheck [globulin]
Increased
Perform serum protein electrophoresis
Polyclonal gammopathy or
Monoclonal gammopathy
increased alpha/beta globulins only
Consider: Multiple myeloma
·Alpha/beta globulins: acute phase
Extramedullary plasmacytoma
proteins from acute inflammation
Lymphoid neoplasia
·Polyclonal beta and/or gamma
Canine ehrlichiosis*
globulins: consider chronic
Chronic pyoderma*
inflammation, chronic antigenic
Plasmacytic enterocolitis *
stimulation, nephrotic syndrome,
Visceral leishmaniasis*
liver disease, immune mediated
Lymphoplasmacytic stomatitis* (cats)
disease, lymphoid neoplasia.
Idiopathic (MGUS)
Figure 29.3 An algorithm for evaluation of increased serum protein concentrations. MGUS = monoclonal garmmopathy of undetermined significance
*Typically causes polyclonal, not monoclonal, garmmopathy. Refer to text for details.
467
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
anemia. Other potential causes of hyperglobulinemia should
also be considered (discussed later).
Selective hyperglobulinemia
The significance of hyperglobulinemia depends on the mag-
nitude and the type of globulin that is increased, which can
be determined by serum protein electrophoresis. No matter
what the underlying cause, mild to moderate hypoalbumin-
emia is often also present. Common disorders and typical
electrophoretic patterns are discussed below.
Increased alpha/beta globulin concentrations
Acute/chronic infammation. During acute inflammation,
increased synthesis of acute phase proteins may cause
hyperglobulinemia, which is generally mild. The acute phase
proteins are located in the alpha and beta globulin regions
of the electrophoretogram (except for fibrinogen, which is
albuminalpha,
alpha,
beta,
beta
gamma
absent from serum). There are numerous acute phase pro-
Figure 29.4 An electrophoretograrm and corresponding gel from a dog
teins, and generally many of them must be increased in
with a polyclonal garnmopathy. There is an increase in alphaz-globulins
order to visualize an electrophoretic abnormality or result
and a broad-based peak in the beta2 and gamma region5.
in hyperglobulinemia; however, fibrinogen or haptoglobin
alone can be increased to a degree sufficient to cause hyper
globulinemia and an increase in total protein.? Because
albumin is a negative acute phase protein, albumin concen-
trations usually decrease due to decreased hepatic produc-
tion during acute inflammation. The magnitude of the
decrease is usually <30 %.63
Increased gamma globulin concenfrations
The gamma globulin fraction includes immunoglobulins of
all types. Increases in gamma globulin concentrations are
termed gammopathies. Gammopathies may be monoclonal
or polyclonal, which may be distinguished presumptively on
the basis of the homogeneity of the globulin peak on an
electrophoretogram. Polyclonal gammopathies have broad-
based peaks (i.e., wider than the base of the albumin peak.
with a slope that is less steep than the albumin peak) on the
resent increased quantities of a mixture of immunoglobulin
types produced by a heterogeneous population of B lympho.
cytes, plasma cells, or both, each secreting its own immuno-
albumin
alpha,
alpha,
beta,
beta
gamma
globulin molecule specific for one particular antigen epitope.
Monoclonal gammopathies, however, have narrow-based
Figure 29.5 An electrophoretogram and corresponding gel from a cat
with a monoclonal gammopathy due to multiple myeloma. There is a
peaks (i.e., similar in width to the base of the albumin peak.
with a slope that is as steep or steeper than the albumin
narrow-based peak in the gamma region; the corresponding monoclonal
band is apparent on the gel.
peak) on the electrophoretogram (Fig. 29.5), and they result
from increased production of a single type of immunoglobu
lin by a single clone of B lymphocytes or plasma cells.
separately. Examples include polymerization of immuno-
Proliferation of a single clone of lymphocyte results in over-
globulin molecules (such as dimer formation), production of
production of its specific immunoglobulin molecule. Uncom-
incomplete molecules (such as free light chains in addition
monly. two narrow-based peaks may be seen on the
to intact immunoglobulins), or production of an immuno-
electrophoretogram; this is termed a biclonal gammopathy.
 globulin that undergoes isotype switching.67.s9 Rarely, two
Biclonal gammopathies can occur when a single neoplastic
clones of plasma cells or B lymphocytes may proliferate,
clone produces immunoglobulin molecules that migrate
resulting in production of two separate, but homogeneous.
468
CHAPTER 29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and Serum Proteins
types of immunoglobulins." It is possible for a monoclonal
because it consisted of a several subclasses of IgG or hetero-
gammopathy to be obscured by a concurrent polyclonal
peak; in these cases visual inspection of the stained electro-
has been reported to ca use a monoclonal gammopathy (con-
phoretic gel may suggest presence of a monoclonal band
firmed by immunofixation) in people, but this has not been
More sensitive and specific techniques may be required to
 described yet in animals.4
confirm presence of a monoclonal gammopathy (i.e., immu-
· Liver disease. Especially when chronic, liver disease may
lead to increased globulin production, which has been well-
Hyperviscosity of the blood can result from high concen-
trations of immunoglobulins, especially in association with
globulins are frequently immunoglobulins that migrate in
monoclonal gammopathies. Hyperviscosity syndrome might
the beta or gamma region of an electrophoretogram and can
cause the initial clinical signs observed in animals with
obscure the border between the beta and gamma regions.
monoclonal gammopathies. These signs include epistaxis.
known as beta-gamma bridging. It is theorized that mono-
ocular abnormalities (e.g., visual impairment, distension and
nuclear phagocytes (Kupffer cells) in the diseased liver fail
tortuosity of retinal veins, retinal hemorrhage and detach-
to clear antigens from the portal circulation. The antigens
ment). cardiovascular abnormalities (e.g.. gallop rhythm,
subsequently reach the general circulation, where they stim-
left ventricular hypertrophy),. and neurologic dysfunction
(e.g., disorientation, seizures).2 Hyperviscosity syndrome is
failure, albumin concentrations may be decreased concur-
often associated with monoclonal gammopathies involving
rently due to decreased hepatic synthesis. Although histori-
IgM (because of their large size) or IgA (because of dimer
cally believed to be pathognomonic for hepatic disease,
formation). but can also occur with IgG
recent studies have shown that beta-gamma bridging is fre-
Monoclonal cryoglobulinemia is a rare variation of mono-
quently seen with infectious diseases as well.8
clonal gammopathy that has been reported in dogs. cats, and
· Lymphoma and lymphocytic leukemia. Polyclonal gam-
horses." In this disorder, the monoclonal globulins are
mopathy occasionally occurs with lymphoma and lympho-
soluble at 37°C, but become reversibly insoluble at lower
cytic leukemia, sometimes because of increased production
temperatures, causing formation of a gel-like precipitate.
of heterogeneous immunoglobulins by multiple clones of
To demonstrate cryoglobulins, serum must be harvested
from the blood at 37°℃. If blood samples are stored at refrig-
clonal gammopathies are more commonly associated with
erator temperature before harvesting the serum, the cryo-
lymphoid neoplasia (discussed later). Secondary infectious
globulins are not harvested, and cryoglobulinemia is not
processes may stimulate immunoglobulin production in
detected. Cryoglobulins are rarely associated with polyclonal
animals with lymphoma and lymphocytic leukemia.
disorders.
Conditions typically associated with monoclonal gammopathies
include:
include:
· Multiple myeloma. This is a malignant, proliferative
· Chronic inflammation or antigenic stimulation. As an
disease of plasma cells that involves the bone marrow at
inflammatory response becomes chronic (>l week), produc-
multiple sites and, often, other tissues (e.g., spleen, liver).
tion of immunoglobulins and complement proteins may be
Infiltration of visceral organs appears to be relatively
 s  a n   is
common in cats.62 Multiple myeloma typically results from
well. Chronic antigenic stimulation from any cause, includ-
the proliferation of a single clone of plasma cells that produce
ing immune-mediated diseases, can cause similar abnor-
-d s o pa s n ud p ad souou 
malities. Immunoglobulins usually migrate in the gamma
protein or M-component. This protein most commonly 
globulin region, although some (IgA and IgM) occasionally
is IgA or IgG; IgM paraproteinemias occur with lymphoma
migrate in beta globulin region along with complement pro-
and lymphocytic leukemia. but are rare with multiple
teins. The magnitude of the hyperglobulinemia that occurs
myeloma.3246 Primary macroglobulinemia (Waldenstrom
with chronic inflammation is variable, but can be marked in
macroglobulinemia) results from neoplastic proliferation of
some cases (>10g/dL).74
less differentiated B lymphocytes and is an uncommon cause
Gammopathies associated with chronic inflammation are
of IgM monoclonal gammopathy: this disease may be diff-
usually polyclonal, exemplified by canine ehrlichiosis and
cult to distinguish from multiple myeloma.s Multiple
feline infectious peritonitis. However, exceptions to this rule
myeloma paraproteins can be composed of entire immuno-
have been recognized. In particular, apparent monoclonal
globulin molecules or of just heavy or light chains of these
gammopathies have been reported in dogs with chronic
molecules.12.2336:8 Paraproteins typically are found as a
ehrlichiosis, chronic pyoderma. plasmacytic enterocolitis.
monoclonal peak in the beta or gamma region and, more
visceral leishmaniasis, and in cats with lymphoplasmacytic
rarely, in the alpha region of the electrophoretogram." As
discussed previously. biclonal peaks are also possible, but
monoclonal spike was not a true monoclonal gammopathy
rare. Light chains also may be detected in the urine and are
469
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
referred to as Bence-Jones proteins. The diagnosis of this
cases of chronic lymphocytic leulkemia, but IgG and IgA
disease is usually established on the basis of finding at least
 monoclonal gammopathies also have been reported.47
three of the following four features:
 Less common causes of apparent monoclonal gammopa-
1. Monoclonal gammopathy.
thies include:
2. Excessive numbers of plasma cells on a bone marrow
· Canine ehrlichiosis. Although polyclonal gammopathies
film. The percentage of plasma cells that is considered to
are more common, monoclonal gammopathies have been
be suggestive of myeloma varies with different authors
reported in dogs with ehrlichiosis. Infrequently. polyclonal
(>5% to >20%). Chronic antigenic stimulation also can
-id sayedowuea leuoouou on ssaisod sanyedouea
result in greater than 5% plasma cells on a bone marrow
    s so a 
film. Other features that are suggestive of plasma cell
and result from an unexplained proliferation of one plasma
neoplasia, such as the presence of plasma cell aggregates.
cell clone. Monoclonal spikes disappear after treatment for
poorly differentiated plasma cells, or both, are helpful in
ehrlichiosis. The serum hyperviscosity syndrome (discussed
differentiating myeloma from antigenic stimulation in
later) has also been reported in these dogs.
bone marrow films with increased numbers of plasma
· Chronic pyoderma. An IgG monoclonal gammopathy
cells.
with Bence-Jones proteinuria has been reported in a dog
 3. Radiographic evidence of osteolytic bone lesions.
with chronic pyoderma. Treatment and resolution of the
4. Bence-Jones proteinuria. Bence-Jones proteins are
pyoderma were followed by disappearance of the monoclo-
light chains of immunoglobulins that are produced in
nal gammopathy.
some gammopathies. Because of their small size, these
· Plasmacytic enterocolitis.? Monoclonal gammopathy has
proteins readily pass the glomerulus. If the concentration
been reported in a dog with this disease. The monoclonal
of Bence-Jones proteins in the urine exceeds the tubular
gammopathy disappeared after treatment and resolution of
reabsorptive capacity, they are excreted in the urine.
the inflammation.
Bence-Jones proteins rarely are detected by urine dipstick
● Visceral leishmaniasis (in dogs).25 Most dogs with visceral
tests for proteins, because dipsticks primarily detect
leishmaniasis have polyclonal gammopathies. In a few such
albumin. Bence-Jones proteins can be detected by several
dogs. a single clone of plasma cells may proliferate and result
techniques, including the heat precipitation test, electro-
in IgG monoclonal gammopathy.
phoresis, and immunoelectrophoresis. The heat precipita-
● Lymphoplasmacytic stomatitis (in cats)."’ Monoclonal
tion test can be performed in a practice laboratory. but
gammopathy with Bence-Jones proteinuria occurs infre-
this test is difficult to perform and interpret.' Bence-
quently in cats with this disease.
Jones proteins are detectable in approximately 30% of
· Idiopathic
monoclonal gammopathy.1'9.37
Unexplained
dogs and cats with multiple myelomas and have been
monoclonal gammopathies among animals in which known
causes have been eliminated are termed idiopathic, or
Jones proteins have also been detected in animals
 monoclonal  gammopathy  of undetermined  significance
with other neoplastic and nonneoplastic monoclonal
(MGUS). These animals are asymptomatic and may have
gammopathies.7.1947.51
stable production of the monoclonal immunoglobulin for a
· Extramedullary plasmacytoma.° Extramedullary plasma-
prolonged period of time (i.e., months to years): Bence-
cytomas are proliferations of plasma cells originating from a
Jones proteinuria occurs in some of these cases. These gam-
site other than bone. They are usually solitary, cutaneous.
mopathies may relate to antigenic stimulation of a
2 benign lesions that most commonly occur in dogs but have
B-lymphocyte clone. "Idiopathic" monoclonal gammopathy.
also been reported in cats. Plasmacytomas that occur in the
however, may precede the onset of overt multiple myeloma.
digestive tract are more likely to be malignant. In cats, there
is evidence that extramedullary tumors may progress to
multiple myeloma.57 Monoclonal gammopathies rarely
Hyperfibrinogenemia
occur in association with these tumors. A biclonal gam-
Increased plasma fibrinogen concentrations are most often
mopathy has been reported in a cat with two extramedullary
associated with inflammatory conditions and dehydration,
plasmacytomas.45
but have also been recognized with pregnancy and
● Lymphoma and lymphocytic leukemia.56,68.sz Monoclonal
neoplasia.29,34.54.76
gammopathies can occur with lymphoma and lymphocytic
· Dehydration. With dehydration, fibrinogen increases in
leukemia. Approximately 5% of dogs with lymphoma and
proportion to other plasma proteins. To eliminate the effect
lymphocytic leukemia have monoclonal gammopathies.s2
of hydration status. a plasma protein:fibrinogen ratio
The incidence appears higher in dogs with chronic lympho.
(PP:Fib) can be calculated as follows:76
cytic leukemia, however, with studies indicating 
an
incidence of greater than 50% in such cases.47 The immu-
Plasma protein (g/dL)x1000
PP:Fib =
noglobulin most commonly increased is IgM, especially in
Plasma fibrinogen (mg/dL)
470
CHAPTER 29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and Serum Proteins
The PP:Fib should not change with changes in hydration
 Table A29.1 Interpretation of sodium sulfite precipitation test
sta tus.
results.
As a general rule, a PP:Fib <l0 is considered consistent
with hyperfibrinogenemia due to inflammation (discussed
Estimated
 Sodium sulfite concentration
below),. and a ratio >l5 is considered normal or consistent
immunoglobulin 
with dehydration.s Some authors suggest slightly different
con centration 
14 %
16%
18%
cut-off values for horses; <l5 for inflammation and >20 for
 normal or dehydration.?6 These are rough guidelines for use
500mg/dL
in adult animals, and do not take into account other factors
 500-1500mg/dL
+
that could influence plasma protein and fibrinogen
>1500mg/dL 
+
con centrations.
● Inflammation. Fibrinogen is a positive acute phase protein.
- No precipitation after one hour (cloudines without visible flakes is
therefore plasma concentrations increase with inflamma-
a negative test).
+ Flakes of precipitation after one hour (regardless of flake density).
tion. Although other acute phase proteins may be better
Adapted from Pfeiffer NE, McGuire TC (1977) A sodium sulfite-
indicators of inflammatory disease, fibrinogen continues to
precipitation test for assessment of colostral imrmunoglobulin transfer
be used because it is easy to measure in practice situa-
to calves. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170: 809-11
tions.15.40.63 It is often included in routine equine and bovine
complete blood counts. With inflammation in those species.
fibrinogen concentrations may sometimes be increased in
the absence of an inflammatory leukogram.' In dogs. it
offers no advantage over leukocyte counts for evaluation of
 inflammation.71
Table A29.2 Zinc sulfate turbidity test perforrmance for detection of
 FPT in ruminants.
 Zinc sulfate concentration 
Sensitivity
Specificity
Appendix 29.1
 200 mg /L
100%
25 %
Sodium sulfite precipitation test: Application in
250 mg/L
100%
42 %
ruminants
 300 mg /L
98 %
65 %
1. Prepare three solutions of sodium sulfite (14%, 16%, and
350 mg /L
94 %
76%
18%) from anhydrous sulfite and distilled water.
400 mg /L
% E8
91 %
2. Place 1.9 mL of sodium sulfite solution into each of three
13 × 100 mm test tubes.
Adapted from Hudgens KA. Tyler JW, Besser TE, Krytenberg DS (1996)
3. Add 0.1 mL of serum into each of the three tubes.
Optimmizing performance of a qualitative zinc sulfate turbidity test for 
passive transfer of irnmunoglobulin G in calves. Am J Vet Res 57:
 4. Mix immediately, and then incubate at room temperature
171 1-13.
for l hour.
5. After l hour examine the tubes for evidence of
precipita tion.
6. Interpret as described in Table A29.1.
2. The solution should be stored in an air-tight bottle that
is connected to a CO, trap to prevent CO, absorption.
Appendix 29.2
3. Add 0.1 mL of serum (hemolysis might interfere with the
test) to a tube (13 × 100 mm) containing 6mL of the zinc
Znc sulfate turbidity test: Application
sulfate solution. Cap the tube to prevent absorption of COz.
in ruminants
which adds to turbidity.
1. Prepare a solution of zinc sulfate (ZnSOg · 7HzO) by
4. Mix the contents of the tube and incubate at room tem-
mixing 350 mg of zinc sulfate in 1 L of distilled water that
perature (23C) for 1 hour.
has been previously boiled to remove CO,. Note that lower
5. After the incubation period, mix the contents of the tube.
concentrations of zinc sulfate might be appropriate in some
and then hold the tube in front of newsprint.
cases. Lower concentrations have a higher sensitivity but a
6. Cloudiness sufficient to obscure newsprint when viewed
lower specificity: higher concentrations (e.g., 350mg/L)
through the tube is considered to be a positive reaction.
have a lower sensitivity and a higher specificity (Table
7. Interpret a negative reaction as being suggestive of the
A29.2).
failure of passive transfer.
471
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
4. Interpret as follows:
Appendix 29.3
(a) Coagulation within 10 minutes indicates immuno-
globulin concentration is more than 800 mg/dL.
Zinc sulfate turbidity test: Application in horses
(b) Coagulation by 60 minutes indicates immunoglobu-
1. Prepare a solution of zinc sulfate (ZnSO。 · 7HzO) by
lin concentration is 400 to 800 mg/dL.
mixing 208 mg of zinc sulfate in lL of distilled water that
(c) No coagulation by 60 minutes indicates immuno-
has been previously boiled to remove COz.
globulin concentration is less than 400mg/dL.
2. The solution should be stored in an air-tight bottle that
is connected to a CO, trap to prevent CO, absorption.
3. Add 0.1 mL of serum to a 13 × 100mm test tube contain-
Appendix 29.6
ing 6 mL of the zinc sulfate solution. Cap the tube to prevent
absorption of COz, which adds to turbidity.
Fibrinogen determination by heat precipitation
4. Mix the contents of the tube and incubate at room tem-
1. Fill two microhematocrit tubes with ethylenediamine tet-
perature (23C) for 1 hour.
raacetic acid (EDTA)-anticoagulated blood.
5. After the incubation period, mix the contents of the tube.
 2. Sediment blood in both tubes using a microhermatocrit
and then observe for turbiditry.
centrifuge.
6. Interpret as follows:
3. Break one tube at the bottom of the plasma column,
(a) Visible turbidity indicates immunoglobulin concen-
apply the plasma to a refractometer, and read the protein
tration is at least 400 mg/dL.
concentration.
(b) This test can be made semiquantitative by using a
 4. Place the second microhematocrit tube in a waterbath at
spectrophotometer and reading absorbance at 600 nm,
56 to 58°℃ for 3 to 5 minutes, which denatures and precipi-
which requires the use of standards.
tates the fibrinogen in the sample. Note that hot tap water
frequently is in the 56 to 58°℃ range. If so (check with a
thermometer), such tap water placed in an insulated con-
Appendix 29.4
tainer can replace the waterbath as an incubation chamber.
5. After incubation, re-centrifuge the second microhemato-
Glutaraldehyde coagulation test:
crit tube in the microhematocrit centrifuge to sediment the
Application in ruminants
precipitated fibrinogen.
1. Prepare a lo% solution of glutaraldehyde (usually pre-
6. Measure the protein concentration in the second tube
pared via dilution of a 25% solution to a 10% solution).
using a refractometer.
2. Place 0.5 mL of serum into a 13 x 100 mm test tube.
7. Subtract the protein concentration of the second tube
3. Add 50 μL (0.05mL) of the 10% glutaraldehyde reagent
from that of the first tube. The difference is the estimate of
to the tube.
the plasma fibrinogen concentration. For example, if the
4. Mix immediately.
and then incubate
room
 protein concentration in the first tube is 7.1 g/dL and that in
temperature
the second tube is 6.7g/dL, then the fibrinogen concentra-
5. Examine the tube at intervals for as long as l hour,
tion is 0.4 g/dL.
looking for evidence of coagulation.
8. Fibrinogen concentrations usually are converted to mg/
6. Interpret as follows:
dL (e.g., 0.4g/dL = 400 mg/dL).
(a) Complete coagulation  indicates
s  immunoglobulin
concentration is more than 600 mg/dL.
(b) Semisolid gel indicates immunoglobulin concentra-
References
tion is 400 to 600 mg/dL.
(c) No coagulation indicates immunoglobulin concentra-
1. Andrews DA, Reagan WR, DeNicola DB (1994) Plasma fbrino-
tion is less than 400 mg/dL.
 gen in recognizing equine inflammatory disease. Compendium on
Continuing Education for the Practicing Veterinarian 16: 1349-56.
 2. Attaelmannan M, Levinson SS (2o00) Understanding and iden-
Appendix 29.5
tifying monoclonal gammopathies. Clin Chem 46: 1230-8, 2000.
3. Beetson SA, Hilbert BJ, Mills JN (1985) The use of the glutar-
aldehyde coagulation test for detection of hypogammaglobu-
Glutaraldehyde coagulation test:
linaemia in neonatal foals. Ausr Ver J 62: 279-81.
Application in horses
4. Bossuyt X (2006) Advances in serum protein electrophoresis.
1. Perform steps 1 through 4 as outlined in Appendix 29.4.
Adv Clin Chem 42: 43-80.
2. Examine the tube at 5. 10, 15, 20, 30, 45, and 60 minutes.
5. Breitschwerdt EB, Woody BJ, Zerbe CA, De Buysscher EV, Barta
3. A positive reaction is solid coagulation (i.e., does not
O (1987) Monoclonal gammopathy associated with naturally
move when the tube is tilted).
occurring canine ehrlichiosis. J Ver Inrerm Med 1: 2-9.
472
CHAPTER 29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and Serum Proteins
6. Breuer W. Colbatzky F Platz S. Hermanns W (l993)
and a dog with plasma cell neoplasia. Ver Clin Parhol 39:
Immunoglobulin-producing tumours in dogs and cats. J Comp
440-6.
Parho! 109: 203-16.
25. Font A, Closa JM, Mascort J (1994) Monoclonal gammopathy
7. Burkhard MJ, Meyer DJ, Rosychuk RA, O'Neil SP, Schultheiss
in a dog with visceral leishmaniasis. J Ver Inrern Med 8: 233-5.
PC (1995) Monoclonal gammopathy in a dog with chronic
   )   '  
pyoderma. J Ver Intern Med 9: 357-60.
Srhalm's Vererinary Hemarology (eds.), Feldman BF, Zink] JGJain
8. Camus MS, Krimer PM, Leroy BE, Almy FS (2010) Evaluation
NC, 5th ed., pp. 929-31. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Balti-
of the positive predictive value of serum protein electrophoresis
more, MD.
Beta-gamma bridging for hepatic disease in three domestic
27. Geelen SN, Bernadina WE, Grinwis GC, Kalsbeek HC (1997)
animal species. Ver Pathol 47: 1064-70.
Monoclonal gammopathy in a Dutch warmblood mare. Ver Q
9. Center SA, Smith CA, Wilkinson E, Erb HN, Lewis RM (1987)
19: 29-32.
Clinicopathologic, renal immunofluorescent, and light micro-
28. Gentilini F Calzolari C, Buonacu cina A, Tommaso Md, Militemo
scopic features of glomerulonephritis in the dog: 4l cases
G. Bergamini PF (2005) Different biological behaviour of
{1975-1985). J Am Vet Med Assor 190: 81-90.
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia in two dogs. Vererinary and
10. Ceron JJ, Eckersall PD, Martymez-Subiela S (2005) Acute phase
Comparative Oncology 3: 87-97.
-iad aiin pue aapa[ou iuaun rsieo pue saop ul suano.nd
29. Gentry PA, Feldman BF O'Neill SL, Madigan JE, Zinkl JG
spectives. Ver Clin Pathol 34: 85-99.
 -ad a u ad  an o  (e)
11. Clabough DL, Conboy HS, Roberts MC (1989) Comparison of
 post parturient mare, with particular focus on the perinatal
four screening techniques for the diagnosis of equine neonatal
period. Equine Ver J 24: 33-6.
hypogammaglobulinemia. J Am Ver Med Assoc 194: 1717-20.
30. George JW (200l) The usefulness and limitations of hand-held
12. Cowgill ES, Neel JA, Ruslander D (2004) Light-chain myeloma
in a dog. J Ver Inrern Med 18: 1l9-21.
and technical review. Ver Clin Pathol 30: 201-10.
13. Cray C, Rodriguez M, Arheart KL (2008) Use of refractometry
31. Giordano A, Paltrinieri S (2010) Interpretation of capillary zone
for determination of psittacine plasma protein concentration.
electrophoresis compared with cellulose acetate and agarose gel
Ver Clin Pathol 37: 438-42.
electrophoresis: reference intervals and diagnostic efficiency in
14. Crisman MV, Scarratt WK (2008) Immunodeficiency disorders
dogs and cats. Ver Clin Pathol 39(4):464-73.
in horses. Ver Clin North Am Equine Pracr 24: 299-310, vi.
32. Giraudel JM, Pages JP, Guelf JF (2002) Monoclonal gammopa-
15. Crisman MV, Scarratt WK, Zimmerman KL (2008) Blood pro-
thies in the dog: a retrospective study of 18 cases (1986-1999)
teins and inflammation in the horse. Ver Clin North Am Equine
and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assor 38: 135-47.
Pract 24: 285-97, vi.
33. Grauer GF (2005) Canine glomerulonephritis: new thoughts on
 16. Crivellente F Bonato M, Cristofori P (2008) Analysis of mouse,
proteinuria and treatment. J Small Anim Pracr 46: 469-78.
rat, dog, marmoset, and human serum proteins by capillary
34. Heuwieser W, Kautni J, Biesel M, Grunert E {1 990) Coagulation
electrophoresis: comparison with agarose gel electrophoresis.
profle of dairy catle in the periparturient period. Zentralb!
Ver Clin Pathol 37: 73-8.
Vererinarmed A 37: 8-15.
17. Davis R, Giguere S (2005) Evaluation of five commercially
35. Hickford FH, Stokol T, vanGessel YA, Randolph JF, Schermer-
 -s uanod [enon uas jo luawannseau pue sesse aqe[eae
horn T (2oo0) Monoclonal immunoglobulin G cryoglobuline-
centration via refractometry for the diagnosis of failure of
mia and multiple myeloma in a domestic shorthair cat. J Am Vet
passive transfer of immunity in foals. J Am Vetr Med Assoc 227:
Med Assoc 217: 1007-28, 1029-33.
1640-5.
36. Hoenig M (1987) Multiple myeloma associated with the heavy
18. Dawes ME, Tyler JW, Hostetler D, Lakritz J, Tessman R (2002)
chains of immunoglobulin A in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 190:
Evaluation of a commercially available immunoassay for assess-
1191-2.
ing adequacy of passive transfer in calves. J Am Ver Med Assoc
37. Hoenig M, O'Brien JA (1988) A benign hypergammaglobu-
220:791-3.
linemia mimicking plasma cell myeloma. Journal of the American
19. Dewhirst MW, Stamp GL, Hurvitz AI (1977) Idiopathic monoclonal
Animal Hospital Association 24: 688-90.
(gA) gammopathy in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assoc 170: 1313-16.
38. Hudgens KA, Tyler JW, Besser TE, Krytenberg DS (1 996) Opti-
20. Diehl KJ, Lappin MR, Jones RL, Cayatte S (1992) Monoclonal
mizing performance of a qualitative zinc sulfate turbidity test 
for passive transfer of immunoglobulin G in calves. Am J Ver Res
Ver Med Assoc 20l: 1233-6.
57: 1711-13.
21. Dixon FJ, Maurer PH, Deichmiller MP (1953) Half-lives of
39. JacobsG, Callins-Kelly L, Lappin M, Tyler D (1 990) Lymphocytic-
homologous serum albumins in several species. Proc Soc Exp Bio!
t t p ua r p  u sa d
Med 83: 287-8.
40. Jones ML, Allison RW (2007) Evaluation of the ruminant com-
22. Drew ML, Fowler ME (1995) Comparison of methods for mea-
plete blood cell count. Ver Clin Norh Am Food Anim Pracr 23:
suring serum immunoglobulin concentrations in neonatal
377402.
llamas. J Am Ver Med Assor 206: 1374-80.
41. Kaneko JJ (1997) Serum proteins and the dysproteinemias. In:
23. Edwards DF, Parker JW, Wilkinson JE, Helman RG (1993)
Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals (eds.), Kaneko JJ, Harvey
Plasma cell myeloma in the horse. A case report and literature
 JW, Bruss ML, 5th ed., pp. 117-38. Academic Press, San Diego.
review. J Ver Intern Med 7: 169-76.
GA.
24. Facchini RV, Bertazzolo W, Zuliani D, er al. (20l0) Detection of
42. Keren DF (1999) Procedures for the evaluation of monoclonal
 e u sisadoaa az Aede Aq edol [e
immunoglobulins. Arrh Pathol Lab Med 123: 126-32.
473
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
43. Kerm MR, Stockham SL, Coates JR (1992) Analysis of serum
62. Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF McManus PM (2005) Multiple
protein concentrations after severe thermal injury in a dog. Vert
         
Clin Patho! 2l: 19-22.
341-52.
44. Krause R, Auner HW, Daxbock F, et al. (2003) Monoclonal and
63. Petersen HH, Nielsen JP, Heegaard PM (2004) Application of
biclonal gammopathy in two patients infected with Bartonella
henselae. Ann Hemaro! 82: 455-7.
istry. Ver Res 35: 163-87.
45. Larsen AE, Carpenter JL (1994) Hepatic plasmacytoma and
64. Peterson EN, Meininger AC (1997) Immunoglobulin A and
biclonal gammopathy in a cat. J Am Ver Med Assor 205:
708-10.
myeloma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33: 45-7.
46. Lautzenhiser SJ, Walker MC, Goring RL (2003) Unusual IgM-
65. Peterson PB, Willard MD (2003) Protein-losing enteropathies.
secreting multiple myeloma in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assor 223:
Ver Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33: 1061-82.
636, 645-8.
66. Pfeiffer NE, McGuire TC (1977) A sodium sulfite-precipitation
47. Leifer CE, Matus RE (1986) Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in
tests for assessment of colostral immunoglobulin transfer to
the dog: 22 cases (19741984). J Am Ver Med Assoc 189: 21417.
calves. J Am Ver Med Assoc 170: 809-11.
48. Littman MP, Dambach DM, Vaden SL, Giger U (2000) Familial
67. Ramaiah SK, Seguin MA, Carwile HF, Raskin RE (2002) Biclonal
protein-losing enteropathy and protein-losing nephropathy in
m lop e u y unqoounuu ym paieose Auedous
Soft Coated Wheaten Terriers: 222 cases (1983-1997). J Vet
multiple myeloma. Ver Clin Patho! 3l: 83-9.
Interm Med 14: 68-80.
68. Rosenberg MP, Hohenhaus AE, Matus RE {199l) Monoclonal
 49. Lumeij JT, de Bruijne JJ (1985) Evaluation of the refractometric
gammopathy and lymphoma in a cat infected with feline immu-
method for the determination of total protein in avian plasma
nodeficiency virus. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Asso
or serum. Avian Patho! 14: 441-4.
cation 27: 335-7.
50. Lumeij JT, de Bruijne JU, Kwant MM (l990) Comparison of
69. Rothschild MA, Oratz M, Schreiber SS (1988) Serum albumin.
different methods of measuring protein and albumin in pigeon
Hepatology 8: 385-401.
sera. Avian Patho! 19: 255-61.
70. Rumbaugh GE, Ardans AA, Ginno D, Trommershausen-Smith
 51. Lyon KF (1 994) Feline lymphoplasmacytic stomatitis associated
A {1978) Measurement of neonatal equine immunoglobulins
with monoclonal gammopathy and Bence-Jones proteinuria.
for assessment of colostral immunoglobulin transfer: compari-
J Ver Denr 1l: 25-7.
son of single radial immunodiffusion with the zinc sulfate tur-
52. MacAllister CG, Mosier D, Qualls CW, Jr., Cowell RL (1990)
bidity test, serum electrophoresis, refractometry for total serum
Lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis in two horses. J Am Ver Med
protein, and the sodium sulfite precipitation test. J Am Ver Med
Assoc 196: 1995-8.
Assoc 172: 321-5.
53. MacEwen EG, Hurvitz AI (1 977) Diagnosis and management of
 71. Solter PF, Hoffmann WE, Hungerford LL, Siegel JP, St Denis SH,
monoclonal gammopathies. Ver Clin North Am 7: 119-32.
Dorner JL (199l) Haptoglobin and ceruloplasmin as determi-
54. Madewall BR, Feldman BF, O'Neill S (1 980) Coagulation abnor-
nants of inflammation in dogs. Am J Ver Res 52: 1738-42.
malities in dogs with neoplastic disease. Thromb Haemost 44:
72. Spagnolo V, Crippa V, Marzia A, Sartorelli P (2006) Reference
35-8.
55. Matteeuws DR, Kaneko J1, Loy RG, Cormelius CE, Wheat JD
protein electrophoretic fractions in captive common buzzards
{1966) Compartmentalization and turnover of 13l-1-labeled
(Buteo buteo). Ver Clin Pathol 35: 82-7.
albumin and gamma globulin in horses. Am J Ver Res 27:
73. Spano JS, Whitesides JF, Pedersoli WM, Krista LM, Ravis WM
699-705.
(1988) Comparative albumin determinations in ducks, chick-
56. McClure JT (2000) Leukoproliferative disorders in horses. Ver
ens, and turkeys by electrophoretic and dye-binding methods.
Clin North Am Equine Pracr 16: 165-82.
Am J Ver Res 49: 325-6.
57. Mellor PJ, Haugland S, Smith KC, et al. (2008) Histopathologic.
74. Sparkes AH, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Harbour DA {199l) Feline
immunohistochemical, and cytologic analysis of feline myeloma-
infectious peritonitis: a review of clinicopathological changes in
related disorders: further evidence for primary extramedullary
65 cases, and a critical assessment of their diagnostic value. Ver
development in the cat. Ver Pathol 45: 159-73.
Rer 129: 209-12.
58. Michels GM, Boon GD, Jones BD, Puget B (1995) Hypergam-
75.Stockham
SL,
ketoamines,
maglobulinemia in a dog. J Am Ver Med Assorc 207: 567-8; discus-
and related
regulatory hormones.
.In:Fundamentals
f
sion 569-70.
59. Moore GE, Mahaffey EA, Hoenig M (1992) Hematologic and
Ames, IA.
serum biochemical effects of long-term administration of anti-
76. Stockham SL, Scott MA (2008) Proteins. In: Fundamentals of
inflammatory doses of prednisone in dogs. Am J Ver Res 53:
Vererinary Clinical Pathology. 2nd ed., pp. 369-413. Blackwell,
1033-7.
Ames, IA.
60. Naylor JM, Kronfeld DS, Bech-Nielsen S, Bartholomew RC
77. Stokol T, Tarrant JM, Scarlett JM {200l) Overestimation of
 d  n nd [nn ee (e)
canine albumin
1 concentration with the bromcresol green
disease and mortality in calves. J Am Ver Med Assoc 17l: 635-8.
 r   s ed r  
61. Parraga ME, Carlson GP, Thurmond M (1995) Serum protein
170-6.
concentrations in horses with severe liver disease: a retrospec-
78. Takiguchi M, Fujinaga T, Naiki M, Mizuno S, Otomo K (1990)
tive study and review of the literature. J Ver Inrern Med 9:
Isolation,
 characterization, and quantitative analysis 
of
154-61.
C-reactive protein from horses. Am J Ver Res 51: 1215-20.
474
CHAPTER 29 Laboratory Evaluation of Plasma and Serum Proteins
79. Tennant B, Baldwin BH, Braun RK, Norcross NL, Sandholm M
85. Varela F Font X, Valladares JE, Alberola J (1997) Thrombocy-
{1979) Use of the glutaraldehyde coagulation test for detection
topathia and light-chain proteinuria in a dog naturally infected
of hypogammaglobulinemia in neonatal calves. J Am Ver Med
with Ehrlichia canis. J Ver Interm Med ll: 309-11.
Assoc 174: 848-53.
86. Weaver DM, Tyler JW, Marion RS, Wallace LM, Nagy JK, Holle
80. Thomas JS (2000) Overview of plasma proteins. In: Schalm's
 JM (20o0) Evaluation of assays for determination of passive
Vererinary Hemarology (eds.). Feldman BF Zink] JG, Jain NC, 5th
transfer status in neonatal lamas and alpacas. J Am Ver Med Assoc 
ed., pp. 89l-8. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
216: 559-63.
81. Thomas JS (2ooo) Protein electrophoresis. In: Srhalm's Vereri-
87. Weaver DM, Tyler JW, Scott MA, Wallace LM, Marion RS, Holle
nary Hemarology (eds.), Feldman BF, Zink] JG, Jain NC, 5th ed.,
JM (2o00) Passive transfer of colostral immunoglobulin G in
pp. 899-903. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, MD.
neonatal llamas and alpacas. Am J Ver Res 6l: 73841.
82. Thrall MA (1981) Lymphoproliferative disorders. Lymphocytic
88. Weaver DM, Tyler JW, VanMetre DC, Hostetler DE, Barrington
leukemia and plasma cell myeloma. Ver Clin North Am Small
GM (2ooo) Passive transfer of colostral immunoglobulins in
Anim Pracr 1l: 321-47.
calves. J Ver Inrern Med 14: 569-77.
83. Tyler JW, Besser TE, Wilson L, Hancock DD, Sanders S, Rea DE
89. Yamada O, Tamura K, Yagihara H, et al. (2007) Light-chain
(1996) Evaluation of a whole blood glutaraldehyde coagulation
multiple myeloma in a cat. J Ver Diagn Invesr 19: 443-7.
test for the detection of failure of passive transfer in calves.
90. Yamamoto S, Tagata K, Nagahata H, Ishikawa Y, Morimatsu M.
J Ver Intermn Med 10: 82-4.
Naiki M (1992) Isolation of canine C-reactive protein and char-
84. Tyler JW, Hancock DD, Parish SM, et al. (1996) Evaluation of 3
acterization of its properties. Ver Immunol Immunopathol 30:
assays for failure of passive transfer in calves. J Ver Inrerm Med
329-39.
10: 304-7.
475
30
Laboratory Detection of Muscle Injury
Robin W. Allison
Oklahoma State University
Routine laboratory tests that evaluate muscle are primarily
The fourth isoenzyme, CK-Mt, exists within mitochondria
aimed at detecting muscle injury. These tests include assays
of many tissues. The reported distributions of isoenzyme
that measure the serum activities of enzymes and other
activities in the blood of normal dogs vary, but CK-MM and
proteins that leak from injured muscle cells and the urine
CK-BB together are responsible for the majority of the CK
concentrations of myoglobin, which also leaks from injured
activity with a small contribution from CK-MB.? Because of
muscle cells and is excreted via glomerular filtration.
the different tissue locations, CK isoenzymes have the
potential to be tissue specific. In people, increased serum
CK-MB activity has historically been considered a reliable
Creatine kinase
marker of myocardial injury. but has been replaced by other
 cardiac biomarkers in recent years (see discussion of cardiac
Creatine kinase (CK) is an enzyme present in highest con-
troponins)." Measurement of CK isoenzyme activities
centrations in skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, smooth
requires electrophoresis or specifies-specific antibodies, and
muscle, and brain, with lesser amounts present in various
these assays are not routinely available for animals.
organs such as intestine, liver, and spleen.4.12 Creatine kinase
Creatine kinase activity can be measured in serum or
is found free in the cytoplasm of muscle cells and leaks from
plasma, but the activity is reportedly about 2.5 times greater
these cells when they are damaged. Creatine kinase is con-
in serum, most likely due to release of CK from platelets
sidered a muscle-specific leakage enzyme. Although CK is
during clotting. In dogs. plasma CK activity is stable for a
present in the brain, brain injury causes increased CK activ-
week when refrigerated and a month when frozen at -20°℃.
ity in the cerebrospinal fluid instead of the blood because of
Serum CK activity has been reported to be greater in young
the blood-brain barrier. Increases in CK activity following
puppies compared to adult dogs, with four times adult levels
muscle injury occur rapidly (peaking in 6-12 hours) but also
found in puppies under a month of age.? A falsely increased
decline rapidly (a day or two) because CK has a short half-
CK activity can occur as a result of hemolysis, hyperbiliru-
life of about 2 hours (See Fig. 30.l).′ Thus, persistent
binemia, and muscle fluid contamination of the blood
increases in CK activity indicate ongoing muscle damage.
sample during a difficult venipuncture. Extremely high
Although the specificity of CK activity for muscle injury is
serum CK activities (>loox URL) occasionally are detected
high, sensitivity is fairly low, likely related to its short
in animals with muscle injuries. These markedly increased
half-life.3
CK activities may be greater than the linearity limits for the
Creatine kinase exists as a dimer, composed of different
assay. Technicians analyzing such serum for CK activity may
combinations of two subunits designated B (brain) and M
have difficulty reaching an endpoint in the assay because
(muscle). A total of four isoenzymes have been identified.
the serum CK activity continues to increase with serial dilu-
There is some variation by species, but in dogs CK-BB (CK-
tion. Various theories have been postulated to explain this
1} predominates in brain and organs such as spleen and
phenomenon, including that dilution of serum CK inhibi-
kidney. CK-MB (CK-2) is mainly in intestine, lung. and
tors is responsible.&112 In these cases CK activity may be
spleen with a small amount in myocardium, and CK-MM
reported as greater than the limit of linearity for that par-
(CK-3) is the major form in skeletal and cardiac muscle.
ticular assay.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
476
CHAPTER 30 Laboratory Detection of Muscle Injury
CK activity, but this is rarely recognized in practice. However.
the bovine uterus has been shown to contain relatively high
-- CK
concentrations of CK, and serum CK increases have been
AST
documented in cattle with endometritis.25
· Muscle catabolism. Increased CK activity can occur in
anorexic cats that have diseases not directly involving
Enzyme
muscle. A median serum CK activity of 2529 IU/L, with
activity
some activities being greater than 10,000 IU/L (reference
interval = l0-l00 IU/L). has been reported in such cats."
Muscle catabolism to supply amino acids for protein synthe-
sis and gluconeogenesis is theorized to result in the leakage
of CK from muscle cells. The CK activity in these cats
24
48
72
decreased rapidly after nutritional support was initiated.
Hours since injury
Aspartate aminotransferase
Figure 30.1 Serum activities of both AST and CK increase as a result of
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), previously known as
muscle injury, but rise and fall at different rates. Evaluation of these two
serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), is present
 pue paunno Aunlui ajpsnu e uaum apewsa diay uen ayabot sawszia
 indicate whether such injury is still occurring. An increase in only the
at highest concentrations in hepatocytes as well as in skeletal
serum CK activity (ine A) suggests very acute muscle injury. Increased
and cardiac muscle cells. Aspartate aminotransferase is
serum activities of both AST and CK (line B) suggest active or recent
present in both the cytoplasm and mitochondria of these
 muscle injury. An increase in only the serum AST activity (line C) suggest5
cells.? Serum AST activity increases not only from muscle
that muscle injury stopped more than 2 days earlier, and that the serum
injury but also hepatocyte injury. and may be mildly
CK activity returned to normal as a result of the short half-life of CK. An
increased in dogs due to drug induction (see Chapter 26).
Anui lanll woy hnsau ose Aeuu Ae isy wnas au Auo ui asauu
Serum AST activity increases more slowly than serum CK
-dde ie sead i ( roe i anu aosu iae Aa
mately 24-36 hours after acute muscle injury. and it
Increased serum CK activity results from:
decreases more slowly than serum CK activity after the
● Skeletal muscle injury. Injury to skeletal muscle is the
muscle injury ceases. The half-life of AST in the blood has 
most common cause of increased CK activity. which may
been estimated between 4 and 12 hours in dogs. 77 minutes 
result from such minor procedures as physical restraint and
intramuscular injections. Muscle necrosis and ischemia.
The relative serum activities of both CK and AST can be
strenuous exercise or seizures, and trauma during shipping
lsed to estimate when muscle injury occurred and whether
can result in an increased serum CK activity. The underlying
active muscle injury is ongoing (Fig. 30.1). An increase in
causes for muscle injury are numerous and varied, including
only the serum CK activity (Fig. 30.1, line A) suggests very
trauma, toxins, exertional rhabdomyolysis, inflammatory
acute muscle injury (i.e., there has not been sufficient time
myopathies due to bacterial, viral, or parasitic diseases, and
since the injury occurred for the serum AST activity to
inherited conditions such as muscular dystrophy.3′ So-called
increase). Increased serum activities of both AST and CK
downer cattle will have increased CK activity due to isch-
(Fig. 30.1, line B) suggest active or recent muscle injury. An 
emic muscle necrosis. Increased CK activity has also been
increase in only the serum AST activity (Fig. 30.l, line C)
reported in dogs with endocrine diseases (hypothyroidism
and hyperadrenocorticism).? Depending on the underlying
and that the serum CK activity returned to normal as a result
cause, the magnitude of the increase may be mild to marked
of the short half-life of CK. This latter combination of results
and correlates somewhat with the extent of muscle injury.
also can occur with liver injury (i.e., if liver is the source of
· Cardiac muscle injury. Increases in CK activity can occur
the AsT, the CK activity would be normal).
with injury to cardiac muscle. In dogs, this is due to increases
in both CK-MM and CK-MB activities.' Because of the rela-
tively small volume of cardiac muscle compared to skeletal
Alanine aminotransferase
muscle, CK activity increases with cardiac muscle injury are
unlikely to reach the magnitude seen with severe injury to
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), previously known as serum
skeletal muscle.
glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT), is a leakage enzyme
●Smooth muscle injury. In theory, injury to tissues contain-
that is free in the cytoplasm. This enzyme is primarily used
ing abundant smooth muscle could cause increased serum
to detect hepatocyte injury (see Chapter 26). but it is not
SEcTloN Iv Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
totally liver specific.2 The ALT activities in skeletal and cardiac
all have been used successfully in animals.132 Additionally.
muscles are approximately 5% and 25%, respectively, of the
values obtained with one type of assay may not be directly
liver ALT activity.d Muscle should be considered as a potential
comparable to values obtained with another.' Although
solurce of increased serum ALT activity. beca use the total mass 
regarded as highly sensitive and specific markers for cardiac
of muscle is much greater than that of liver. Measuring the
disease in people, how cardiac troponin concentrations will
correlate with specifc diseases in animals is the subject of
(CK) is preferable for detecting muscle damage.
 ongoing investigations. Several studies have shown that cTnI
 e  o    so
diseases compared to norrmal healthy dogs: conditions
Lactate dehydrogenase
included mitral valve disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, and
acute myocardial damage secondary to gastric dilatation-
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is located in the cytoplasm of
most cells in the body.? Injury to most tissues results in
trations were also increased in cases of renal failure,
leakage of LDH into the extracellular space and the blood;
noncardiac systemic disease, and noncardiac dyspnea.1022
therefore, LDH is a very nonspecific enzyme.
Recently, greyhound dogs were shown to have cTnI concen-
trations significantly greater than those of non-greyhound
Lactate dehydrogenase isoenzymes
control dogs."4 The specificity of cardiac troponins for cardiac
Five LDH isoenzymes exist, which can be identified by elec-
injury in animals will depend on development of appropriate
trophoretic separation. Each isoenzyme is present in a
decision limits for the particular assay being used.
limited number of tissues and, therefore, is more tissue spe-
cific than the serum total LDH activity.'s Lactate dehydroge-
Myoglobinemia and myoglobinuria
nase molecules are composed of four components, which
are either muscle (M) or heart (H) subunits. The five isoen-
Myoglobin is released from dead or dying muscle cells into
Zymes are LDH, (Ha). LDH, (MH,). LDH, (MH). LDH
the blood as a result of severe, usually acute muscle injury.30
(M,H), and LDH, (M). The designations H, MH, and so on
Becalse
myoglobin has a low molecular weight
refer to the number of each subunit (M or H) in the LDH
(MW = 17,000) and is not significantly bound to proteins in
isoenzyme molecule. Although there is considerable species
the blood, it quickly passes through the glomerulus and is
excreted in the urine.'7 The urine will be brown to red-
in cardiac muscle and the LDH, (Ma) isoenzyme predomi-
brown if the urinary myoglobin concentration is high
nates in skeletal muscle. The remaining three isoenzymes
enough (Fig. 30.2). Myoglobin is detected as a positive reac-
are found in variable quantities in several different tissues.
tion on the urine dipstick test for blood or hemoglobin
Although measurement of specific isoenzyme activities may
because of its peroxidase activity. Therefore, myoglobinuria
provide information about skeletal versus cardiac muscle
must be differentiated from hemoglobinuria (see Chapter 23
injury. isoenzyme assays are not routinely performed by
most veterinary laboratories and more specific serum
markers are now available for evaluating myocardial injury
(see discussion of cardiac troponins).
Cardiac troponins
Troponins are structural proteins of striated muscle. In
people, antibody assays developed against cardiac troponins
I (cTnI) and T (cTnT) have identified that these proteins are
released from injured cardiac muscle and enter the periph-
eral blood.?4 Assays for cTnI and cTnT have largely replaced
assays for CK-MB activity as markers for myocardial injury
in people, and are being investigated for similar purposes in
animals.23,2 Because the cardiactroponins are well-conserved
between species, immunoassays designed for use in people
have been used to detect these proteins in plasma from a
variety of species including dogs. cats, horses, and
Figure 30.2 Urine from a horse with exertional rhabdomyolysis and
cattle.16.z0.z2i27 However, there are multiple commercial
o umong u ansau uigoiouu jo suoeuauon yi eunuigoiou
immunoassays available for assaying these proteins, and not
red-brown urine.
478
CHAPTER 30 Laboratory Detection of Muscle Injury
for further discussion of red urine). This differentiation can
13. Klein MS, Shell WE, Sobel BE (1973) Serum creatine phospho-
be aided by observing the packed cell volume and color of
kinase (CPK) isoenzymes after intramuscular injections, surgery.
the serum. Hemoglobin released into the plasma because of
and myocardial infarction. Experimental and clinical studies.
hemolysis is quickly bound to a carrier protein, ha ptoglobin
Cardiovasc Res 7: 412-18.
Hemoglobin-haptoglobin complexes are large and do not
14. Lavecchio D, Marin LM, Baumwart R, Iazbik MC, Westendorf
N, Couto CG (2009) Serum cardiac troponin I concentration in
readily pass through the glomerulus. If haptoglobin becomes
retired racing greyhounds. J Ver Inrern Med 23: 87-90.
saturated with hemoglobin, f
free hemoglobin(
dimers
15. Milne EM, Doxey DL (1987) Lactate dehydrogenase and its
(MW = 32,000) in plasma are cleared by the kidney, result-
isoenzymesin the tissues and sera of clinically normal dogs. Res
u paueiai aq oi spua uqosoay aouis er'aun pai u su
Ver Sci 43: 222-4.
the plasma after hemolysis, it imparts a red color to the
16. O'Brien PJ, Smith DE, Knechtel TJ, er al. (2006) Cardiac tropo-
plasma and serum. Myoglobin, however, is readily excreted
nin I is a sensitive, specific biomarker of cardiac injury in labora-
tory animals. Lab Anim 40: 153-71.
in the serum. Colorless to yellow serum in animals with
17. Osbome CA, Stevens JB {1999) Urinalysis: A Clinical Guide to
evidence of muscle injury (increased CK or AST activity) and
Compassionare Patient Care. pp. l06-10. Bayer Corporation.
a positive reaction for hemoglobin on a urine dipstick test
Shawnee Mission, KS.
suggests myoglobinuria; red serum in an anemic animal is 
18. Oyama MA, Sisson DD (2004) Cardiac troponin-I concentration
in dogs with cardiac disease. J Ver Intern Med 18: 831-9.
 suggestive of hemolysis and hemoglobinuria.
 19. Oyama MA, Solter PF (2004) Validation of an immunoassay for 
measurement of canine cardiac troponin-1. J Ver Cardio! 6: 17-24.
20. Peek SF Apple FS, Murakami MA, Crump PM, Semrad SD
References
(2008) Cardiac isoenzymes in healthy Holstein calves and calves
with experimentally induced endotoxemia. Can J Ver Res 72: 356-6 1.
1. Adin DB, Oyama MA, Sleeper MM, Milner RJ (2006) Compari-
 21. Phillips W, Giguere S, Franklin RP, Hernandez J, Adin D, Peloso
son of canine cardiac troponin I concentrations as determined
JG {2003) Cardiac troponin I in pastured and race-training
by 3 analyzers. J Ver Inrerm Med 20: 1136-42.
thoroughbred horses. J Vet Intern Med 17: 597-9.
2. Aktas M, Auguste D, Concordet D, et al. (1994) Creatine kinase
22. Porciello F, Rishniw M, Hemdon WE, Birettoni F, Antognoni
in dog plasma: preanalytical factors of variation, reference
 MT, Simpson KW (2008) Cardiac troponin I is elevated in dogs
values and diagnostic significance. Res Ver Sci 56: 30-6.
- m so ul pue ain ean eanze  si p
3. Aktas M, Auguste D, Lefebvre HP, Toutain PL, Braun JP (1 993)
cardiac systemic disease. Aust Ver J 86: 390-4.
Creatine kinase in the dog: a review. Ver Res Commun 17: 353-69.
23. Saenger AK, Jaffe AS (2008) Requiem for a heavyweight: the
4. Boyd JW (1983) The mechanisms relating to increases in plasma
demise of creatine kinase-MB. Cirrularion 118: 2200-6.
enzymes and isoenzymes in diseases of animals. Ver Clin Pathof
24. Sarko J, Pollack CV, Jr. (2002) Cardiac troponins. J Emerg Med
12: 9-24.
23: 57-65.
5. Burgener IA, Kovacevic A, Mauldin GN, Lombard CW (2006)
25. Sattler T, Furll M (2004) Creatine kinase and aspartate amino-
Cardiac troponins as indicators of acute myocardial damage in
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 20: 277-83.
Physiol Pathol Clin Med 51: 132-7.
6. Cardinet GH (1997) Skeletal muscle function. In: Clinical Bio-
26. Simpson AC, Holmes D, Pennington RJ (1979) Dilution effect
chemisry of Domesric Animals (eds.), Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss
on serum creatine kinase in carriers of Duchenne muscular
ML, 3rd ed., pp. 407-40. Academic Press, San Diego, CA.
dystrophy. Ann Clin Biochem 16: 545.
7. Cardinet GH, Littrell JF, Freedland RA (1967) Comparative
27. Sleeper MM, Clifford CA, Laster LL (200l) Cardiac troponin I
investigations of serum creatine phosphokinase and glutamic-
in the normal dog and cat. J Ver Intern Med 15: 501-3.
-0[oau oaeed anba u saae aseuesenl saneo[exo
28. Spratt DP, Mellanby RJ, Drury N, Archer J (2005) Cardiac tro-
binuria. Res Ver Sri 8: 219-26.
 ponin I: evaluation I of a biomarker for the diagnosis of heart 
8. Farrington C, Chalmers AH (1976) The effect of dilution on
disease in the dog. J Small Anim Pract 46: 139-45.
creatine kinase activity. Clin Chim Arra 73: 217-19.
29. Swenson CL, Graves TK (1997) Absence of liver specifcity for
9. Fascetti AJ, Mauldin GE, Mauldin GN (l997) Correlation
canine alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Ver Clin Pathol 26: 26-8.
between serum creatine kinase activities and anorexia in cats.
a {661) N uawoh ' wou1 T uossur 's 31aq[ 06
J Ver Intern Med 1l: 9-13.
10. Herndon WE, Rishniw M, Schrope D, Sammarco CD, Boddy
kinase and myoglobin changes with exercise in horses with
KN, Sleeper MM (2008) Assessment of plasma cardiac troponin
recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis. Equine Ver J 25: 1l-16.
I concentration as a means to differentiate cardiac and noncar-
31. Wakim KG, Fleisher GA (1963) The fate of enzymes in body
diac causes of dyspnea in cats. J Am Ver Med Assor 233: 1261-4.
fluids—an experimental study. I. Disappearance rates of
11. Holt PG, Knight JO, Kakulas BA (1971) The significance of the
glutamic-oxalacetic transaminase I under various conditions.
"dilution effect" in the determination of serum creatine kinase.
J Lab Clin Med 6l: 86-97.
Clin Chim Ara 33: 455-6.
32. Willis MS, Snyder JA, Poppenga RH, Grenache DG (2007)
12. Keller P (198l) Enzyme activities in the dog: tissue analyses,
plasma values, and intracellular distribution. Am J Ver Res 42:
common human clinical immunoassay. J Ver Diagn Invesr 19:
575-82.
106-8.
479
Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids
M. Judith Radin
 The Ohio State University
Lipids play diverse roles in normal physiology. The most
discussions lipid chemistry and metabolism are available
obvious use is as an energy source that can be stored as
elsewhere..3
triglycerides within adipocytes during times of nutritional
plenty and mobilized when needed. Lipid stores within
brown fat cells can be rapidly oxidized via uncoupling
Dietary absorption of lipids
protein pathways to provide heat (thermogenesis). Fat pads
provide thermal insulation and act as shock absorbers. Lipids
 Lipids may be obtained from the diet orby synthesis. Dietary
function as structural components of cell membranes and
fat entering the small intestine stimulates release of chole-
organelles, as mediators of intracellular signal transduction
cystokinin. Cholecystokinin causes the gall bladder to con-
pathways, as a constituent of surfactant in the lung. and as
tract, releasing bile into the intestinal lumen. Bile salts and
electrical insulators (myelin in the nervous system). Choles-
lecithin in the bile emulsify dietary fat to form micelles that
terol is an important component in cellular membranes of
consist of fatty acids, triglycerides, cholesterol, and the fat-
animals and is the precursor for the synthesis of steroid
soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. Cholecystokinin also stimu-
hormones, vitamin D, and bile acids. Recent studies have
suggested a role for cell membrane cholesterol in innate
with the micelle and break down the lipid into forms that
immunity and in the pathogenesis of some infectious agents
may be absorbed by the intestinal enterocytes. Pancreatic
through regulation of microbial entry, intracellular survival.
lipase and colipase are responsible for hydrolysis of triglyc-
and exit.' volatile fatty acids (propionate, acetate, and butyr-
eride to two fatty acids and a monoglyceride. Dietary cho-
ate) are major products of rumen microbial fermentation of
lesterol esters are hydrolyzed by cholesterol esterase to
carbohydrates and play a significant role in ruminant energy
release cholesterol and a fatty acid. Long chain fatty acids
metabolism. While often thought of as indicators of meta-
(LCFA, fatty acids having more than 12 carbons), monoglyc-
bolic disturbances, ketones are normally present at low
erides, cholesterol, and fat-soluble vitamins diffuse from the
levels in the circulation and are an important energy source
micelle across the brush border into the enterocyte, leaving
during times of negative energy balance.
the bile salts within the intestinal lumen (Fig. 3l.l). Short
A variety of lipids are present in the circulation. Altera-
and medium chain fatty acids having fewer than 12 carbons
tions in their concentrations reflect energy balance and
may be absorbed without the need of micellar emulsification
metabolic disturbances. Lipid abnormalities can contribute
and may be transferred from the enterocyte directly to the
to development of serious clinical syndromes such as insulin
portal blood. LCFA must be re-esterified to triglycerides and
resistance, hepatic lipidosis, and atherosclerosis. Measure-
packaged into lipoproteins called chylomicrons for transport
ment of different types of lipids is predicated on available
in the lacteals and blood.
test methodologies as well as clinical relevance. Circulating
Maldigestion and malabsorption of dietary fats can result
lipids of clinical interest that can be readily assessed include
in steatorrhea and deficiency of essential fatty acids and fat
triglycerides, cholesterol, nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA),
soluble vitamins. If pancreatic exocrine deficiency results in
lipoproteins, and ketone bodies. Prior to discussion of labo-
inadequate release of lipases into the intestine, maldigestion
ratory evaluation and diagnosis of lipid abnormalities, a brief
will result in high concentrations of triglycerides (also called
overview of lipid metabolism is presented. More detailed
 neutral fats) in the feces. If the stool contains increased fatty
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall. Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
480
TG
CE
BA
Intestinal
Cholesterol
Lipase
esterase
lumen
BA
BA
MG
LCFA
FC
LCFA
SCFA MCFA
Enterocyte
TG
CE
Golgi
B48
Nascent CM
B48
TG
Nascent
CE
HDL
CE
E
C
E
HDL
Figure 31.1 Dietary lipids in the intestinal lumen are
solubilized by emulsification with bile acids (BA) to form
CM
 micelles. Pancreatic lipases associate with the micelles 
and hydrolyze triglycerides (TG) to monoglycericdes (MG)
B48
CE
E
and long chain fatty acids (LCFA). Cholesterol esters (CE)
atsalou aa ot aseiasa joasal  pazloy aie
(FC) and a LCFA. Short chain fatty acids (SCFA) and 
TG
 medium chain fatty acids (MCFA) do not require micellar
CE
E
 ernulsification for intestinal absorption. Following
CMRemnant
absorption by the enterocyte, MG, FC and LCFA are 
 pue y-uianoudode yim buoje palquasse pue payuaisa-a
Glycerol
TG
apoprotein-B48 into nascent chylomicrons (CM). In the 
C
CE
 blood, CM exchange apoproteins-A, -C, and -E with 
high density lipoproteins (HDL). TG in the CM are 
LPL
B48
hydrolyzed to LCFA and glycerol by lipoprotein lipase 
(LPL) on the surface of the endothelial cells. This process 
Endothelium
 requires Apoprotein-C. LCFA may be used by adipocytes
to form TG while glycerol is released into the blood for 
 Use by the liver or other extrahepatic tissues.
Extrahepatic
Apo-E
Apo-B/E
Apoprotein-A and apoprotein-C from CM rermnants are
tissues,
LCFA
receptorreceptor
transferred back to HDL. Removal of the cholesterol-
enriched CM rernnant from the blood is mmediated by 
adipose
Hepatocyte
Apo-B/E and Apo-E receptors on hepatocytes.
481
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
TG
Glycerol
LCFA
Acyl-CoA
Acetate   Amino acids
β-oxidation
Glycerol-3-P
 Bile acids
TG 1
LCFA—
Acetyl-CoA
→ Cholesterol
Membranes
Steroid
Glycerol-3-P
hormones
Pyruvate
Glucose
Ketones
Acetoacetate
OAA
Citrate
TCA cycle
Acetate βHB
ATP
CO2
Figure 31.2 Acetyl-coenzyme A (Acetyl-CoA) is central to both catabolisrn and synthesis of long chain fatty acids (LCFA) in the hepatocyte. LCFA
derived from lipolysis are converted to acyl-CoA which undergoes β-oxidation to acetyl-CoA. Other sources of acetyl-CoA include acetate, armino acids,
and glucose. Acetyl-CoA may be used in the synthesis of LFCA or cholesterol. TG are synthesized by esterification of LCFA to glycerol-3-phosphate
(glycerol-3-P) derived from either lipolysis or glucose metabolism. A major route for utilization of Acetyl-CoA is for energy production through the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. This process requires combination of acetyl-CoA with oxaloacetate (OAA) to form citrate. OAA is obtained fror glucose
metabolisrn. If there is excess acetyl-CoA and/or insufficient OAA, acetyl-CoA may be shunted into ketogenesis to form acetoacetate. Acetoacetate is
then converted to acetone and β-hydroxybutyrate (βHB). This last pathway is stirnulated in conditions of negative energy balance characterized by exces5
lipolysis and undersupply of glucose.
acids and glycerol (referred to as split fats). this implies that
site. Other tissues are capable of producing fatty acids but at
sufficient lipase is present to hydrolyze triglyceride and that
much lower rates. Fatty acids are synthesized from acetyl-
 malabsorption of fats is occurring.
coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) (Fig. 3l.2). Glucose is the main
precursor for acetyl-CoA in nonruminants, while acetate
serves this function in ruminants. Amino acids also can be
Lipids present in the blood
used as precursors for formation of acetyl-CoA. Synthesis of
fatty acids is stimulated by insulin and inhibited by glucagon
Fatty acids
and epinephrine via modulation of activity of acetyl-CoA
Unesterified fatty acids are referred to as free fatty acids or
carboxylase, the rate limiting enzyme of fatty acid synthesis.
nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA). Most mammalian fatty
As a result, the rate of fatty acid synthesis is responsive to
acids contain more than l2 carbon atoms and are referred
diet and metabolic state. For example, fatty acid synthesis is
to as long chain fatty acids (LCFA). Fatty acids may be
stimulated by high carbohydrate/low fat diets (high insulin
obtained from the diet or may be synthesized. Because they
and availability of glucose as a precursor). Fatty acid synthe-
are hydrophobic, LCFA must be attached to plasma proteins.
sis is decreased by fasting (low insulin, high glucagon),. high
primarily albumin, for transport in the blood.
fat/low carbohydrate diets (increased availability of pre-
 In nonruminants, biosynthesis of fatty acids occurs at the
formed LCFA), and diabetes mellitus.
  s ss  a  s 
 Fatty acids are an important energy source for peripheral
adipose tissue and mammary glands. In ruminants, adipo-
tissues such as skeletal muscle and are oxidized back to
cytes are the primary site for fatty acid formation, and the
acetyl-CoA as part of this process. Acetyl-CoA produced by
liver plays a less important role in fatty acid synthesis.
mitochondrial β-oxidation of LCFA may be used to generate
During lactation, the mammary gland is a major synthetic
ATP and CO, via the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle (Fig.
482
CHAPTER 31 Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids
B       
 q   i   rn 
CoA and oxaloacetate to citrate. If there is inadequate oxa-
enterocyte. Control of triglyceride synthesis by the entero-
loacetate, such as may occur with a low carbohydrate diet
cytes is largely dependent on dietary availability of fatty
or diabetes mellitus, acetyl-CoA may be directed into keto-
acids. Once formed, triglycerides are not stored to any great
genesis. Acetyl-CoA also may be used for production of
extent in enterocytes but are packaged into chylomicrons
cholesterol.
and released into the lacteals.
Hepatocytes use LCFA obtained from the plasma or from
Triglycerides
de novo synthesis for production of triglycerides. Glycerol
Triglycerides are formed by esterification of three LCFA to
may be taken up from the plasma or may be synthesized
glycerol-3-phosphate (Fig. 31.3). Triglyceride synthesis
from glucose. Synthesis of triglycerides by hepatocytes is
occurs in the intestinal mucosal cells, adipocytes, hepato-
decreased in conditions with high glucagon and low insulin
cytes, mammary epithelial cells, and kidneys. Within the
(fasting. diabetes mellitus) and is stimulated by increased
intestinal mucosal cell, dietary fatty acids and monoglycer-
availability of LCFA. Under normal circumstances, triglycer-
ides are re-esterified to form triglycerides. Triglycerides also
ides are released from the hepatocytes into the circulation
may be produced by adding dietary LCFA to glycerol-3-
as a component of lipoproteins called very low density lipo-
proteins (VLDL).
Adipocytes may synthesize LCFA or may obtain them via
Q
lipolysis of blood triglycerides present in chylomicrons or
VLDL. The enzyme responsible for hydrolysis of chylomi-
CH2
R1
     sa i  
CH
+
located on the surface of capillary endothelial cells. Unlike
hepatocytes, adipocytes lack the enzymes to use glycerol
CH2-
0
C
R3
 derived from lipolysis. Triglyceride synthesis by adipocytes 
depends on de novo production of glycerol-3-phosphate from
Triglyceride
glucose or gluconeogenesis. Insulin is an important regula-
tor of adipocyte triglyceride synthesis through stimulation
of activity of lipoprotein lipase (Table 3l.l). Insulin also
CH3
enhances glucose uptake by increasing membrane expres-
CH3
CH3
sion of the GLUT4 glucose transporter, thus increasing intra-
cellular availability of glucose for glycerol-3-phosphate
synthesis. Once triglycerides are formed, they are stored for
CH3
CH3
future use as fat droplets in adipocytes.
Mobilization of triglycerides stored in adipocytes is medi-
ated by the enzyme, hormone sensitive lipase (HSL). Hydro-
HO
lysis of triglycerides results in the release of LCFA and
glycerol to the blood for transport to tissues. A variety of
Cholesterol
hormones directly and indirectly affect lipolysis through
modulation of the activity of HSL (Table 31.1). Catechol-
CH3
 s  a id e sd s a an n
CH3
CH3
supply fatty acids for energy production. Thyroid hormone
      
CH3
CH3
number of receptors for catecholamines on adipocytes. Glu-
    a r 
tion and synthesis of HSL. Insulin and insulin-like growth
factor inactivates HSL by promoting dephosphorylation of
the enzyme. Insulin also opposes the effect of glucocorticoids
on HSL gene transcription.
Cholesterol Ester
Cholesterol
Figure 31.3 The structure of triglycerides, cholesterol, and cholesterol
ayl pie Ariey uieyn bual e jo uieyo uogen ayn siuasaidan y 'shatsa
Cholesterol may be in the form of free cholesterol or may
hydroxyl group on cholesterol confers sorme water solubility, allowing free
be esterifed with a fatty acid to form a cholesterol ester (Fig.
cholesterol to be part of the outer shell of lipoproteins. Cholesterol esters
31.3). Because it is not synthesized by plants or microbes.
are hydrophobic and contained within the center of lipoprotein particles.
only carnivores or omnivores may obtain cholesterol from
483
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Table 31.1 Effect of hormmones on key regulatory steps in lipid metabolismm.
LPL
HSL
Acetyl CoA
HMG CoA
LDL receptors
Carboxylase
Reductase
 Hydrolysis of triglycerides
Lipolysis of
 Rate lirniting enzyrme
 Rate limiting enzyme
Clearance of LDL
 from chylomicrons and 
triglycerides to 
in the synthesis of 
 in the synthesis of 
from the blood 
VLDL
LCFA and glycerol
fatty acids 
cholesterol 
 Insulin 
↑ enzyme activity:
e aazua 
 ↑ enzyme activity 
↑ activity
↑ synthesis of the
 ↑ synthesis of the enzymne;
↓ cortisol-induced
receptor
↑ translocation of the
gene transcription
enzyme to the 
endothelium
Glucagon
↑ activity
↓ enzyme activity
↓ activity
Cortisol 
 ↑ gene transcription
↓ gene transcription 
↓ synthesis of
and synthesis of
and synthesis of the 
receptor due to
enzyme
enzyne
secondary decrease
in thyroid hormones 
 Thyroid hormones
↑ synthesis of
 ↑ synthesis of the
 ↑ synthesis of the
 adrenergic
 azua
receptor
receptors which
increases the effect 
of catecholamines
Catecholamines
 ↑ enzyme activity
↓ enzyme activity
Growth hormone
↑ enzyme activity
√ synthesis of
receptor due to
secondary decrease
 in thyroid horrmones 
CoA, coenzyrme A; HMG CoA, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A; HSL, hormone sensitive lipase; LDL, low density lipoproteins; LPL, lipoprotein
lipase; VLDL, very low density lipoprotein5.
the diet. Herbivores must synthesize their own cholesterol.
esters to the blood as a constituent of lipoproteins. Choles-
The primary site for cholesterol synthesis is the liver, and
terol is a structural component of cell and organelle mem-
the rate limiting enzyme is 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-
branes and is a precursor for vitamin D synthesis. Cholesterol
q sauu xis u pias n und rn sn s os
HMG-CoA reductase activity and consequently cholesterol
tissues such as the adrenal gland and gonads. Alternatively.
synthesis (Table 3l.l).1
HMG-CoA reductase activity is
cholesterol may be used by hepatocytes to synthesize bile
increased by insulin and decreased by glucagon. Thus, cho-
acids. Bile is a major route for elimination of cholesterol
lesterol synthesis increases following a meal (high insulin)
from the body.
and decreases with fasting (high glucagon, low insulin) or
with diabetes mellitus. Thyroid hormone increases HMG-
Lipid transport in the blood
CoA reductase activity by increa sing synthesis of the enzyme.
Because lipids are largely immiscible in water, transport in
Glucocorticoids have the opposite effect, decreasing synthe-
the blood must be accomplished by binding to carrier pro-
sis of HMG-CoA reductase and consequently cholesterol
teins. LCFA bind to albumin, while triglycerides, cholesterol.
synthesis. Statins, a class of cholesterol lowering drugs. have
 cholesterol esters, and phospholipids are transported by lipo-
their effect on serum cholesterol by inhibiting HMG-CoA
proteins. Lipoproteins consist of a shell of apoproteins, cho-
reductase.
lesterol, and phospholipids oriented so that amphoteric
Once formed, cholesterol may be utilized through several
portions of the molecules are on the outside, facing the
routes. The liver can export cholesterol and cholesterol
aqueous environment of the blood. The hydrophobic ends
484
CHAPTER 31 Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids
are oriented toward the center of the particle. Triglycerides
ated by binding of Apo-B and Apo-E to hepatocyte recep-
and cholesterol esters constitute the hydrophobic core of
tors. Alternatively, additional hydrolysis of triglyceride by
lipoprotein particles. Lipoproteins are traditionally named
hepatic lipase converts IDL to low density lipoproteins
based on their density as determined by ultracentrifugation
(LDL). As the lipoprotein loses triglyceride, Apo-C and
and are further characterized by lipid and apoprotein con-
Apo-E are transferred back to HDL while Apo-Bl0o is
stituents. Apoproteins may be integrated into the shell of
retained. The primary function of LDL is transport of cho-
the lipoprotein or be more loosely associated with the
lesterol to the liver and other tissues. Removal of LDL from
surface of the lipoprotein. Integrated apoproteins include
circulation is receptor mediated and depends on the pres-
apoprotein-B48 (Apo-B48) of intestinal origin and
ence of Apo-B. LDL receptor expression is stimulated by
apoprotein-B100 (Apo-Bl00} of hepatic origin. Peripheral
insulin and thyroxine. Most cells have receptors for LDL and
can acquire cholesterol by binding LDL; however the liver
(Apo-C), and apoprotein-E (Apo-E) are exchanged between
plays the major role in LDL clearance.
lipoproteins in circulation (Figs. 31.1 and 31.4),
 Cholesterol transport is mediated by high density lipopro-
Enterocytes package fat from the diet into lipoproteins
teins (HDL). Nascent HDL are synthesized by hepatocytes
called chylomicrons which are released into the lacteals with
and contain phospholipids, a small amount of cholesterol.
eventual delivery into the blood. Chylomicrons contain
Apo-C, and Apo-E. As previously described, HDL provide a
mostly triglycerides with lesser amounts of cholesterol, cho-
       
lesterol ester, fat soluble vitamins, Apo-B48, and Apo-A. In
and VLDL. As HDL mature, Apo-A is acquired by exchange
the circulation, Apo-C and Apo-E are transferred from high
with chylomicrons. The small intestine also produces HDL
density lipoproteins (HDL) to the chylomicron. Chylomi-
that initially contain Apo-A, but lacks Apo-C and Apo-E.
crons are the largest and least dense of the lipoproteins.
Intestinal HDL must pick up Apo-C and Apo-E from hepatic-
When present in large quantity. they confer a visible hazi-
origin HDL in the blood. Importantly, HDL incorporate
ness to the serum, contributing to the appearance of lipemia.
excess cholesterol from extrahepatic tissues in a process
Apo-C is a co-factor for lipoprotein lipase which is found on
called "reverse cholesterol transport." Cholesterol is then
the surface of endothelial cells within tissue beds such as
esterified to cholesterol esters by lecithin cholesterol acyl
adipose and muscle. Lipoprotein lipase is synthesized by
transferase (LCAT) in the HDL, an enzyme which requires
extravascular tissues and transferred to the surface of endo-
Apo-A for activation.
thelial cells where it is anchored by heparan sulfate. Injec-
There is species variation in the relative amounts of HDL
tion of heparin can cause release of lipoprotein lipase into
and LDL (Table 31.2).4s In species that typically have high
the circulation and this technique has been used to clear
HDL and low LDL in the blood, such as dogs and cats, HDL
serum of lipemia. Lipoprotein lipase hydrolyzes triglycerides
are the primary transporters of cholesterol and cholesterol
to LCFA and glycerol for use by extrahepatic tissues. In
esters to the liver. In low HDL/high LDL species such as
adipose and muscle, insulin increases lipoprotein lipase
humans, cholesterol esters may be transferred by cholesteryl
activity, facilitating hydrolysis of chylomicron triglycerides
ester transfer protein (CETP) to VLDL remnants and LDL for
and absorption of LCFA. The remaining lipoprotein, now
subsequent delivery to the liver. High LDL species are at risk
depleted of triglycerides, is called a "chylomicron remnant"
for the development of atherosclerosis beca use macrophages
and is subsequently removed from the circulation by hepa-
are capable of scavenger receptor-mediated removal of LDL
tocytes. Uptake of chylomicron remnants is mediated by
from the circulation. Accumulation of LDL cholesterol in
binding of Apo-B48 and Apo-E on the chylomicron remnant
macrophages results in subendothelial lipid deposits or ath-
to either Apo-E or Apo-B/E receptors on the hepatocyte.
erosclerotic plaques. High cholesterol diets can favor
Triglycerides synthesized by hepatocytes are packaged into
increased concentrations of LDL and exacerbate develop-
very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) for transport in the
ment of atherosclerosis.
blood (Fig. 31.4). VLDL contain a large quantity of triglyc-
eride along with lesser amounts of cholesterol, cholesterol
Ketones
esters, and Apo-Bloo. Apo-C and Apo-E are obtained from
Ketogenesis is another option available for metabolism of 
HDL in the circulation. If present in high quantities, VLDL
fatty acids by the liver. As described above, LCFA may be
also can contribute to a lipemic appearance of the blood.
repackaged into triglycerides and released as VLDL. Alterna-
Like chylomicrons, binding of VLDL to lipoprotein lipase in
 o n id o   
the tissues is facilitated by Apo-C, and triglycerides are
subsequently be used for energy production via the TCA
hydrolyzed to LCFA and glycerol for utilization by extrahe-
cycle, for cholesterol synthesis, or for ketogenesis (Fig. 3l.2).
patic tissues.
Under conditions of adequate nutrition, low levels of ketone
After the VLDL is depleted of triglycerides, the remaining
-a  au al a q d a  so
lipoprotein is termed an intermediate density lipoprotein
thelium also appears to be capable of synthesizing β-
(IDL). IDL may be taken up by hepatocytes, a process medi-
hydroxybutyrate which may account for the higher
485
Hepatocyte
LCFA +Glycerol
Apo-B/E
Apo-E
TG
receptor
receptor
HL
VLDL
B100
TG
E
CE
HDL
LDL
B100
E
CE
CE
E
TG
C
 Figure 31.4 Triglycerides (TG) synthesized in
hepatocytes are packaged along with 
VLDL
cholesterol, cholesterol esters (CE), and 
IDL
 apoprotein-B100 into very low density
B100
lipoproteins (VLDL) for transport in the blood.
B100
VLDL pick up apoprotein-C and apoprotein-E
from high density lipoproteins (HDL). TG are
TG
CE
hydrolyzed to long chain fatty acids (LCFA)
TG
 and glycerol by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) on the 
CE
 surface of endothelial cells. LCFA may be
used by adlipocytes to form TG while glycerol 
 is released into the blood for use by the liver
Glycerol
 or other extrahepatic tissues. Depletion of TG 
C
 results in forrmation of an intermedliate 
density lipoprotein (IDL). Apoprotein-C and 
LPL
apoprotein-E recirculate back to HDL. IDL may 
be removed from the circulation by
LDL
hepatocytes, a process mediated by Apo-B/E
Endothelium
and Apo-E receptors. Alternatively, IDL may
receptors
 be further depleted of TG by hepatic lipase
(HL) and converted to low density lipoprotein5
Extrahepatic
(LDL). Uptake of LDL by peripheral tissues is 
tissues,
LCFA
Peripheral tissues,
medliated by binding of LDL to LDL receptor5.
 Macrophages are also capable of removing 
adipose
macrophages
LDL from circulation through scavenger
receptors.
486
CHAPTER 31 Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids
of oxaloacetate. Excess circulating fatty acids are cleared by
Table 31.2 Examples of HDL marmmals and LDL mammals.4.5 HDL
  q  o a a e a a
mammals are defined as those having HDL as >50% of total
ketone production. The degree of postexercise ketosis
lipoproteins while LDL mmarnmals have >50% LDL. Age, 5train, breed.
 and diet may affect the relative distribution of lipoprotein5.
appears related to intensity and duration of exercise, condi-
tioning of the athlete, and diet.
HDL Mammals
LDL Mammals
Dog5
Guinea pigs
Measurement of lipids
Cat5
Hamsters
Ferrets
Pig5
Because of the technical challenges associated with mea-
Horses
Camels 
surement of lipids, relatively few types of lipids are mea-
Cattle
Rabbits (some strains)
sured in routine biochemistry panels. Triglycerides and
Sheep
Spider monkey
Humans 
  s n a s
Mice
  n     
Rats
 Chimpanzee
and are commonly part of biochemical profiles. Measure-
Most Old World mnonkeys
ment of free fatty acids or NEFA has been used to assess
metabolism in ruminants and camelidae. However, these
HDL, high density lipoprotein: LDL, low density lipoprotein
assays are not as commonly available on routine biochemi-
cal profiles.
 ro su ane uo pansa aq a s
the cage side by dry reagent methods such as dipsticks,
tablets, or nitroprusside powder. Measurement of ketones in
concentrations of ketone bodies in fed ruminants compared
the urine using dipsticks based on the nitroprusside test is
to fed monogastric species. The main ketone bodies are
frequently used as a less invasive, semiquantitative means 
acetone, acetoacetate, and β-hydroxybutyrate. Acetyl-CoA
is metabolized to acetoacetate, which subsequently is con-
in small animals or in ketosis in cattle. The disadvantage of
verted to acetone and β-hydroxybutyrate. These small
this method is that these dipsticks are more sensitive to
lipids are water soluble and may be transported by the
acetoacetate than acetone or β-hydroxybutyrate and may
blood to other tissues for use as an energy source. Because
underestimate ketones in some stages of diabetic ketoacido-
they are not bound to albumin, ketone bodies easily enter
sis. The presence of some drugs or compounds in the urine
cells and cross the blood brain barrier. Tissues such as the
heart and brain readily utilize ketone bodies as an energy
instrument has been evaluated for measurement of whole
source
blood β-hydroxybutyrate in dogs and cats. In cattle, test
 Ketogenesis increases in conditions of negative energy
strips are available for measurement of β-hydroxybutyrate
balance and is a normal response to fasting. As plasma
in milk which may prove more practical to obtain than
glucose falls, the concentrations of insulin decreases and
urine.
glucagon increases. This stimulates lipolysis by hormone
Measurement of lipoproteins in veterinary species requires
  n    a
more sophisticated methods such as density gradient cen-
stored in adipocytes. Fatty acids delivered to the liver are
converted to acetyl-CoA. At the same time, enhanced glu-
care" methods designed to quantitate HDL-cholesterol using
coneogenesis consumes the available oxaloacetate without
precipitation and calculation techniques in humans have not 
which acetyl-CoA cannot enter into the TCA cycle. As a
 been validated in veterinary species. As a result, lipoprotein
result, acetyl-CoA is directed to ketogenesis.
      
Transient ketosis may develop following intense exercise
and require shipment of samples to specialized reference 
and has been seen dogs and horses. During exercise, lipolysis
laboratories
by hormone sensitive lipase is stimulated by catecholamines.
The term "hyperlipidemia" refers to increased circulating
cortisol and thyroxine, and the released fatty acids are con-
lipids. This may be due to hypertriglyceridemia and/or
sumed by muscle for energy production. Ketones formed
hypercholesterolemia. Lipemia or hyperlipemia refers to a
during exercise are rapidly used, and circulating levels
visible haziness to overt latescence of the serum or plasma.
remain low to undetectable. In the postexercise period.
Lipemia is caused by increased triglycerides in chylomicrons
muscle metabolism switches from oxidation of fatty acids to
and/or VLDL. Hypercholesterolemia without concurrent
hypertriglyceridemia will not cause a sample to appear
replenish glycogen stores. Metabolism of acetyl-CoA through
lipemic. The refrigeration test is a simple means to distin-
the TCA cycle declines as a result of decreased availability
guish between chylomicrons and VLDL as the cause of
487
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Figure 31.5 Lipemia is characterized by haziness to overt lactescence of a serum sarnple due to increased triglycerides in the form of chylornicrons and/
or very low density lipoproteins (VLDL). Formation of a crearm-like layer on the top of a sarmple indicates the presence of chylormicrons (left). Failure of a
sample to separate indicates the presence of VLDL (middle). Normal sarmples are clear (right).
lipemia (Fig. 31.5). To perform this test, a sample is left
 ruminants do not show significant postprandial effects and
upright in a refrigerator overnight. Chylomicrons will float
 so need not be fasted prior to sampling.
to the top of the sample and form a milky or cream-like layer
 Persistence of hyperlipidemia after a l2-hour fast in dogs
at the top of the sample. If the underlying serum clears, then
and cats suggests an alternative pathogenesis for the hyper-
chylomicrons are the cause of the lipemia. On the other
lipidemia. In monogastric animals, consumption of a high
hand, if VLDL are the cause of the lipemia, VLDL will not
fat diet may contribute to higher fasting and postprandial
separate out into a cream layer, and the sample will remain
serum lipids compared to normal or low fat diets. The time
hazy to turbid. If the lipemia is due to increases in both
it takes for serum lipids to decrease to fasting levels may be
chylomicrons and VLDL, a cream layer will form over a
prolonged following a high fat meal. As seen in Table 31.1,
sample that remains turbid.
many key regulatory steps in lipid metabolism are influ-
triglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, hyperketonemia.
hyperlipidemia is commonly due to secondary causes such
and hypocholesterolemia. Hypotriglyceridemia is of uncer-
as hormonal or metabolic disturbances. Primary or idio-
tain clinical relevance and may be most indicative of nutri-
P        
tional state.
ba sis.
 Secondary pathologic hyperlipidemias
Hyperlipidemias
     
variety of diseases (Fig. 3l.6). While described separately
Postprandial hyperlipidemia
below, it is important to realize that there may be overlap-
Postprandial hyperlipidemia is due to a transient increase in
ping effects promoting abnormalities in lipid metabolism in
triglycerides in the form of chylomicrons. Hyperlipidemia
any given patient. For example, pancreatitis may be compli-
becomes apparent within 1-2 hours of consuming a meal
cated by diabetes mellitus due to damage to pancreatic
that contains fat and usually peaks by 6-8 hours. Because
parenchyma. Diabetes mellitus commonly occurs in con-
 postprandial hyperlipidemia is primarily due to increases in
junction with hyperadrenocorticism in cats as a result of
triglycerides, blood samples may appear hazy to grossly
corticosteroid-related insulin resistance. Many of these con-
lipemic. For dogs and cats, fasting for 12 hours should allow
ditions also have an inflammatory component resulting in
sufficient time for clearance of the hyperlipidemia. Because
increased local and systemic release of pro-inflammatory
of continuous rumenal digestion and diet composition,
cytokines capable of modulating lipid metabolism.
488
CHAPTER 31 Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids
Hyperlipidemia
12 hour fast
Hypercholesterolemia and/or
Normal triglycerides
hypertriglyceridemia still present 
and cholesterol
小
Postprandial
 Rule out secondary causes
 Endocrine
Liver:
Inflammation:
Renal:
Obesity
Hypothyroidism
 Cholestatic disease
Pancreatitis
 Nephrotic syndrome
High fat diet
Diabetes mellitus
Hepatic lipidosis
 Sepsis/Endotoxemia
Hyperadrenocorticism
Acromegaly
No secondary causes identified.
 No response to weight loss 
or diet change
Primary hyperlipidemia
Figure 31.6 Approach to the hyperlipidemic patient.
Hypothyroidism
In humans with hypothyroidism, decreased LDL receptor
Hypothyroidism in dogs is a common endocrinopathy and
synthesis and activity contributes to the hypercholesterol-
is frequently accompanied by hypercholesterolemia due to
emia by impairing LDL clearance.'5 Biliary excretion of cho-
lesterol also is decreased. Decreased lipoprotein lipase
common and is due to increased VLDL and sometimes chy-
activity delays clearance of triglycerides from both VLDL and
lomicrons. In contrast to dogs. spontaneously occurring
chylomicrons, while decreased hepatic lipase activity slows
hypothyroidism is rare in cats but may develop as a sequella
clearance of cholesterol-enriched chylomicron remnants.
to treatment for hyperthyroidism. Congenital hypothyroid-
Similar mechanisms have not been thoroughly examined in
ism has been described in kittens." Hypercholesterolemia
domestic species.
may be a feature of both spontaneous and iatrogenic feline
 hypothyroidism.liz In adult horses, the actual incidence of 
Hyperadrenocorticism
naturally occurring hypothyroidism is uncertain. Cases ini-
tially diagnosed as hypothyroidism may actually be attribut-
terol may be observed in dogs with Cushing's disease.10.16-19
able to equine metabolic syndrome or hyperadrenocorticism
Hypercholesterolemia  also is reported
din cats with
secondary to a tumor or dysfunction of the pituitary pars
intermedia.' Experimental ablation of the thyroid glands of 
induced insulin resistance, hyperadrenocorticism, especially
adult horses will result in hypercholesterolemia and hyper-
in cats, is often complicated by concurrent diabetes mellitus 
triglyceridemia characterized by increased LDL and VLDL
which exerts additional effects on lipid metabolism.22 Horses
respectively.14
with a tumor of the pars intermedia may develop pituitary.
489
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Stimulation of lipolysis in
complex and instigating causes are varied. Conditions associ-
these horses results in elevated circulating NEFA as well as
ated with insulin resistance include obesity, hyperadreno-
increased ketogenesis.? Reports vary on the incidence of
corticism, and hypersomatotropism. As a result, the effects
hypertriglyceridemia in horses with pars intermedia tumors
of impaired response to insulin are superimposed on the
and hyperadrenocorticism.23-25
A combination of direct effects of glucocorticoids and indi-
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is the most common form of diabe-
rect effects due to steroid-induced insulin resistance contrib-
tes mellitus in cats and horses.
a sid u na pid un suon a o ai
 Obesity is a frequently encountered problem in dogs., cats,
hyperadrenocorticism. Hypercholesterolermia results from
and horses. Lipid profiles of obese individuals can exhibit a
impaired clearance of LDL along with decreased catabolism
spectrum from normal to marked increases in triglycerides
of cholesterol secondary to steroid-induced hepa topathy and
along with variable increases in cholesterol. Plasma NEFA
cholestasis. Decreased clearance of VLDL secondary to
often are increased. The variation observed in lipid
decreased activity of lipoprotein lipase is a factor in the
profiles in obesity likely relates to the site of excess fat depo-
development of hypertriglyceridemia. At the same time.
sition, duration of obesity. and dysfunction of metabolic
synthesis of VLDL by hepatocytes is increased.
regulatory hormones such as insulin, cortisol, leptin, and
adiponectin. Obesity is now recognized as a pro-inflammatory
state, and fat pads are a source of inflammatory cytokines
Diabetes mellitus
such as interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-c. These
inflammatory mediators can have a significant impact on
Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus due to insulin deficiency
adipocyte and hepatic lipid metabolism (see section below
(type l or insulin dependent diabetes mellitus) is associated
on inflammation) and can promote insulin resistance. Intra-
with hypertriglyceridemia, increased serum LCFA, and
abdominal obesity appears to have more severe metabolic
hypercholesterolemia in dogs.726.27 Type 1 diabetes mellitus
consequences compared to peripheral adiposity and predis-
-a q u aq  iq ao an ui a 5
poses to the development of insulin resistance and metabolic
glyceridemia.2 Insulin is required for synthesis and activity
syndrome.
of lipoprotein lipase, so insulin deficiency results in failure
 In addition to increases in absolute concentrations of
to clear triglycerides from chylomicrons and VLDL. In addi-
triglycerides and cholesterol, the composition of lipopro-
tion, circulating LCFA are increased due to a combination of
teins may change. Obese dogs show a pattern of increased
triglycerides and cholesterol in both VLDL and HDL.223D
adipocytes. A lack of insulin results in increased activity of
In cats, triglyceride and cholesterol content of VLDL are
hormone sensitive lipase in adipocytes and subsequent
increased while HDL cholesterol is increased.3132 Horses
hydrolysis of stored triglycerides and release of LCFA into
exhibit increases in VLDL-triglyceride and HDL-cholesterol
the circulation. Because adipocytes require glucose for syn-
content." Decreases in lipoprotein lipase activity has been
thesis of glycerol-l-phosphate, impaired insulin-mediated
documented in obese cats, suggesting that uptalke of triglyc-
glucose uptake by adipocytes results in decreased availability
eridesbyadipocytesand peripheral tissue beds isimpaired.31,34
of glycerol-l-phosphate for esterification of LCFA to form
LDL fractions appear unaffected and may account for the
triglycerides. LCFA are released into the blood and are sub-
relative resistance of these species to development of ath-
erosclerosis even with obesity-related hyperlipidemia.
ides, and released as VLDL. If the concentration of LCFA
Hypercholesterolemia has been observed in cats with
exceeds the ability of hepatocytes to produce and release
acromegaly.?5 Acromegaly is the result of increased produc-
VLDL or to consume acetyl-CoA through the TCA cycle.
tion of growth hormone. While not specifically explored in
  s aq  a  a o
cats, there are several mechanisms that may explain the
thesis of ketone bodies, contributing to the development of
hypercholesterolemia  secondary  to  hypersomatotropism.
ketoacidosis.
These cats have metabolic complications from significant
Insulin stimulates production of the LDL receptors so
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. In addition,
hypercholesterolemia appears to be primarily the result of a
growth hormone decreases release of thyroid stimulating
decrease in receptor-mediated uptake of LDL. Increased
hormone resulting in secondary hypot hyroidism.
intestinal synthesis of cholesterol also appears to play a role
in the genesis of the hypercholesterolermia in the dog.
Hepatic lipidosis
Hepatic lipidosis or fatty liver occurs when triglycerides
Obesity. insulin resistance, and metabolic
 a   s  n 
syndrome
  r '    
disturbances, hypoxia, or toxins. It results from an imbal-
betes mellitus. The pathogenesis of insulin resistance is
ance between hepatic uptake of fatty acids, synthesis of
490
CHAPTER 31 Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids
triglycerides, formation of VLDL, and release of VLDL.
ment of hepatic lipidosis as a consequence of increased
Hepatic lipidosis may develop in association with conditions
lipolysis.4 Hypertriglyceridemia occurs as a result of
such as bovine ketosis, ovine pregnancy toxemia, fasting in
increased VLDL production as well as impaired peripheral
obese cats and horses, and a variety of syndromes in cam-
utilization. Although export of VLDL from the liver is
elids. In these syndromes, hormone sensitive lipase activity
increased, this appears insufficient to prevent accumulation
and subsequent adipocyte lipolysis is accelerated, increasing
of triglycerides in hepatocytes. Hypercholesterolemia is a less
the supply of LCFA. The supply of LCFA outpaces the ability
consistent finding.
of the liver to oxidize LCFA through the TCA cycle so LFCA
Hepatic lipidosis occurs in camelids secondary to condi-
are re-esterified to triglycerides. Triglycerides accumulate as
the ability to either produce VLDL or transport VLDL out of
accompanied by increased NEFA and, in some cases, keto-
the hepatocyte is exceeded. Excess fatty acids also may be
nemia and ketonuria. Like other species, hepatic lipidosis 
shunted to ketone body production, and lipidosis is often
may occur as a sequella to negative energy balance associ-
accompanied by some degree of ketosis. Grossly, the liver
ated with pregnancy or lactation, in which case the dams
appears pale to yellow in color. Microscopically, variably-
will be hypoglycemic and ketonemic. In cases not associated
sized clear fat vacuoles are seen within the cytoplasm of the
with pregnancy and lactation, hyperglycemia may be
hepatocytes (Fig. 31.7).
observed due to the blunted insulin response and excessive
Anorexia in horses, especially if they are obese to begin
gluconeogenesis typical of camelids. Hypertriglyceridemia
with, can prompt the development of hyperlipidemia and
may develop with severe, terminal lipidosis.
hepatic lipidosis. Ponies, miniature horses, donkeys, and
mares are at increased risk, and the risk may be compounded
Pancreatitis
by pregnancy or lactation.36,37 The syndrome in equids is
Dogs with naturally occurring pancreatitis may have hyper-
characterized by increased circulating NEFA, triglycerides,
triglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia, and the serum
and, to a lesser degree, cholesterol.38,3 However, ketonemia
may exhibit overt lipemia 7.45.46 Hypercholesterolemia also is
and ketonuria are not findings. Elevations in triglyceride
concentrations may be marked and are primarily due to
protein patterns include increases in VLDL, chylomicrons.
increased hepatic production of VLDL.?7 Triglyceride levels
and LDL with decreases in some subtypes of HDL. The
in anorexic horses have been shown to be inversely related
hypertriglyceridemia arises from both a decrease in clear-
to survival.40.41
ance of chylomicrons and VLDL due to decreased lipoprotein
Obese cats that become anorexic due to illness or are
lipase activity as well as an increase in VLDL production.
subjected to a rapid weight reduction are at risk for develop-
Hypercholesterolemia results from decreased biliary excre-
tion due to pancreatitis-associated cholestasis as well as
increased hepatic synthesis. Release of inflammatory cyto-
kines likely contributes to the alterations in hepatic lipid
 metabolisrm. Pathogenesis of the hyperlipidemia may be
further complicated by the comorbidity of diabetes mellitus
as pancreatic parenchyma is damaged.
   rn   n
clinical impression that consumption of high fat meals can
precede the onset of acute pancreatitis. The theory is that
hydrolysis of chylomicron triglycerides by pancreatic lipase 
within the pancreatic microcirculation results in local release
LCFA. LCFA have the potential to damage both the endo-
thelial cells of the pancreatic microvasculature as well as 
the pancreatic ascinar cells. This provides a mechanism
for perpetuating a cycle of ongoing release of pancreatic
lipase and generation of damaging LCFA as well as release
parenchyma.
Figure 31.7 Fine needll aspirate of the liver of a cat with hepatic
lipidosis. The cytoplasm of the hepatocytes contains variably-sized, clear
Endotoxemia and inflammation
lipid vacuoles. Lipid ladlen hepatocytes are often fragile and will break
Alterations in serum lipids and lipoproteins may be seen as
leaving lipid droplets evident in the background. Wright Geimsa stain,
a response to endotoxin and endotoxin-induced release of
400x.
inflammatory cytokines. Inflammatory cytokines have been
491
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
implicated in mediating the changes in lipid metabolism in
decreased clearance of LDL. Catabolism of cholesterol and
a number of pro-inflammatory conditions such as obesity
subsequent excretion of cholesterol through the bile also
and pancreatitis. Response to endotoxin is characterized by
may be impaired due to decreased activity of enzymes
increased circulating LCFA, triglycerides, and VLDL. Stimu-
involved in bile acid synthesis.
lation of lipolysis by adipocytes and hepatic fatty acid syn-
Hypertriglyceridemia results from both increased hepatic
thesis in concert with decreased fatty acid oxidation results
 synthesis of VLDL and decreased peripheral clearance of
in increased triglyceride and VLDL synthesis.*s Clearance of
VLDL and chylomicrons. Impaired clearance of triglycerides
triglycerides is impaired due to decreased lipoprotein lipase
appears to be the result of decreased activity of lipoprotein
activity. Decreased lipoprotein Apo-E content blunts recep-
lipase and hepatic lipase. The amount and activity of lipo-
tor mediated removal of lipoproteins from the blood.
protein lipase is affected by renal loss of heparan sulfate.
Cholesterol levels are more variable and likely depend on
species, clinical severity, and time course in the disease. Mild
Primary hyperlipidemia
hypercholesterolemia may develop secondary to endotoxin-
Once other causes of hyperlipidemia have been excluded, a
induced decreases in biliary excretion of cholesterol as well
diagnosis of primary hyperlipidemia should be considered.
as decreased uptake of LDL secondary to down regulation
These conditions are rare and usually believed to have a
of LDL receptors.* As part of a negative acute phase reaction
genetic basis, although pathogenesis often remains elusive.
mediated by inflammatory cytokines, patients may develop
In dogs. idiopathic hyperlipidemia is most commonly
mild to moderate hypocholesterolemia due to a decrease in
observed in miniature schnauzers and is characterized by
hepatic cholesterol synthesis. HDL may both decrease in
moderate to marked hypertriglyceridemia and moderate
 concentration and alter in composition.50
hypercholesterolemia.5s59 Defects in lipoprotein lipase or
Cholestasis
Apo-C have been proposed as mechanisms for the increases
in VLDL and chylomicrons seen in these dogs. This syn-
Cholestasis arising from a variety of mechanisms may result
drome may be an incidental finding or may be associated
in mild to moderate increases in cholesterol with occasional
 with clinical signs such as seizures or abdominal pain. Idio-
mild increases in triglycerides. This is likely due to a combi-
pathic hyperlipidemia has been reported in other dog breeds
nation of decreased hepatic cholesterol uptake and impaired
cholesterol excretion in the bile. Alterations in lipoprotein
lesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia has been described in
composition and distribution have been documented in
Shetland sheepdogs$ and beagles.6 Idiopathic hypercholes-
dogs. cats, and horses with natural and experimentally
terolemia with normal triglycerides has been observed in
induced cholestasis.51-54
Briards,62 while idiopathic hypertriglyceridemia without
 Protein losing nephropathies and nephrotic
elevations in cholesterol have been documented in Brittany
spaniels.63
syndrome
Nephrotic syndrome may develop as a result of glomerular
 in the lipoprotein lipase gene has been documented in cats.64
damage and proteinuria arising from a variety of etiologies.
It is suggested that the lipoprotein lipase enzyme cannot
The hallmarks of nephrotic syndrome include proteinuria.
bind to the capillary endothelium. These cats have increases
ascites, edema, hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia.
in serum chylomicrons, triglycerides, and cholesterol. This
and hypertriglyceridemia. Nephrotic syndrome accompa-
condition is associated with overall decrease in body fat
nied by hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia has
mass. development of xanthomata and ocular lipid
been observed in dogs, cats, and horses.5 while nephrotic
accumulation.65.66
syndrome with proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia has been
described in cattle, effects on serum cholesterol and triglyc
erides were not reported.56
A number of mechanisms have been suggested to explain
Ketosis and ketoacidosis
the altered lipid metabolism secondary to proteinuria and
hypoalbuminemia.5? Experimental studies in human and
Clinically significant ketosis occurs in conditions where
animal models suggest that proteinuria and hypoalbumin-
energy supply and demand are out of balance. This may be
emia are associated with increased activity of hepatic cho-
seen in dairy cows in early lactation when high milk produc-
lesterol synthetic enzymes, resulting in increased production
tion results in a negative energy balance. Clinical bovine
of cholesterol  and  cholesterol containing  lipoproteins.
ketosis is characterized by increased plasma NEFA, hypogly-
    s  s  ss
cemia, hypoinsulinemia, high glucagon, low insulin, and
ration of HDL and impair the mechanism of reverse choles-
metabolic acidosis.67 Increased lipolysis supplies LCFA to
terol transport. Decreased LDL receptor expression as well
hepatocytes at a rate that exceeds the ability to produce and
as altered binding of LDL to LDL receptors contributes to
export triglycerides or to oxidize them through the TCA
492
CHAPTER 31 Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids
cycle. As a result, fatty acids are shunted to ketone produc-
Protein losing enteropathy. malabsorption,
tion. Hepatic lipidosis usually precedes clinical ketosis due
and maldigestion
to sluggish export of VLDL. While clinical bovine ketosis is
Conditions resulting in malabsorption and/or maldigestion
not a fatal disease, it does result in significant loss of milk
may be associated with hypocholesterolemia and hypotri
production and may predispose to other conditions such as
glyceridemia, although these findings are inconsistent.
displaced abomasum, metritis, and mastitis. Ovine preg-
Decreased serum cholesterol and triglycerides may occur
nancy toxemia also is a consequence of negative energy
with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. In these patients.
balance. In this case, the energy drain is usually the result
serum albumin is usually maintained within the reference
interval. In contrast, patients that develop protein losing
is a severe, often fatal disease that may be precipitated by
stress. Ewes typically are depressed with hypoglycemia.
hypoalbuminemia due to loss of both albumin and lipopro-
severe metabolic acidosis, and ketosis. In sheep with preg-
teins. Protein losing enteropathy may result from a variety
nancy toxemia, an inability to either produce VLDL or trans-
of gastrointestinal pathologies including infectious, inflam-
port triglycerides out of the hepatocytes occurs and hepatic
matory, or infltrative intestinal diseases as well as primary
lipidosis ensues.
or secondary intestinal lymphangiectasia." Five to 30% of
Poorly controlled diabetics may develop ketosis and
cats with idiopathic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are
ketoacidosis. Diabetic ketoacidosis is characterized by hyper-
reported to have hypocholesterolemia.6 However this
glycemia, hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, in-
finding is not consistent, and those same studies indicate
 creased NEFA, and metabolic acidosis.2 Enhanced lipolysis 
that 3-5% of cats with IBD may have hypercholesterolemia.
d o  n    s si 
Some breeds of dogs are predisposed to protein losing enter-
insulin responsiveness. Increased glucagon, cortisol, and
opathy, including the soft-coated Wheaton terrier, Yorkshire
norepinephrine also have been implicated in the pathogen-
terrier, Basenji, and Norwegian Lundehund." In soft-coated
esis of diabetic ketoacidosis in dogs.? Triglycerides accumu-
Wheaton terriers, concurrent protein losing nephropathy
late, resulting in hepatic lipidosis, while excess acetyl-CoA
and nephrotic syndrome can have counterbalancing effects
is converted to ketone bodies. Ketone production exceeds
 on serum cholesterol and triglycerides.70
the ability to utilize them as an energy substrate and ketone
bodies accumulate. Because ketones are strong acids, meta-
Hepatic insufficiency
bolic acidosis develops as the concentrations of ketone
Noncholestatic liver failure may be associated with hypo-
bodies rise.
cholesterolemia due to decreased cholesterol production.
Hypocholesterolemia has been associated with cirrhosis.
toxin-induced parenchymal damage, and portosystemic vas-
Hypolipidemias
cular anomalies. Hypotriglyceridemia also may be present.
Hepatic insufficiency can be difficult to distinguish from
 Table 31.3 lists diseases in which hypolipidemia may occur.
intestinal diseases resulting in protein losing enteropathy as
Mild decreases in cholesterol and triglycerides alone may be
both may have concurrent hypocholesterolemia, hypoalbu-
of limited clinical significance and may just reflect a fasting
minemia, low BUN, and gastrointestinal signs.
state. Hypocholesterolemia can be a characteristic of ill-
nesses that result in decreased production, malabsorption,
Hypoadrenocorticism
maldigestion, or increased catabolism of cholesterol. Hypo-
Hypocholesterolemia is sometimes seen in dogs with hypo-
triglyceridemia often is a reflection of inadequate nutrition
adrenocorticism."l The incidence of hypocholesterolemia
such as starvation or malnutrition secondary to malabsorp-
may be more common in atypical Addisonians in which
tion and/or maldigestion.
there is a deficiency of glucocorticoid but not mineralocor-
ticoid production.7 Hypoalbuminemia and hypoglycemia
  a  e isd aq  o
Table 31.3 Causes of hypolipidermia.
Addisons from other conditions such as liver or intestinal
disease difficult.
Protein losing enteropathy
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Hematopoietic neoplasia
Infl arnmatory bowel dlisease
Decreased serum cholesterol is observed in some forms of
 Hepatic insufficiency
hematopoietic neoplasia in humans and animals. Hypocho-
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hemmatopoietic neoplasia 
lesterolemia was noted in 69% of dogs with hemophagocytic
Hyperthyroidism
histiocytic sarcoma? and cats with multiple myeloma."4 A
recent report indicated that 24% of cats with nasal and
nasopharyngeal lymphoma had hypocholesterolemia.7 The
493
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
mechanism underlying the hypocholesterolemia is uncer-
10. Barrie J, Watson TDG, Stear MJ, Nash AS (1993) Plasma cho-
tain but may relate to production of inflammatory cytokines
lesterol and lipoprotein concentrations in the dog: the effects of
such as interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α. These
age, breed, gender and endocrine disease. J Small Anim Prac 34:
cytokines suppress hepatic cholesterol synthesis and contrib-
507-12.
-ody iasuo-inpe pue [enuauo jo ssouea (9oo) sa ooai ‘11
lte to the negative acute phase reaction observed with both
albumin and cholesterol. Hypoalbuminemia was a relatively
thyroidism in cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pracr 2l: 40-4.
12. Berent AC, Drobatz KJ, Ziemer L, Johnson VS, Ward CR (2007)
common finding in the cats with multiple myeloma and
 Liver function in cats with hyperthyroidism before and after 131Y
dogs with hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma, but not in
therapy. J Ver Interm Med 2l: 1217-23.
the cats with nasal and pharyngeal lymphoma. Enhanced
13. Breuhaus BA (1999) Review of thyroid function and dysfunc-
catabolism of cholesterol has been suggested as another
ton in adult horses. AAEP Proceedings 50: 3347.
mechanism to explain hypocholesterolemia in some human
14. Frank N, Sojka JE, Latour MA, McClure SR, Polazzi L (1999)
cancer pa tients.
Effect of hypothyroidism on blood lipid concentrations in
horses. Am J Ver Res 60: 730-3.
Hyperthyroidism
15. Duntas LH (2002) Thyroid disease and lipids. Thyroid 12:
Hypocholesterolemia and hypotriglyceridemia have been
287-93.
16. Ling GV, Stabenfeldt GH, Comer KM, Gribble DH, Schechter RD
observed in hyperthyroid humans and in some experimental
(1979) Canine hyperadrenocorticism: pretreatment clinical and
models of hyperthyroidism.  While hyperthyroidism
is
laboratory evaluation of ll7 cases. J Am Ver Med Assoc 174:
common in older cats, decreases in serum cholesterol and
1211-15.
triglycerides are uncommon findings. Concentrations of
17. Lorenz MD (1982) Diagnosis and medical management of
cholesterol and triglycerides may be near but often do not
canine Cushing's syndrome: a study of 57 consecutive cases.
dip below the lower limit of the reference interval.? In one
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18: 707-16.
report, hypercholesterolemia was observed in 8% of cases.
18. Ford SL, Feldman EC, Nelson RW (1993) Hyperadrenocorticism
while hypocholesterolemia was not seen in any of the 131
caused by bilateral adrenocortical neoplasia in dogs: Four cases
cats included in the study.77
{1983-1988). J Am Ver Med Assor 202: 789-92.
19. Jeric6 MM, Chiquito F de C, Kajihara K, et al. (2009) Chro-
matographic analysis of lipid fractions in healthy dogs and dogs
with obesity or hyperadrenocorticism. J Ver Diag Invest 2l:
References
203-7.
20. Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Smith MC (1988) Hyperadrenocorti-
1. Goluszko P, Nowicki B (2005) Membrane cholesterol: a crucial
cism in cats: Seven cases {1978-1987). J Am Ver Med Assor 193:
molecule affecting interactions of microbial pathogens with
245-50.
mammalian cells. Infer Immun 73: 7791-6.
21. Moore LE, Biller DS, Osen DE (2000) Hyperadrenocorticism
 treated with metyrapone followed by bilateral adrenalectomey
2nd Edition. Elsevier, Burlington, MA.
in a cat. J Am Ver Med Assoc 217: 6914.
3. Bruss ML (2008) Lipids and ketones. In: Clinical Biochemistry of
22. Gunn-Moore D (2005) Feline endocrinopathies. Ver Clinics N
Domestic Animals, 6th ed. Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML
Amer Small Anim Pracr 35: 171-210.
(eds.), Academic Press, New York.
23. van der Kolk JH, Wensing T, Kalsbeek HC, Breukink HJ (1995)
4. Hollanders B, Mougin A, N'Diaye F Hentz E, Aude X, Girard A
Lipid metabolism in horses with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Ver
(1986) Comparison of the lipoprotein profiles obtained from
Med Assoc 206: 1010-12.
rat, bovine, horse, dog, rabbit and pig serum by a new two-step
24. van der Kolk JH, Wensing T (2oo0) Urinary concentration of
ultracentrifugal gradient procedure. Comp Biochem Physiol B 84:
 -aapeiady io euauandodady ya saud u spio
83-9.
nocorticism. Ver Quarterly 22: 55-7.
5. Chapman MJ (1986) Comparative analysis of mammalian
25. Koutinas CK, Saridomichelakis MN, Mylonakis ME, er al. (2004)
plasma lipoprotein. Methods in Enzymology 128: 70-143.
6. Hoenig M, Dorfman M, Koenig A (2008) Use of a hand-held
lenic Ver Med Soc 55: 21-33.
meter for the measurement of blood beta-hydroxybutyrate in
26. Durocher LL, Hinchcliff KW, DiBartola SP, Johnson SE
dogs and cats. J Ver Emergency Critical Care 18: 86-7.
(2008) Acid-base and hormonal abnormalities in dogs with
 7. Rogers WA, Donovan EF Kociba GJ (1975) Lipids and lipopro-
naturally occurring diabetes mellitus. J Am Ver Med Assor 232:
-uanoidodaday Aiepuonas um sop pue saop [euiou u sua
1310-20.
emia. J Am Ver Med Assor 166: 1092-1100.
27. Doxey DL, Milne EM, Mackenzie CP (1985) Canine diabetes
8. Mahley RW, Weisgraber KH, Innerarity T (1974) Canine lipo-
mellitus: a retrospective survey. J Sm Anim Prac 26: 555-61.
proteins and atherosclerosis l. Characterization of the plasma
 28. Johnson PJ, Scotty NC, Wiedmeyer C, Messer NT, Kreeger JM
lipoproteins associated with atherogenic and nonatherogenic
(2005) Diabetes mellitus in a domesticated Spanish Mustang.
hyperlipidemia. Cirr Res 35: 722-33.
J Am Ver Med Assoc 226: 584-8.
9. Dixon RM, Reid SW, Mooney CT (1999) Epidemiological, clini-
 29. Bailhache E, Nguyen P, Krempf M, Siliart B, Magot T, Ouguer-
cal, haematological and biochemical characteristics of canine
ram K (2003) Lipoproteins abnormalities in obese insulin-
hypothyroidism. Ver Rec 145: 481-7.
resistant dogs. Merabolism Clin Exper 52: 559-64.
494
CHAPTER 31 Laboratory Evaluation of Lipids
30. Chikamune T, Katamoto H, Ohashi F Shimada Y (1995) Serum
51. Danielsson B, Ekman R, Johansson BG, Petersson BG (1977)
lipid and lipoprotein concentrations in obese dogs. J Ver Med Sci
a  s aa  s o 
57: 595-8.
dog. Clin Chim Arta 80: 157-70.
31. Jordan E, Kley S, Le NA, Waldron M, Hoenig M (2008) Dyslip-
52. Bauer JE (2004) Lipoprotein-mediated transport of dietary and
idemia in obese cats. Dom Anim Endocrino! 35: 290-9.
symthesized lipids and lipid abnormalities in dogs and cats. J Am
32. Hoenig M, Wilkins C, Holson JC, Ferguson DC (2003) Effects
Ver Med Assoc 224: 668-75.
of obesity on lipid profiles in neutered male and female cats.
53. Center SA, Baldwin BH, King JM, Tennant BC (1983) Hema-
Am J Ver Res 64: 299-303.
tologic and biochemical abnormalities associated with indu ced
33. Frank N, Elliott SB, Brandt LE, Keisler DH (2006) Physical
extrahepatic bile duct obstruction in the cat. Am J Ver Res 44:
characteristics, blood hormone concentrations, and plasma lipid
1822-9.
concentrations in obese horses with insulin resistance. J Am Ver
54. Bauer JE, Meyer DJ, Campbell M, McMurphy R (1990) Serum
Med Assoc 228: 1383-90.
lipid and lipoprotein changes in ponies with experimentally
34. Hoenig M, McGoldrick JB, de Beer M, Demacker PNM, Fergu-
induced liver disease. Am J Ver Res 5l: 1380-4.
son DC (2006) Activity and tissue-specific expression of lipases
55. McCullagh KG (1 978) Plasma lipoproteins in animal health and
and tumor-necrosis factor-α in lean and obese cats. Dom Anim
disease. Ver Annua! 18: 41-50.
Endocrino! 30: 333-44.
56. Murray GM, Sharpe AE (2009) Nephrotic syndrome due to
35. Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al. (1990) Acromegaly in
glomerulopathy in an Irish dairy cow. Ver Record 164: 179-80.
14 cats. J Ver Intern Med 4: 192-201.
57. Tsimihodimos V, Dounousi E, Siamopoulos CK (2008) Dyslip-
36. Gay CC, Sullivan ND, Wilkinson JS, McLean JD, Blood DC
idemia in chronic kidney disease: an approach to pathogenesis
(1978) Hyperlipaemia in ponies. Australian Ver J 54: 459-62.
and treatment. Am J Nephrol 28: 958-73.
58. Rogers WA, Donovan EF Kociba GJ (1975) Idiopathic hyperli-
a review. Australian Ver J 82: 136-42.
poproteinemia in dogs. J Am Ver Med Assoc 166: 1087-91.
saod paises jo suaioudod pue spidi euse[d fes6 I) ar ianea '8e
59. Whitney MS, Boon D, Rebar AH, Story JA, Bottoms GD (1993)
Am J Ver Res 44: 379-84.
Utracentrifugal and electrophoretic characteristics of the
39. Watson TDG, Burns L, Love S, Packard CJ, Shepherd J (1992)
plasma lipoproteins in Miniature Schnauzer dogs with idio-
Plasma lipids, lipoproteins and post-heparin lipases in ponies
pathic hyperlipoproteinemia. J Ver Intern Med 7: 253-60.
with hyperlipaemia. Equine Ver J 24: 341-6.
60. Sato K, Agoh H, Kaneshige T, Hikasa Y, Kagota K (2000) Hyper-
cholesterolemia in Shetland sheepdogs. J Ver Med Sci 62:
1297-1301.
1994). J Am Ver Med Assoc 207: 604-7.
61. Wada M, Minamisono T, Ehrhart LA, Naito HK, Mise J (1977)
41. Schotman AJH, Wagenaar G (1969) Hyperlipemia in ponies.
Zentralblart fur Veterinarmedizin 16A: 1-7.
999-1008.
42. Armstrong PJ, Blanchard G (2009) Hepatic lipidosis in cats. Ver
 61   1    79
Clin N Am Small Anim Pracr 39: 599-616.
aemia in briards in the United Kingdom. Res Ver Sei 54: 80-5.
43. Tornquist SJ, van Saun RJ, Smith BB, Cebra CK, Snyder SP
63. Hubert B, Braun JP, de La Farge F Magnol JP (1987) Hypertri-
{1999) Hepatic lipidosis in llamas and alpacas: 3l cases (1991-
glyceridemia in two related dogs. Companion An Prar l: 33-5.
1997). J Am Ver Med Assoc 214: 1368-72.
64. Ginzinger DG, Clee SM, Dallongeville J, er al. (1999) Lipid and
44. Cebra CK (2009) Disorders of carbohydrate or lipid metabolism
lipoprotein analysis of cats with lipoprotein lipase deficiency.
in camelids. Ver Clin N Am Food Anim Prarr 25: 339-52.
Eur J Clin Invest 29: 17-26.
45. Whitney MS, Boon GD, Rebar AH, Ford RB (1987) Effects of
65. Backus RC, Ginzinger DG, Excoffon K)DA, et al. (200l) Mater-
acute pancreatitis on circulating lipids in dogs. Am J Ver Res 48:
1492-7.
body fat mass and body condition scores of mature cats with
46. Chikamune T, Katamoto H, Nomura K, Ohashi F (1998) Lipo-
lipoprotein lipase deficiency. Am J Ver Res 62: 264-9.
protein profle in canine pancreatitis induced with oleic acid.
66. Johnstone AC, Jones BR, Thompson JC, Hancock WS (1990)
J Ver Med Sci 60: 413-21.
The pathology of an inherited hyperlipoproteinemia of cats.
47. Hill RC, van Winkle TJ (1993) Acute necrotizing pancreatitis
J Comp Pathol 102: 125-37.
and acute suppurative pancreatitis in the cat: a retrospective
67. Hayirli A (2006) The role of exogenous insulin in the complex 
study of 40 cases (1976-1989). J Ver Inrern Med 7: 25-33.
of hepatic lipidosis and ketosis associated with insulin resistance
48. Khovidhunkit W, Kim MS, Memon RA, er al. (2004) Effects of
phenomenon in postpartum dairy cattle. Ver Res Commun 30:
infection and inflammation on lipid and lipoprotein metabo-
749-74.
lism: mechanisms and consequences to the host. J Lipid Res 45:
68. Peterson PB, Willard MD (2003) Protein-losing enteropathies.
1169-96.
Ver Clin N Am Small Anim Prar 33: 106l-82.
49. McGillicuddy FC, de la Llera Moya M, Hinkle CC, et al. (2009)
69. Ferguson D, Gasche F (2009) Feline idiopathic inflammatory
Inflammation impairs reverse cholesterol transport in vivo. Cir-
bowel disease. Ver Focus 19: 20-30.
cularion 119: 1135-45.
70. Littman MP, Dambach DM, Vaden SL, Giger U (2000) Familial
50. van der Westhuyzen DR, de Beer FC, Webb NR (2007) HDL
protein-losing enteropathy and protein-losing nephropathy in
cholesterol transport during inflammation. Curr Opin Lipido! 18:
soft coated Wheaten Terriers: 222 Cases (1983-1997). J Vet
147-51.
Interm Med 14: 68-80.
495
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
 71. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Kass PH (1996) Pretreatment clinical
75. Little L, Patel R, Goldschmidt M (2007) Nasal and nasopharym-
and laboratory findings in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism: 225
geal lymphoma in cats: 50 cases {1989-2005). Ver Pathol 44:
885-92.
72. Lifton SJ, King LG, Zerbe CA {1996) Glucocorticoid deficient
76. Fox PR, Trautwein EA, Hayes KC, Bond BR, Sisson DD, Moise
hypoadrenocorticism in dogs: 18 cases (1986-1995). J Am Vet
NS (1993) Comparison of taurine, α-tocopherol, retinol, sele-
Med Assoc 209: 2076-81.
nium, and total triglycerides and cholesterol concentrations in
73. Moore PF, Afflter VK, Vernau W (2006) Canine hemophago-
cats with cardiac disease and in healthy cats. Am J Ver Res 54:
cytic histiocytic sarcoma: a proliferative disorder of CDlld+
563-9.
macrophages. Ver Parho! 43: 632-45.
77. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Cavanagh PG, er al. (1983) Feline
74. Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF McManus PM (2005) Multiple
hyperthyroidism: Pretreatment clinical and laboratory evalua-
myeloma in 16 cats: a retrospective study. Ver Clin Pathof 34:
tion of 13l cases. J Am Ver Med Assor 183: 103-10.
341-52.
496
32
Laboratory Evaluation of the Thyroid,
Adrenal, and Pituitary Glands
Donald Meuten
North Carolina State University
formed. Imaging is not l00% reliable, auscultation is not
Clinical endocrinology
100% reliable, and neither are endocrine tests. But their
combined use may be very good. As newer techniques
Introduction
are developed they will need clinical trials on the same old
Before reading any further let's clarify the record that there
diseases to determine if they improve our diagnostic
are no perfect diagnostic tests. Endocrine or otherwise there
capabilities.
are none. There are expectations, or at least criticisms, that
 Some endocrine tests will remain screening tests despite
tests should be perfect and that there should be agreement
criticism. Total T4, low-dose dexamethasone suppression
between testing methods. For a test to have any value, it
(LDDS). urine creatinine cortisol ratio (UCCR), and other
must identify animals with the disease from normal animals
tests are excellent screening tests. Total T4 is a good first step
or the test is useless. For diagnostic use we need tests that
to recognize hypothyroidism in dogs and tojustify additional
distinguish animals with a specific disease from the other
testing to confirm or refute this differential. It is an excellent
differentials that may clinically appear similar. In the major-
test to rule out hypothyroidism. Total T4 will rule in hyper-
ity of cases, endocrine testing combined with other proce-
thyroidism in the majority of cases in cats, especially those
dures are very helpful if used properly. Diseases that are fully
in which the disease is fully developed. Basal cortisol is
developed are more easily recognized with diagnostic tests.
excellent to rule out Addison's disease, but is not reliable to
There probably is a correlation that the earlier a disease is
rule out or rule in Cushing's disease. LDDS has many false
in its onset and the earlier the veterinarian is in his or her
positives, but it is an excellent screning test to rule out
career, the more tests are needed to arrive at "certainty-of-
diagnosis." For many diseases, the consequence of an incor-
if the dog looks like a poster-card representative of Cushing's
rect diagnosis and the prescription of chemicals that kill
disease. Therefore how we use tests, when we use tests.
hyperplastic tissues and require lifelong treatment are such
what methodologies were used, and the consequences of a
that we must be certain. In some instances this will require
false positive or a false negative test will influence the utility
multiple tests, or repeat testing at different times. We need
of tests. It may be better to select a test for Cushing's disease
to be prepared to defend this need for certainty to owners
that could miss some cases to be certain this diagnosis is not
and colleagues. Our awareness of certain diseases means we
falsely ruled in and a lifelong treatment regimen started. We
seem to dwell on exceptions or when a test misses a diag-
them early in their development. We try to recognize a
nosis and become critical of the test while we forget the big
disease at one point in time and sometimes this is possible.
picture. If a test worlks 80-90% of the time that is terrific;
but in other cases we need to repeat our examinations at a
we all should be so good.
later point. Imaging is an absolutely great procedure to com-
The endocrine system is unique in that it has diseases that
plement endocrine tests. Visualization of a mass in the
cause hyperfunction as well as hypofunction. For most
correct location along with supportive endocrine test results
systems we try to recognize failure of an organ, but in the
is optimal. Many times this is present and many times
endocrine system many diseases are due to hyperfunctional
finances or the techniques themselves limit what is per-
states. A primary lesion in the endocrine gland or a lesion
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
497
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
   n  a    a 
serum TT4 and fT4 come from the thyroid gland and only a
endocrine organ is dependent on the pituitary axis.
 a  s n an    n 
The approach used to solve or dia gnose endocrine diseases
      t    
should involve the following sequential steps.
thyroid gland function. The majority of T3 is produced
· Determine the historical and physical exam findings that
outside of the thyroid glands via deiodination of T4 in non-
may suggest an endocrine disease.
thyroid cells.
● Determine the routine lab results (CBC, chemistry profile.
The major diseases of the thyroid gland are neoplasia.
urinalysis) that may be characteristic of the suspected endo-
hyperthyroidism, and hypothyroidism. Generally, thyroid
crine disease.
 in sroi u pin pu uq ae si un so
· Lastly, utilize appropriate screening and confirmatory tests
large enough to be detected clinically in dogs are malignant.
that rule in or rule out, the suspected endocrine disease.
Hyperthyroidism is a very common disease of cats, but is
 Each of these steps is easier to assess by understanding the
uncommon in dogs and other species. The majority of thyroid
possible primary lesions and the positive and negative feed-
tumors in dogs do not cause hyper or hypothyroidism. Hypo-
back loops that contribute to the diseases. As with all diag-
thyroidism is very common in dogs and does not occur
nostic tests the results obtained for specific endocrine tests
spontaneously in adult cats. Hypothyroidism in cats is almost
should be compared to reference intervals from the labora-
tory that provides the results, as opposed to reported ranges
thyroidism. Hypothyroidism is associated with goiter, or
in this or any other text. This is especially important for
hyperplastic thyroid glands, in ruminants, birds, and horses.
endocrine tests that may have variable methodologies. In
fact it is recommended to use laboratories that not only
Thyroid tests
produce results (numbers, values). but also have experi-
enced people that will help you interpret the results. This is
This is an excellent test to rule in hyperthyroidism in cats
especially important for substances that are measured infre-
and rule out hypothyroidism in dogs. Increased serum TT4
quently or in situations in which clinical experience is
o d  n n  sn r  
limited with rare or uncommon diseases.
Serum TT4 concentration within reference interval rules out
hypothyroidism in dogs. TT4 is stable at room temperature
Thyroid disorders
for l week, an unusual benefit compared to most hormones
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothal-
that degrade postcollection if not frozen. TT4 can be mea-
mus stimulates the release of thyroid stimulating hormone
sured via RIA, chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay and
(TSH, thyrotropin) from thyrotrophs in the pituitary which
ELISA, all of which have similar diagnostic value. Point-of-
in turn stimulates thyroid gland follicular cell hypertrophy
care ELISA can be used in clinics and provide results within
and a cascade of intracellular events that result in the pro-
minutes. Numerous drugs and nonthyroid diseases and can
duction of thyroxine (TT4, tetraiodothyronine) and smaller
suppress serum TT4, the latter being known as euthyroid
amounts of triiodothyronine (TT3), and trace amounts of
sick syndrome. It can also be lower in large body size and
reverse triiodothyronine (rT3). Approximately 99% of
certain breeds (see Table 32.1). Retesting for the possibility
secreted TT4 is bound to plasma proteins and less than 1%
of drug-induced suppression requires cessation of most
is free tetraiodothyronine (fT4). However, fT4 is biologically
drugs for 4 weeks. The greater the severity of the nonthyroid
active, enters cells, leads to intracellular TT3 production, and
disease the greater the suppression of TT4 in both dogs and
causes negative feedback to TSH release. Free T4 that passes
cats. Low concentrations of TT4 in a dog should prompt
into cells is metabolized into TT3 or rT3 based on physiologic
consideration of fT4, TSH, and possibly other tests to distin-
needs. In normal metabolic states TT3 is produced and this
guish primary hypothyroidism, secondary hypothyroidism.
is the biologically active hormone that stimulates cellular
and euthyroid sick syndrome.
events, but when patients are sick there is preferential con-
TT4 < ll nmol/L, with classic clinical signs and routine lab
version to biologically inactive rT3. Reverse TT3 increases in
data, may be diagnostic for some cases. When clinical signs
nonthyroidal illness and is responsible for the decrease in
and other routine lab data seem inconsistent, measurement
 TT4 seen in the euthyroid sick syndrome. Increased concen-
of fT4 and TSH may be helpful. Markedly decreased TT4 and
trations of serum rT3, combined with measurement of TT4
fT4 is considered diagnostic for primary or secondary hypo-
and TT3 were used to identify patients with the euthyroid
thyroidism. Decreased fT4 with increased TSH is diagnostic
sick syndrome, but measurement of rT3 and TT3 are seldom
for primary hypothyroidism. Decreased fT4 with decreased
        
TSH is diagnostic for secondary hypothyroidism.
euthyroid sick syndrome, or nonthyroidal illness. Although
TT3 is the biologically active form of thyroid hormone it is
fT4
of limited diagnostic value. TT4, the storage form of thyroid
Although fT4 is less than 1% of total serum thyroxine, it
hormone, and fT4 are of greater diagnostic value. All of the
is of excellent diagnostic value and is suppressed less by
498
Table 32.1 Surmrmary of thyroid tests.
TT4
pue shop ui wusipiouAyody ino ainu ot pasn 'sien pue shop loy buuaains jualinxa 'isat uouuos json
rule in hyperthyroidlism in cat5, stable in vitro 
fT4 
Excellent dliagnostic utility, use equilibrium dialysis to measure, biologically active hormnone
TSH 
 Endogenous, from thyrotrophs in pars distalis, use with TT4 and/or fT4 to evaluate hypothyroidism, do
not use as stand alone test
TT4 & TSH
 Panel used to diagnose and distinguish type of hypothyroidism
fT4 & TSH
 Panel used to diagnose and distinguish type of hypothyroidismn 
ELL
 Most abundant thyroid horrnone, biologically active but poor diagnostic value, in some canine thyroid
 panels but do not use, rely on TT4 and fT4
r' T3
 Used infrequently, helpful to diagnose euthyroid sick syndrome
 TRH stirn 
Substitute for TSH stirnulation, Gl side effects
TSH stirn 
Tests thyroid reserve, bovine medical grade TSH is not available; human TSH is available but expensive;
algelene jou Hsl alqeioalu! j! pasn wirs Hal pue HSl snouabopua
T3 suppression 
 Used in cats with suspected hyperthyroidisrn
anti-T3. anti-T4, and anti-
 Antibodies produced in lymphocytic thyroiditis, increased in <5% of cases, used to explain unusual
thyroglobulin autoantibodies
increases or decreases in TT4 or TT3, suggests lymphocytic thyroiditis is present 
 Thyroid testing by species
Dog
1e3
TT4
TT4
fT4
fT4
fT4 & TSH: TT4 & TSH 
 If needed 
Thyroglobulin, T4, and T3
T3 suppression 
autoantibodies
TSH, TRH stimmulation 
TSH, TRH stirmulation 
nonthyroid diseases and drugs than is TT4. Similar to TT4,
separate protein bound from free hormone and remove
the greater the severity of the nonthyroid disease the greater
nonspecific substances in the serum that may interfere
is the suppression of fT4 in dogs and cats. Nonthyroid disease
with the assay. Radioimmunoassay is performed on the
is also associated with increased fT4 in some cats that could
dialysate.
interfere with interpretation when used to evaluate hyper-
thyroidism. fT4 is useful in dogs and cats in which the con-
centration of TT4 and the rest of the data are not definitive
TT3 triodothyronine
for a diagnosis. fT4 is not influenced by autoantibodies.
TT3 is not recommended for testing in animals. It offers no 
 Anitconvulsant therapy and glucocorticoids will lower fT4.
diagnostic value over TT4 or fT4 in recognizing hyper- or
hypothyroidism.
Decreased values suggest, but do not prove hypothyroidism
TT3 is often in reference interval in hypothyroid dogs: it
unless other data is supportive. Concentrations of fT4 cor-
is interfered with more by antibodies than is TT4. It is the
relate with the thyroid status at the cellular level and cor-
most abundant and biologically active thyroid hormone, but
relate very well with TSH.
it has poor diagnostic value perhaps because most is pro-
Equilibrium dialysis is the technique of choice for fT4.
duced outside of the thyroid gland. It is offered in some
This means that serum is dialyzed in some manner to
canine thyroid panels.
499
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
r' T3 reverse triiodothyronine
tion status. These antibodies contribute to the destruction of
the gland and are directed against thyroglobulin (aaTg
drome in humans and experimentally in dogs; see euthyroid
present in 35-50% of hypothyroid dogs), TT3 (35% of hyp0-
sick syndrome at end of this chapter. It is available in some
thyroid dogs), and TT4 (15% of hypothyroid dogs). Thyro-
labs and clinical investigations for its utility should be done.
globulin antibodies predominate and thyroglobulin is the
Anticipated results in euthyroid sick dogs are: decreased TT4.
protein that TT4 and TT3 are attached to, hence dogs with
reference interval fT4, reference interval TSH, and increased
antibodies against TT4 and TT3 will also have aaTg. but the
r'T3 due to preferential conversion of T3 to r'T3.
 opposite is not true. Autoantibodes directed against thyro-
globulin, TT4 or TT3 may increase or decrease TT4 and TT3
Thyrotropin, thyroid stimulating hormone, TSH
concentrations as measured by RIA depending on method-
TSH is measured in diagnostic labs with various techniques.
ologies of the separation used. Falsely increased values of
Never measure or interpret alone; always measure in the
TT4 or TT3 are seen if antibody coated tubes are used in a
same sample as a panel with TT4 and/or fT4, and correlate
single-step separation technique. However, falsely decreased
results with all the other data available. Endogenous TSH is
values of TT4 and TT3 are seen if less specifc separation
Used primarily to differentiate primary hypothyroidism, sec-
techniques are used such as activated charcoal or ammo-
ondary hypothyroidism, and euthyroid sick syndrome. In
nium sulfate. Consult the reference lab for clarification of
interference.
and within reference interval with euthyroid sick cases. See
These antibodies are used primarily to explain unusual
  an  s 
increases in TT4 in the serum of dogs being evaluated for
nosticians, diseases are in stages of progression, degrees of
severity, and there may be different treatments to consider
thyroiditis, probably early in the disease while inflammation
when the samples are analyzed and therefore results may
is present. Results are reported as positive, negative, or
not be this clear-cut. However, increased TSH concentration
inconclusive. A positive result can explain an increased con-
combined with a decreased TT4 and fT4 results in a specific-
centration of TT4 in a dog with clinical signs of hypothyroid-
ity of nearly 1oo%. In other words there are no or very few
false positives for hypothyroidism using this combination of
the TT4 into reference interval in a dog with true hypothy-
test results. In a study of l08 dogs this combination was seen
roidism. A positive antibody test does not prove hypothy-
in one euthyroid sick dog and would have lead to a false
roidism, it indicates autoantibodies are in the serum and that
lymphocytic thyroiditis is the likely lesion. There may be
alone then it is not as diagnostically helpful and this is dis-
adequate reserve such that hypothyroidism is not present
couraged. Thyroid stimulating hormone may not be
and may not develop. It is recommended that TT4 and fT4
increased in up to 33% of hypothyroid dogs. If hypothyroid-
be repeated some months later if the patient is suspected of
developing hypothyroidism. Many of the breeds predisposed
weeks or performing a stimulatory test or imaging studies of
to develop hypothyroidism are the breeds with a high preva-
the thyroid are options. Decreased TSH with decreased TT4
lence of aaTg. The false positive rate for aaTg is approxi-
and fT4 is characteristic of secondary hypothyroidism, but
mately 6% and transient increases are reported post
this only represents 5% or less of canine hypothyroidism
cases.
[ a   a   
Levothyroid treatment of a dog that does not have hypo-
results for TT4 (or TT3) are obtained.
thyroidism will suppress TSH production and cause second-
ary thyroid atrophy if the dose of is large enough. Retesting
Stimulation tests: TSH and TRH response tests
for this possibility requires cessation of levothyroid for 8
TSH stimulation (response) test historically was a gold stan-
weeks. TSH can also be used to monitor treatment of true
dard for diagnosis of hypothyroidism. However, exogenous
hypothyroid dogs if TSH was measured in a thyroid panel
bovine medical grade TSH is no longer commercially avail-
 prior to treatment with levothyroid. Endogenous TSH should
able and endogenous TSH is an alternative as described
decrease by 33% or more posttreatment if the dose of levo-
above. Chemical grade bovine TSH is not recommended
thyroid being administered is sufficient to break the pituitary
due to life-threatening complications. Recombinant human
thyroid gland axis.
TSH is available, but is expensive. TSH stimulation is
used to predict thyroid reserve and differentiate primary
Autoantibodies
hypothyroidism, secondary hypothyroidism, and euthyroid
These are produced by lymphocytes and plasma cells in the
sick syndrome by evaluating the magnitude of increase of
thyroid in lymphocytic thyroiditis. They may be detected in
TT4 post TSH administration. In principle TT4 will not
the serum and are used to indicate lymphocytic thyroiditis
n a   a  
may be present, but are not predictors of thyroid gland func-
gland is destroyed and there are "no" target cells for TsH tO
500
stimulate. TT4 values that are less than reference interval
ina  sou a Hi isod u an (ig'i>)
Hyperthyroidism
sick dog should increase TT4 normally (twofold or greater
increase in TT4, or an increase of TT4 >3μg/dL). A dog with 
General
Hyperthyroidism or thyrotoxicosis is one of the most
variable results depending on the degree of atrophy in the
common diseases of cats and is the most common endocrine
thyroid gland, but partial stimulation is expected unless
disease of cats. It is caused by adenomas in the thyroid gland.
atrophy is severe. Unfortunately, intermediary results occur
Multinodular adenomatous hyperplasia is another term
and it is not known if these represent early stages of the
used to describe the lesion in cats, but the lesions are best
three differentials or mild to moderate lesions.
explained by neoplasia for the following reasons. A small
TRH response test is used in place of TSH to evaluate
percentage of cases progress to carcinoma and metastasize.
  si   hd  s
Nonneoplastic tissue is atrophic and is adjacent to neoplastic
thyroidism when results of other tests are not conclusive
nodules, whereas functional hyperplasia of endocrine organs
or waiting several weeks to months and retesting is not an
produces uniform enlargement of the entire gland. Hyper-
option. Some euthyroid dogs do not respond to TRH and
plastic endocrine lesions respond to stimulatory and sup-
therefore this dynamic test is less reliable. Both TT4 and
pressive signals, whereas neoplastic lesions generally do not.
TSH can be measured in dogs. Dogs with primary hypothy-
Cats with these adenomas do not respond to these stimuli.
roidism should have values for TT4 below reference interval.
Furthermore, there is overexpression of the c-ras oncogene
<1.5μg/dL pre and post TRH. Euthyroid dogs should dem-
in the adenomas, and a decrease in inhibitory G protein
onstrate an increase of TT4 >2 μg/dL or a doubling of the
permitting uncontrolled mitosis and thyroid horrmone pro-
pre-TT4 value. If TSH is measured there should also be a
duction. A small percentage of cats will have neoplastic
doubling of the pre TSH value. The principle is similar to
tissue in the anterior mediastinum from rests of thyroid
the TSH response test in dogs. but distinction of primary
tissue. Some cases have nodules in both thyroid lobes and
and secondary hypothyroidism is not clear. Side effects of
anterior mediastinum that could suggest multicentric hyper-
TRH are notable and include vomiting. defecation, urina-
plastic or neoplastic stimuli. Numerous attempts have tried
tion, salivation, tachycardia, and/or tachypnea. They can
to identify a goitrogenic etiology and none has been found.
be reduced by using the lower dose of TRH; see protocols
Attempts to demonstrate antibodies to thyrotropin receptors
under hyperthyroidism.
in hyperthyroid cats, as seen in hyperplastic thyroid disease
In cats suspected of occult hyperthyroidism (TT4 in refer-
in humans with Grave's disease, have been negative in mul-
ence interval) the TRH response test checks for a failure of
tiple studies. Regardless of the term used, 99% of the lesions 
TT4 to increase post TRH. Normal cats should double TT4
are benign and they need to be removed surgically, medi-
post TRH because TRH stimulates release of TSH which in
cally. or with radiation if the disease is to be reversed.
turn stimulates normal thyroid follicular cells to increase
Approximately 75% of cases have bilateral involvement,
production of TT4. However, hyperthyroid cats do not
20% are unilateral, and 5% have ectopic thyroid prolifera-
increase TT4. This is because neoplastic follicular cells do
tion in the anterior mediastinum or thyroid carcinoma.
not respond to the increase in TSH caused by the injected
Hyperthyroidism is uncommon in dogs and when present
TRH and the adjacent nonneoplastic follicular cells are atro-
is due to thyroid adenoma or more likely. carcinoma.
plastic thyroid cells do not respond to TRH-TSH has not
are relatively common in dogs. Occasionally thyroid tumors
been determined, but this could be due to lack of TSH
may induce hypothyroidism in dogs. but most dogs with
receptors.
thyroid tumors are euthyroid. The size of the thyroid tumor
correlates with aggressiveness. Approximately 50% of dogs
have rests of thyroid tissue in the anterior mediastinum and 
Thyroid gland biopsy
occasionally these rests become neoplastic. Even if excessive 
quantities of TT4 and TT3 are produced, the efficient catabo-
hyperthyroidism, but it may prove useful to evaluate thyroid
lism and metabolism of thyroid hormones in the dog (up to
mended for suspected thyroid tumors and biopsy is only
degradation of the hormones and a euthyroid status.
needed on those cases in which cytology is not definitive.
  s   a n 
Approximately 80% of thyroid gland masses in dogs are
Hyperthyroidism in horses is reported with thyroid tumors
malignant if an enlarged mass is found clinically and 40%
or less are malignant if necropsy data is used. Size correlates
with aggressive behavior and bilateral tumors are 16 times
active, have polyphagia, weight loss, and increased serum
more likely to metastasize than unilateral tumors.
concentrations of TT4, TT3, and fT4.
501
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Hyperthyroidism summary
Hyperphosphatemia without azotemia is seen in 25-40%
Occurs in older cats;adenoma(s):weight loss:polyphagia,hyperac-
of hyperthyroid cats and the mechanism is not known. Total
five; one or more liver enzymes (ALP, ALT, AST) increased in 90%
  i       
of cases; increased TT4 is diagnostic,if fT4 is needed measure by
decrease in ionized serum calcium without associated clini-
equilibrium dialysis and correlate value with TT4 concentration.
cal signs is observed in up to 50% of hyperthyroid cats.
Increased concentrations of parathyroid hormone are also
Clinical problems
reported in hyperthyroid cats. Hypocalcemia, hyperphos-
Hyperactivity, weight loss, and polyphagia in a middle aged
phatemia, hyperparathyroidism, and renal problems are a
to old cat are the most common clinical problems. Weight
common series of events. The parathyroid hyperplasia may
loss is the most commonly observed clinical problem and
help explain why some cats do not develop postsurgical
may produce cachexia in severe cases. Mean age is 13 years;
fewer than 5% of cases are in cats less than l0 years old.
calcemia is usually not permanent. Although hypercalcemia
Chronic renal failure and cancer look similar, but cats with
has been reported for dogs with hyperthyroidism, it is mild
these diseases will not be polyphagic and hyperactive.
and the mechanism is not known.
Cardiac abnormalities can be detected in over 50% of hyper-
Nonspecifc hematologic abnormalities may occur  in
     n  i ' 
The most common cardiac lesion is left ventricular hyper-
malities include mild polycythemia and a stress leukogram.
trophy. Other signs include PU PD, vomiting. tachycardia.
Less frequently, lymphocytosis and eosinophilia are observed.
patchy alopecia, unkempt hair coat, bulky stools, diarrhea.
perhaps secondary to a decrease in cortisol due to increased
and apathetic signs such as decreased activity, lethargy.
thyroid hormones. Heinz bodies are often present, as they
anorexia, and weakness. Apathetic signs may be due to
are in many diseases in cats.
concurrent illnesses in these older cats such as heart failure
 Serum fructosamine is decreased in hyperthyroid cats sec-
or renal failure. Due to the incorporation of TT4 in geriatric
  a   a  
panels of cats and clinical awareness of this disease, a diag-
rate, cachexia) and presumably a decrease in available pro-
nosis of hyperthyroidism is often established before owners
teins to bind with glucose. Therefore fructosamine should
are aware of clinical signs. Clinical signs of hyperthyroidism
not be relied upon to assess long-terrm glucose status in
in dogs are similar to those in cats, but are less severe.
hyperthyroid cats being evaluated for diabetes mellitus.
Routine lab data
Screening tests: TT4, if TT4 in reference interval
The most consistent lab abnormality is a mild to moderate
fT4
   ui s si d s  
When this disease was first recognized essentially loo% of
the cats. There may be mild increases in ALT and AST, and
the hyperthyroid cats tested had increased serum TT4. Now.
one or more liver enzymes will be increased in 90% of
basal concentrations of TT4 are increased in 90-95% of the
hyperthyroid cats. This nonspecific increase in these liver
cases. Some 5-l0% of cases have TT4 within the reference
enzymes is mild to moderate and the pathogenesis is not
    t n    
known. Approximately one-third of the increase in ALP is
cats; specificity is 100%. Decreased concentrations of TT4 or
due to the bone isoenzyme and the rest is liver isoenzyme.
concentrations at the low end of reference interval rules out
Although the increase in ALP is only mild, any increase in
hyperthyroidism with 99% confidence. fT4 is increased in
ALP should be investigated in cats due to the short half-life
98% of hyperthyroid cats and it is increased in 6-12% of
of feline ALP. If the ALT is over loo0 IU/L and TT4 is not
cats that do not have hyperthyroidism. False positives are
markedly increased, pursue other differentials.
6-12%: therefore the specificity is 88-94%. If a cat has some
Azotemia occurs in 20-50% of hyperthyroid cats and is
of the physical and clinical laboratory abnormalities charac-
due to prerenal or concurrent renal disease. If urine specific
teristic of hyperthyroidism, and an increased TT4 concentra-
gravity is less then 1.025, suspect concurrent renal issues. If
tion, it is diagnostic of hyperthyroidism and fT4 or any
 it is greater than l.040 it is probably prerenal. Since cats with
additional tests are not needed. This will account for the
 hyperthyroidism are geriatric, it is likely that some will have
majority of cats with characteristic clinical signs. However.
because the disease is common and up to 10% of hyperthy.
that are not azotemic may have decreased serum creatinine
roid cats have TT4 in reference interval, a considerable effort
concentrations. The mechanism is not known but may be
is placed in correctly identifying this population.
due to muscle cachexia and decreased production of creati-
Concentra tions of TT4 in the middle to high end of reference
nine. Prevalence of concurrent urinary tract infections in
  a       
hyperthyroid cats is 10-20%. Most of these cats are asymp-
and lab data characteristic of hyperthyroidism are present.
tomatic for this problem, but urinalysis will reveal pyuria
This is the diagnostically challenging group. Below are some
and culture will yield E. coli in the majority of infections.
scenario examples of correlation of TT4 with other data.
502
CHAPTER 32 Laboratory Evaluation of the Thyroid, Adrenal, and Pituitary Glands
50
Examples
· TT4 >4.0 μg/dL rule in hyperthyroidism, if clinical signs and lab
8
 data are supportive
● TT4 3.0-4.0 μg/dL favor hyperthyroidism, if clinical signs and lab
40
data are supportive
signs and lab data are supportive
· TT4 2.0-2.5μg/dL probably not hyperthyroidism especially if 
(p/6r)
/0L
no other data are supportive; request additional tests if still
wu
suspicious
址
● TT4 <2.0 μg/dL rule out hyperthyroidism unless other evidence is
Serum
wr
compelling 
er
The top two and the bottom two examples above are easy
to interpret and will explain TT4 results for the majority of
10-
situations. It is the middle gray zone that is diffcult and
。
where fT4 can be then be measured as an aid. This scenario
is being recognized more frequently. This may be due to
8
 more widespread testing that detects cats early in the disease
progression. Wellness exams often include TT4 on chemistry
0
 a     si   
Mild
Moderate
Severe
evidence of the disease before signs are easily recognized.
Figure 32.1 Box plots of serum total T4 concentrations in 221 cats with
When faced with conflicting lab data while trying to confirm
nonthyroidal disease, grouped according to severity of illness. Of 221 cats
a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism, consider approaches in this 
with nonthyroidal ilness 65 had mild disease, 83 had moderate disease,
order, depending on the urgency of a diagnosis:
and 73 had severe diseases. See Figure 32.3 for key. (Reprinted, with
1. Measure free fT4 (via equilibrium dialysis)
permnisson, from Peterson ME et al. (2001) J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:
2. Repeat the TT4 concentration at some other time, i.e.,
529.) See Figure 32.3 for key.
1-2 weeks or later
Author comment: As the severity of nonthyroidal diseases increases, the
serum concentrations of T4 and free T4 decrease.
3. Palpate and/or image the thyroid gland and find nodule(s)
4. Find the nonthyroid disease that is concurrently sup-
pressing the concentrations of thyroid hormones (euthyroid-
sick syndrome just like in dogs)
thyroid hormone secretion are seen over days rather than
 5. Perform a TT3 suppression test
hours.
6. Perform TRH stimulation; see protocols at end of this
section.
Dogs
Concurrent illness will suppress TT4 in dogs and cats and
Routine laboratory data is similar to that in cats, but this is
the greater the severity of the illness, the greater the sup-
less characterized because of the much lower incidence. TT4,
pressive influence (Figs. 32.1 and 32.2). Concurrent illness
fT4 are increased. TSH is decreased due to negative feedback
in a hyperthyroid cat can suppress mild or moderate increases 
on thyrotrophs. Increased TT4 in a dog with a cervical mass
of TT4 into reference interval and therefore explain some of
and clinical signs of hyperthyroidism is sufficient for diag-
the cases of hyperthyroidism that have concentrations of
 nosis. The cause will be a thyroid tumor. Therefore palpa-
TT4 within reference interval. This suppression also occurs
tion, imaging of the neck and thorax, and aspiration cytology
with fT4, but the effect is not as great and therefore measur-
of the cervical mass are important diagnostic steps in dogs
ing fT4 is a logical step to determine if a cat with a normal
with suspected hyperthyroidism. Cytology is a preferred
 TT4 is hyperthyroid. However, fT4 may actually be increased
step as these tumors are highly vascularized and biopsy
in some cats with concurrent illness. Sampling during a
procedures will have considerable hemorrhage. Although
hypercalcemia has been reported, it may not be due to
can also explain TT4 concentrations within reference inter-
hyperthyroidism.
val. Repeat sampling for this possibility should be delayed
Increased TT4 in a dog without a cervical mass and with
for 1-2 weeks or longer because degrees in fluctuations of
 or without clinical signs of hypothyroidism should be tested
503
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
60
50
4.0
50
40
3.0
40
4 (μg/dL)
3.0
ud
30
2.0
Free
30
ree
r
Ser
20
20
1.0
1.0
10-
10
CC
8
8
C
。
0
Mild
Severe
Moderate
Mild
Moderate
Severe
(66)
(95)
(62)
(66)
(95)
(62)
Figure 32.2 Box plots of serum total thyroxine (T4) concentrations (left) and free T4 concentrations (right) in 223 dogs with nonthyroidal disea5e
stratified accordling to severity of disease (rmild, moderate and severe). For each box plot, T-bars represent the main body of data, which in most
instances is equal to the range. Each box represents interquartile range (25th-75th percentile). The horizontal bar in each box is the medlian. Open circles
represent outlying data points. Nummbers in parentheses indicate the nummbers of dogs in each group. The shaded area indicates the reference interval.
 (Reprinted, with permission, with slight format mnodification from Kanrowitz LB et al. (2001) Am Vet Med Assoc 219: 765.)
for thyroid antibodies that may falsely increase TT4. An
125. 6l% had increased TT4 and 191, 93% had increased
increase in TT4 or especially TT3 may be due to crossreactiv-
fT4. However, increased fT4 concentrations are also present
ity of autoantibodies. Antibodies to various thyroid antigens
in some cats with nonthyroidal diseases that can confuse
are attributed to lymphocytic thyroiditis, some of these dogs
interpretation of fT4, but this false increase does not happen
progress into hypothyroidism and some do not. TT4, fT4.
with TT4 (Table 32.2; Fig. 32.3). The false positive rate for
and TsH on the same serum sample should be requested to
fT4 is about 6-l2%, likely due to nonthyroidal disease,
con firm hypothyroidism.
makes it important not only to examine that fT4 is increased.
but also to consider the magnitude of the increase and cor-
Confirmatory tests: fT4, T3 suppression,
relate fT4 with TT4. The increase in fT4 seen with concurrent
TRH or TSH stimulation
diseases is the reason that fT4 should not be relied on solely
fT4
to diagnose hyperthyroidism and why the fT4 concentration
 Usually TT4 is all that is needed to diagnose hyperthyroidism
should be correlated with TT4. The greater the increase of
in cats. If the serum TT4 is increased in a cat with
fT4 and TT4 the more likely the diagnosis is hyperthyroidism
(Fig. 32.3). The lower the TT4 the more likely the increase
measure fT4 as it will also be increased in l00 % of these
in fT4 is due to nonthyroidal illness.
cats. If results of TT4 are not clear-cut then measure fT4 via
equilibrium dialysis and correlate with TT4 concentration and
T3 suppression test
clinical signs.
Suppression and/or stimulation tests are recommended
Serum fT4 is not suppressed by nonthyroidal illnesses to
when repeat testing for TT4 and fT4 have not provided a
the same degree as is TT4 and therefore fT4 is valuable when
diagnosis. Usually finding the concurrent illness, and treat-
concurrent illnesses are suspected to be lowering TT4 into
ing it, or repeating the TT4 and fT4 at different time inter-
reference interval. In a study of over 9oo hyperthyroid cats.
vals, are easier ways to confirm hyperthyroidism than is
205 were categorized as mildly hyperthyroid and of these
performing functional thyroid tests. If a functional test is
504
centrations of TT4, fT4 are still within reference interval, it
Table 32.2 Surmrmary of test results in cats with hyperthyroidismm.
supports hyperthyroidism.
T4:
 Thyrotropin releasing hormone response test--
● 90-95% of hyperthyroid cats increased concentrations; sensitivity
TRH response
90-95 %
● 5-1 0% of hyperthyroid cats have results within reference
Principle
interval = false negative; explanations:
1. Early in the disease
late release of TSH, which stimulates increased TT4 produc-
2. Fluctuations in secretion of TT4 
tion and secretion. This response willbe blunted in hyperthyroid
3. Concurrent non-thyroid diseases that decrease TT4
cats because the neoplastic follicular cells are not responding
"Solutions"
to normal physiologic stimuli and the adjacent atrophic cells
1. Repeat TT4 (1-2 weeks, 2 months, whatever owner wiltolerate)
 are incapable of responding.
2. Measure fT4 via equilibrium dialysis 
 3. Exarmine thyroid for nodules: palpate, US, radioactive irnaging 
Interpretation guidelines
4. Find concurrent nonthyroid disease
 5. T3 suppression test 
 Increase TT4 60% or more from basal = euthyroid
 6. TRH, TSH stirnulation test 
Increase TT4 50-60% of basal = nondiagnostic
freeT4:
· 98.5% of hyperthyroid cats have increased fT4
Increase TT4 < 50% to 0 = hyperthyroid
 6-12% false positive = increased fT4 with nonthyroid dlisease
· Correlate fT4 with TT4, do not diagnose just on fT4 
Side effects can be significant, occur within minutes of
● If fT4 is increased highly probable hyperthyroidisrn
administration, and are transient for a few hours. Side effects
:ELL
include vomiting. defecation, salivation, and tachypnea.
● Approximately 25% of hyperthyroid cats have TT3 within reference
interval
Thyroid stimulating hormone response
 Do not use; better tests are available
test—TSH response
Principle
Same as the TRH response test
desired, try T3 suppression first as it has fewer side effects
Interpretation
and is easier to interpret then the others.
The T3 suppression principle is to administer TT3 orally
 Increase TT4 60% or > from basal = euthyroid
Increase TT4 50-60% of basal = nondiagnostic
tion of TsH. Normal cats will suppress and hyperthyroid cats
do not suppress. Oral TT3 will suppress the secretion of TSH
Increase TT4 < 50 % to 0 = hyperthyroid
from thyrotrophs, which in turn decreases production and
release of TT4 (and TT3) from the thyroid gland in normal
Human recombinant TSH is expensive, but can be used in
a e  s si  n a q si
place of bovine medical grade TSH. Hyperthyroid cats with
thyroid follicular cells are normal. Hyperthyroid cats already
values in mid to low range of TT4 have a response to TSH
a    ui s  s 
that is the same as normal cats.
secreting thyroid tumors and therefore they already have
It is recommended to consult with your reference labora-
decreased TSH. Therefore adding more TT3 cannot suppress
tory to obtain specific suppression and stimulation protocol
this axis any further. The neoplastic thyroid follicular cells
information and interpretation guidelines.
will continue secreting TT4 independent of TSH and there-
fore there is no decrease in TT4.
Endogenous TSH
 This suppression test is accomplished by administering
Assays for feline specific TSH are not yet available, but assays 
TT3 orally for six doses; some protocols use three doses. At
used for dogs and humans are. Consult the reference lab
the start of the study. take a blood sample for a basal TT4.
for which antibodies are used and more importantly the
fT4, TT3 and 6-8 hours after the last dose of TT3 take
reference interval values and cut-off values used to interpret
another serum sample for the same measurements. TT3
results. Measurement of TSH is not needed when TT4 is
determines if the cat successfully received TT3. The concen-
increased and is only used when TT4 and fT4 results are not
tration of TT4, fT4 after the administration of TT3 should
definitive. When TT4 is normal to high normal, TSH that is
decrease in a euthyroid cat and they do not suppress in
decreased and/or below the detectable limit is diagnostic for
hyperthyroidism. If there is no suppression, even if the con-
hyperthyroidism.
505
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
300
23
200
15.5
0
260
14
20
175-
160
12
12
150
140
10
Ol/L)
10
/dL)
2
120
125
0l/L
oud)
/6r)
/6r)
(nm
100
100
tree
wr
wn
Seru
80
Seri
75
Se
C
60
8
50
40
20
25
C
门
Normal
Hyperthyroid
 Other Illness
Normal
Hyperthyroid
Other Illness
Figure 32.3 Box plots of serum total thyroxine (T4) concentrations (left) and free T4 concentrations (right) in 172 clinically normal cats, 917 cats with
untreated hyperthyroidisrm and 221 cats with nonthyroidal disease (other illness). The box represents the interquartile range (i.e., 25th-75th percentile 
range or the mmiddle half of the data). The horizontal bar in the box represents the median value. For each box plot, the T-bars represent the main body
of data, which in most instances is equal to the range. Outlying data points are represented by open circles. The shaded area indicates the reference
Author comment: Some cats with hyperthyroicdism can have serum concentrations of T4 and free T4 within the reference interval (false negatives). Sore
(lg Ateixodde saisod ase tl aa jo suoeuauon paseaui aaey uen (ssaul sauo) aseasip eioyruou um sies
pituitary lesion (tumor) that is destroying or crowding out
Hypothyroidism
thyrotrophs. Lesions associated with this are pituitary
tumors, pituitary cysts, hypoplasia, dysfunctional thyro-
General considerations
trophs, and an apparent deficiency of TSH production in
Hypothyroidism is a common disease in dogs. About 95%
giant schnauzers. The lack of TsH results in atrophy of the
of the cases are due to a primary lesion in the thyroid gland
thyroid gland, which theoretically could be reversed if the
defined as lymphocytic thyroiditis and/or idiopathic follicu-
primary lesion in the pituitary could be corrected. Teritary
lar collapse. These lesions are part of the same disease. It
hypothyroidism due to a lesion that decreases TRH has not
starts as lymphocytic thyroiditis and ends as follicular col-
been reported in veterinary medicine. An increased concen-
lapse, with a continuum in between. A dog with primary
tration of TSH with concurrent decreases in TT4 and fT4
hypothyroidism late in the disease will have decreased TT4
confirms primary hypothyroidism.
and fT4 and increased concentrations of TSH. Increased TSH
Lymphocytic thyroiditis is an immune mediated destruc-
is in response to decreased thyroid hormones and loss of
tion of the thyroid gland directed at thyroid follicular cells,
negative feedback on the pars distalis. Other lesions in the
sparing C-cells. It is nonreversible and affected dogs require
thyroid gland that cause hypothyroidism are uncommon.
life long thyroid replacement therapy. Clinical si gns develop
These include thyroid neoplasia, aplasia, hypoplasia, and
gradually over several years and are detected when approxi-
dyshormonogenesis. Secondary hypothyroidism, due to a
mately 75 % or more of the gland is destroyed. Lymphocytes
structural or biochemical lesion in the pituitary gland that
and plasma cells produce antibodies directed at thyroid fol-
decreases TsH production, is uncommon, 5% or less of
licular cells, with antigens including thyroglobulin (most
cases. A dog with secondary hypothyroidism will have
common), colloid, TT3, and TT4. There is a genetic compo-
decreased TT4, fT4, and TSH. Decreased TSH is due to the
nent to this disease and the list of dog breeds that have an
506
increased prevalence of thyroid antibodies in their serum is
Hypothyroidism in large animals (horses and small rumi-
long. These antibodies and the inflammation gradually
nants) is almost always due to the intake of some exogenous
destroy the follicular cells. Over time, the inflammation evi-
substance that interferes with the production of TT3 and
denced by inflammatory cells subsides. Histologically, the
TT4. Many substances can do this, and they interfere with
gland at this point appears as idiopathic follicular collapse.
the production of thyroid hormones at various stages. A few
Autoantibodes directed against thyroglobulin, TT4, or TT3
of the more common and/or high-profile substances are
may increase or decrease TT4 and TT3 concentrations as
sulfa compounds, decreased iodine intake, increased iodine 
measured by RIA depending on methodologies. Falsely
intake, plants (kale, seaweed). and various chemical sub-
increased values of TT4 or TT3 are seen if antibody-coated
stances (thiouracil). The decreased production of TT3 and 
tubes are used in a single-step separation technique.
TT4 due to these substances, results in reduced or no nega-
Increased concentrations of TT4 in a dog with clinical signs
tive feedback to the hypothalamus and pituitary gland and.
of hypothyroidism can confuse interpretation of the results.
therefore increased TSH production. The increased TSH
This is uncommon, occurring in less than 5% of the cases
stimulates follicular cell hypertrophy and hyperplasia, result-
and can be confirmed by measuring the different antibodies.
ing in an enlarged, goitrogenic thyroid gland. These animals
Furthermore the clinical signs of hyperthyroidism versus
have goiter, mild to massive thyroid gland enlargement, and
hypothyroidism are very different. Even more confusing is
hypothyroidism indicated by decreased TT3 and TT4. Goiter
the situation where the antibodies "raise" the TT4 and/or
in neonates is the most common thyroid disorder in the
TT3 into reference interval. In either situation, if hypothy-
horse and small ruminant. In small ruminants it is usually
roidism is the likely differential, then the next step is to
due to iodine deficiency during pregnancy and is associated
consult with the reference lab and to measure antibodies for
with dead fetus, poor suckling. weak, hypothermia, and
thyroglobulin, TT3, and/or TT4. If any of these are increased
abnormal wool or hair coat. In foals it is associated with
then antibody interference is the most likely explanation for
prolonged gestation, poor ossification, ruptured tendons.
the confounding data. Free T4 is interfered with less than
contracted tendons, prognathism, and unthrifty and weak
TT4 or TT3, so it is hoped that in these uncommon situations
foals. It is seen in northwestern USA and western Canada.
the fT4 will be decreased while TT4 is increased, which
The etiology is not known, but it is associated with lush
pastures. The thyroid gland is not grossly enlarged, but it is
observed (<5% of cases) and when seen is probably in an
hyperplastic microscopically. In weanlings to 2-year-olds
early or active phase of the disease when inflammation and
hypothyroidism is due to ingestion of excess iodine (supple-
        
ments, kelp, etc.).
clinical suspicion with the laboratory data. Recent vaccina-
Hypothyroidism is uncommon to rare in adult horses, but
tion can also produce antibodies to thyroglobulin, but there
is often diagnosed in overweight horses and fat ponies with
is no associa tion with hypothyroidism.
"cresty" necks; it is not usually confirmed with lab data. The
Other casues of hypothyroidism in dogs are rare: neoplas-
horses may have decreased TT4 and TT3, but rarely is endog-
tic destruction of the gland, iodine deficiency, iatrogenic
enous TSH measured or stimulatory tests performed before
destruction (surgery, radioiodine). dyshormonogenesis,
the horses are empirically placed on thyroid supplements.
pituitary cysts (dwarfism), and congenital—giant schnauzer
-  a    a n ro
and an autosomal recessive form in toy fox terriers, in which 
 drome and are resistant to insulin from being overweight, a
there is a deficiency of thyroid peroxidase. A genetic test can
form of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Horses with equine meta-
recognize the carrier trait in fox terriers.
bolic syndrome test negative for hypothyroidism and equine
Spontaneous hypothyroidism is very rare in adult cats. An
Cushing's disease. Furthermore drugs such as phenylbuta-
alutosomal recessive form of congenital hypothyroidism is
zone and food deprivation are known to lower serum
reported in Abyssinian cats. Decreased concentrations of TT4
thyroid hormones in the horse.
in a cat are much more likely to be due to nonthyroidal
      s
Signalment
surgical, chemical, or radiation-induced thyroidectomy
Canine breeds
for the treatment of hyperthyroidism is the most common
Golden retrievers, Doberman pinschers, dachshunds, Irish
cause in cats. Disproportionate dwarfism occurs in
setters, miniature schnauzers, Great Danes, miniature
kittens and causes polyendocrinopathies including growth
poodles, boxers, Shetland sheepdogs. Newfoundlands.
hormone defects and hypothyroidism. Other rare causes
chows, English bulldogs. Airedales, cocker spaniels, Irish 
in kittens are defects in thyroid hormone synthesis, dysgen-
wolfhounds, toy fox terriers, giant schnauzers, Scottish
esis, and an autosomal recessive form of congenital hypo-
deerhounds, and Afghan hounds may be regarded as high
thyroidism in Abyssinians. Iodine deficiency may cause
risk breeds for hypothyroidism. The disease may also occur
hypothyroidism and goiter in kittens fed all meat or home
in all other breeds regarded to be at lower risk. High-risk
designed diets.
breeds may present as early as 2 years of age and low-risk
507
SEcTloN Iv Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
breeds after 5 years of age. Both sexes may be equally
treatment. "Confirmation" with a panel of TT4, fT4, and TSH
affected.
may not be needed in cases this fully developed. Confirming
the diagnosis of hypothyroidism with additional tests
depends on how advanced the disease is.
History and physical examination abnormalities
These are numerous and some combination of problems
may be detected in hypothyroid dogs. These include weight
Screening tests TT4, fT4; panel TT4 and TsH or fT4
gain to obesity without increased feed consumption, leth-
and TsH on same sample
argy. dull haircoat, cold intolerance detected as heat-seeking
Basal concentration of TT4 should be the initial endocrine
behavior, decreased libido, reproductive failure, alopecia
For convenience, TT4 is included in some routine chemistry
tion in areas of alopecia. Secondary skin diseases such as
panels. About 95% of hypothyroid dogs have decreased
seborrhea. dry coat, and pyoderma may be observed.
concentrations of TT4, resulting in a sensitivity 95%.
Uncommon clinical signs include keratoconjunctivitis sicca,
polyneuropathy. vestibular disease, and facial nerve paraly-
also have decreased TT4, resulting in a false positive rate of
sis. Myxedema is uncommon, but is considered pathogno-
20% or specificity of 80%. Euthyroid sick dogs will account
monic. Thyroid hormones stimulate the immune system and
for most or all of these false positives (Fig. 32.2). Therefore.
there is decreased T-cell immunity in hypothyroidism that
TT4 is an excellent screening test to rule out hypothyroidism
may predispose to the secondary skin infections such as
because only 5% of hypothyroid dogs will have TT4 in the
pyoderma, Malassezia, generalized demodicosis, and otitis
reference interval. If a panel is selected, choose fT4 and TSH
externa.
performed on the same sample, fT4 by equilibrium dialysis
 The majority of dogs with lymphocytic thyroiditis present
(see Table 32.3). Interpretive guidelines are:
-  a o i ' n s
eases and/or endocrinopathies may appear concurrently.
fT4 >1.5 ng/dl or 20 pmol/L = typical of euthyroid in dogs 
These may include lymphocytic adrenalitis, lymphocytic dia-
betes mellitus, hypoparathyroidism, and lymphocytic orchi-
fT4 < 0.5 ng/dl or 7 pmol/L = typical of hypothyroidism
tis. Most of these will be detected as one endocrinopathy.
in dogs
However, in some cases a second or third endocrine disease
is recognized months or years later.
A dog with primary hypothyroidism late in the disease
Clinical signs in cats are similar to those in dogs. Clinical
should have the following abnormalities (see Table 32.4.):
signs in dwarf kittens include disproportionate growth, large
decreased TT4 and fT4, increased concentration of TSH, and
head, short broad neck, lethargy, retained deciduous teeth.
failure to increase TT4 in response to a TSH or TRH stimula-
and retained kitten hair coat.
tion test, if it were performed. Ninety percent of these dogs
will have lymphocytic thyroiditis or idiopathic follicular col-
lapse. The glands will never regenerate and the dog will
Routine laboratory data
need lifelong medication. A dog with secondary hypothy-
Routine laboratory test abnormalities are nonspecific and
roidism will have decreased TT4, fT4, and TSH. Decreased
may include the following. Mild nonregenerative anemia
TSH results from the pituitary lesion that is destroying or
(30% of cases) due to decreased responsiveness to erythro-
crowding out thyrotrophs resulting in thyroid gland atrophy
poietin is recognized in about 30% of cases. More cases
due to the absence of trophic hormone. Findings supportive
may have a decreased hematocrit, but it is still in the refer-
of secondary hypothyroidism include decreased TSH, indica-
ence interval. Increased liver enzymes are attributed to
tions of other endocrine diseases, and visual or CNS signs.
hepatic lipidosis that is often present in these dogs. Increases
 It is important to not diagnose hypothyroidism on one
in muscle enzymes (CPK, LDH) are reported, but are not
endocrine test result in isolation. The test(s) must be com-
consistent. Hypertriglyceridemia and hyperlipidemia occurs
bined with signalment, history, physical exam, and routine
in a majority of cases. Hypercholesterolemia is seen in
lab data to determine the likelihood of hypothyroidism
approximately 80% of hypothyroid dogs and a serum cho-
(Tables 32.4 and 32.5). The more pieces of the puzzle that
lesterol concentration greater than 5o0 mg/dL is very sug-
fit with hypothyroidism, the fewer tests are needed to diag-
gestive of hypothyroidism. A concentration >600 mg/dL in
nose and start treatment. If multiple abnormalities are
present, especially if the results are marked, then a diagnosis
Perhaps as many as 20% of the cases can be diagnosed based
can be made with confidence. The lower the concentration
on sufficient clinical signs in a middle aged dog combined
of TT4 and fT4, the greater the likelihood of hypothyroidism.
with a cholesterol >500 mg/dL and a TT4 <2 μg/dL. This will
For example, if the TT4 and fT4 are <10 nmol/L (<0.5 μg/dL)
be enough for many veterinarians to diagnose and start
and <7 pmol/L (<0.5 ng/dL) respectively. the best diagnosis
508
Table 32.3 Expected results for canine thyroid profiles.
 Reference intervals
TT4
fT4
TSH
TT4
nmol/L
pmol/L
ng/mL
7p/6r
20-55
10-45
<0.5
1.5-4.3
 Hypothyroid likely 
<11
<10
<1
 Hypothyroid unlikely
>20
>15
>2
Gray zone
12-20
Prirmary hypothyroid 
<15
<10
>1.0
<1
Prirmary hypothyroid 
<15
<15
>1.0
<1
 Seconcdary hypothyroid
15
<10
UD
<1
 UD = undetectable, below linit of detection, <0.03 ng/ml; if a lower limit of reference is set than values below this number are also confirmatory.
 Reference intervals and cut-off values used should be from the laboratory performing assay5.
Table 32.4 General considerations for interpreting canine thyroid profiles.
 Diag nosis/Test
T4
fT4
TSH
TSH Stimulation
 Rule out hypothyroidlism 
RI
RI
RI
Not performed
Prirnary late
Dec
Dec
Inc
None to suppressed
Prirnary early
RI
Dec
Inc
None to suppressed 
Euthyroid sick
Dec
RI
RI
Increased; mild illness 
Euthyroid sick 
Dec
Dec
Variable
Increased; severe illness 
These above scenarios cover most cases; and the number of tests selected wil depend on the veterinarian's experience and how characteristic the
clinical signs and routine lab data are. Not all cases require all tests. The following are less commonly observed results that we spend considerable 
effort trying to understand and diagnose.
 Primary early
RI
Dec
RI
None to suppressed 
 Prirmary early
RI
RI
Inc
None to suppressed 
Prirmary <2%
LI
Dec
LI
None to suppressed 
 Autoantibodies*
Inc
RI
RI
Secondary 
Dec
lec
Dec
Pituitary lesion 
 Euthyroid sick
Dec
RI
RI
Mild illness 
Euthyroid sick 
Dec
Dec
Variable
Severe illness 
 False positive inc of TSH 
RI
RI
Inc
Increased, doubles or >
Drugs
Dec
 Depends on drug and mode of action 
If excessive ingestion
lodine intake
Dec
Dec
Sight hounds
 Normally dec to 1/2 of Rl; they need their own Rl 
Obese
Inc
Young
2-5x
Inc
 Dec = decrease: Inc = increase: Rl = reference interval
+ Auto-antibodies are not a thyroid function test; they may falsely increase TT4; they indicate lymphocytic thyroidlitis is likely; somme of these dogs
progress into the hypothyroid state and many do not.
509
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Table 32.5 Examples, use all the case data, here are some key component5
Cases
RI
Cholesterol
TT4
fT4
TSH
 Other tests 
Diagnosis
7p/6u
nmol/L
pmol/L
ng/
mL
130-350
20-55
10-45
<0.5
1 alopecia
>500
<10
NN 
NN
NN
Hypothyroid
2 alopecia
>500
<15
<10
NN 
NN
Hypothyroid 
eiadole e
x400
<20
5
NN
NN
Hypothyroid 
4 alopecia
400
<25
<15
inc
NN
 Primary hypothyroid 
 5 alopecia
400
<20
<15
？
Hypothyroid 
6 alopecia
002<
<20
<10
RI
TSH
Stim needed
 7 lethargy
00E<
>25
NN 
NN
NN
Rule out
8 lethargy
00E<
<20
>20
RI
NN 
Rule out 
9 lethargy
00E<
12
20
RI
NN
ino ainy 
10 lethargy
>400
<15
<10
Dec
Imaging?
Pituitary lesion
11 alopecia
>500
>55
<10
Inc
Antibodies
 Prirmary hypothyroid 
12 vague
RI
8
7
NN
NN
 Normal for Saluki
13 vague
RI
RI
RI
RI
 Positive for antibodies
Rl = reference interval; consult laboratory doing measurements for Rl and recommended cut-off values used for diagnostic, gray zone, etc.
 NN = not needed, this is the veterinarian's decision: the more characteristic the clinical signs and routine lab data are for hypothyroidism the fewer
tests are needed
 Examples 1-4 = hypothyroidism confident of dliagnosis but have not distinguished primary vs. secondary: primary much more likely, both treated the
 same.
 Exarmple 5 = hypothyroidism likely; additional testing discretion of the veterinarian.
 Exammple 6 = hypothyroidism likely, TSH did not help recornmend TSH stim.
Examples 7-9 = rule out hypothyroidism: if clinical signs or other data was strongly suggestive of hypothyroidism consider a TSH stim. Examples 8
and 9 are consistent with euthyroid sick syndrome; the decrease in TT4 is disproportionately lower than the expected change in fT4.
Example 10 = hypothyroidism, secondary ruled in: consider imaging
Example 11 = primary hypothyroidism with increased TT4 due to antibodies; <2% of cases have this profile.
Example 12 = TT4 and fT4 dliagnostic for hypothyroidism unless a 5sight hound breed, then a profile like this is norrmal; dliagnostic ranges for sight 
hounds are approximately half that of other breeds.
Example 13 = dog likely has lymphocytic thyroiditis; dog is euthyroid at this time; some develop hypothyroidisr and most do not; repeat testing 
 recomnmended especially if frorm a breed with increase prevalence of hypothyroidism.
is hypothyroidism. If cholesterol is markedly increased and
months. These challenging cases may require more intensive
TT4 and fT4 are both decreased, and the dog has multiple
diagnostic procedures such as measurement of antibodies to
signs, then this is sufficient for a diagnosis without further
thyroid antigens, repeat testing in 4 weeks, removal of con-
testing.
current drug therapy followed by repeat testing in 4 weeks.
stimulation tests (TSH or TRH). imaging of the neck (US.
 More challenging diagnostic scenarios
MRI, technetium pertechnetate). and response to T4 trial
The guidelines above are for classic cases that are fully devel-
replacement therapy. Sometimes. there is merit in trial
oped. However, use of thyroid hormone tests to confirm
therapy in place of extensive, complex testing. Unlike Cush-
hypothyroidism can be frustra ting because the disease can be
ing's disease, hypothyroidism is a disease that can be misdi-
in various stages of development and there are situations in
agnosed, missed and/or treated for when it does not exist and
which the test results present conflicting or ambiguous find-
 the consequences are not great. Missing a diagnosis of hypo-
ings. Breed, superimposed disease, drug, and age variables 
thyroidism is not life-threatening and sometimes repeat
influence results. However, in more than 80% of situations
testing in a month or more will yield clearer results as the
the results are definitive and it is possible to rule out or rule
disease progresses. Treating a dog with levothyroid that does
in hypothyroidism. A minority of cases requires more exten-
not have hypothyroidism also does not have serious biologic
sive testing evaluation, perhaps over a period of weeks to
consequences. In fact a term has evolved to categorize dogs
510
CHAPTER 32 Laboratory Evaluation of the Thyroid, Adrenal, and Pituitary Glands
that respond well to levothyroid but actually do not have
thyroid disease causes the suppression of measured thyroid
hypothyroidism—"thyroid responsive disease." Thyroid hor-
hormones. The decrease in thyroid hormones is a physio-
mones may benefit sick patients similar to the nonspecific
logic adaptive response stimulated by a variety of cytokines
stimulatory effects of steroids. Perhaps accepting some of the
that lower the basal metabolic rate and reduce cellular
above before testing panels are begun will make the 10-20%
metabolism in times of illness. There are a variety of mecha-
of gray zone cases less frustrating. Furthermore primary and
nisms postulated to decrease the thyroid hormones and
secondary hypothyroidism are treated the same, with syn-
some of these may even decrease TSH secretion. These
thetic thyroxine (T4). levothyroid supplementation. This
animals will have decreased concentrations of TT4, but are
 supplerment is inexpensive and a fat dog may benefit from a
euthyroid. A variety of illnesses can cause this syndrome and
little T4 regardless of their thyroid status. The important clini-
the more severe the illness the more pronounced is the
cal distinction is to differentiate hypothyroidism from the
decrease in TT4. Approximately 20% of sick dogs that do
euthyroid sick syndrome and recognize the correct concur-
not have hypothyroidism will have decreased concentra-
rent disease that is suppressing thyroid hormones. Differen-
tions of TT4, a false positive test result for hypothyroidism.
tiating primary and secondary hypothyroidism can be done
Free T4 is only decreased in 5-10% of these dogs. but similar
to TT4 the more severe the illness the more the suppression
dogs are shown in Table 32.6. The effects of some variables
in fT4. If the decrease in TT4 is disproportionately greater
on thyroid hormone testing are presented in Table 32.7.
than the decrease in fT4 then it favors the interpretation of
A relatively common diagnostic challenge is to determine
euthyroid sick syndrome. The key feature for considering
if a dog with a decreased TT4 is really hypothyroid when
euthyroid sick is decreased TT4 without supporting changes
only some of the physical and laboratory abnormalities of
in fT4 and TSH. Another helpful assessment is that dogs with
hypothyroidism are present. This is the syndrome known as
euthyroid sick syndrome are not expected to have the more
"euthyroid sick." The laboratory tests are abnormal, but
specific clinicopathologic features of hypothyroidism such as 
function of the thyroid gland and the biologic activity of the
hypercholesterolemia, alopecia, and weight gain. It is impor-
thyroid hormones is considered normal or "euthyroid." This
tant to recognize this group in order to correct the primary
is a syndrome that occurs in dogs and cats in which a non-
disease that is suppressing thyroid hormones.
Table 32.6 Thyroid hormones in hypothyroid and euthyroid dogs.
Hypothyroid
Euthyroid
Sensitivity/Specificity
Dog5 n = 108 
54
54
%
TT4 dec 
48 = 90%
poog
10 = 18%
90/82
3 RI
Ju! E
jap ell
3/31 = 10%
p006 10N
3/37 = 8%
23 RI
5 inc
freeT4 dec
53 = 98%
Great
4 = 7%
E6/86
1 RI
TSH inc 
41 = 76%
4 = 7%
76/93
13 RI = 24%
5 low normal = 9% *
In this study only one euthyroid sick dog had low T4, low fT4, and increased TSH = false positive.
+Some of these 5 dogs may have had secondary hypothyroidisn. Rl = reference interval.
Sensitivity
Specificity
Accuracy %
 free T4 
86
E6
95
TT4
89
82
85
TSH 
76
E6
84
Summary from: JAVMA 211 : 1396 (1997).
Author comment: The more fully developed a disease the easier it is for diagnostic tests to "recognize" the disease.
511
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Table 32.7 Interpretation of thyroid hormones in dogs with unique situation5.
 Consideration 
Body size
<10kg
Higher TT4: median 31.5nmol/L
>30kg
 Lower TT4; median 25 nmol/L 
Breed
Sight hounds
 Decrease TT4 and fT4 50% less than other dog5
Nordic breeds
No effect on TSH
Age
<3months
Increase TT4  2-5 tirmes adult 
>6 years
Decrease TT4
 Nonthyroidal illnes
Decrease TT4 dogs and cats; the greater the severity of iness the greater the decrease
 Nonthyroidal iliness
fT4 influenced less but can decrease in dogs and cats; can also increase fT4 in cats
Drugs
Decrease TT4 and fT4: glucocorticoids., sulfonammides. propylthiouracil, aspirin, Phenobarbital, carprofen, methimazole,
 Decrease TT4, litle or no effect on fT4: furosemicde, phenylbutazone, progestagens 
 Sulfonamides may decrease TT4 and fT4 and increase TSH and cause hypothyroidism
Obese dogs have mild increases in serum TT4 concentrations; 50-75% higher
Sight hounds have TT4 and fT4 much lower than other breeds; normal concentrations for sight hounds would be hypothyroid values for other
breeds.
 Pregnancy and diestrus will increase TT4.
An age-related decline occurs in serum total TT4 concentrations and response to TSH stimulation in dogs.
The euthyroid sick syndrome is also recognized in cats, but
          
the challenge presented is in the diagnosis of hyperthyroid-
thyroid, yet will "appear" to have increased measurable-
ism. The dilemma is recognizing hyperthyroidism when the
concentrations of T and T, but, most importantly, increased
concentrations of T, and T, antibodies.
The severity of the nonthyroid disease is proportional to the
Diagnostic challenge may occur as a result of ongoing drug
decrease in TT4. This happens in older cats with concurrent
therapy. Most of the problems caused by drugs are interfer-
diseases such as chronic interstitial nephritis, cancer, and
ence with assays and usually this is observed as a decrease
debility. Serum fT4 is not suppressed as much as TT4, so that
in TT4 and/or fT4; see Table 32.7. Sulfonamides, however.
measurement may be helpful. However, fT4 is actually
      
increased in some severely sick cats which adds a new diag
fT4 and increased TSH. Sulfonamides block iodination of
nostic challenge. If TT4is in reference interval, fT4is increased
thyroglobulin and prevent production of thyroid hormones
it is either true hyperthyroidism or the euthyroid sick syn-
if the dose is high enough and given 4 weeks or longer. Ces-
drome. Distinguishing these two differentials requires cor-
sation of the sulfonamides reverses the effects. Glucocorti-
relation of all the data and perhaps additional testing. See
coids affect metabolism of thyroid hormones and inhibit TSH
hyperthyroidism discussion for these approaches. Hopefully
secretion resulting in variable combinations of decreased or
the clinical expression of these nonthyroid diseases is such
normal concentrations of TT4, fT4, and TSH. Phenobarbital
that they are recognized or suspected.
does not cause hypothyroidism, but does decrease TT4 and
Another diagnostic challenge occurs is when the clinical
fT4, and may cause a slight increase in TSH. It is beyond the
and clinical lab abnormalities support hypothyroidism, but
scope of this chapter to review all the influences of therapy
TT4 is increased or perhaps within the mid to upper refer-
on thyroid hormones. A general recommendation is to dis-
ence interval. This creates endocrine testing data that is
continue medications that affect the thyroid gland for 4
inconsistent with the clinical picture. It's more likely such a
weeks before measuring thyroid hormones or doing dynamic
sioday Ard jo asud-pi io Aa ue ui si aop
testing. Levothyroid should be discontinued for 8 weeks
with lymphocytic thyroiditis and increased concentrations
before retesting the thyroid pituitary axis.
of antibodies directed against thyroid antigens. The way t0
It is occasionally useful to determine if the hypothyroid-
solve this problem is to measure antibodies for aaTg and
ism is secondary to a pituitary lesion. The determination is
somewhat academic because thyroid replacement therapy is
in the in vitro measurement of T and T, and therefore.
the same, but documentation of a pituitary lesion may
512
uncover additional endocrinopathies and have longer term
with decreased TT3 and TT4 and associated hypothyroidism.
case management and prognostic implications.
Many substances can do this, and they interfere with the
Sight hounds such as Salukis, greyhounds, whippets,
production of thyroid hormones at various stages. A few of
 Scottish deerhounds, Irish wolfhounds, Sloughis, and Basen-
the more common and/or high-profile substances are sulfa
is  i si n t s  a 
compounds, decreased iodine intake, increased iodine
normal. Salukis and greyhounds also have low fT4 that are
intake, plants (kale, seaweed). and various chemical sub-
in the range of hypothyroidism for other breeds. TT4 may
stances (thiouracil). The decreased production of TT3 and
be below the lower limit of reference intervals for normal
TT4 due to these substances results in reduced or no nega-
dogs in 90% of greyhounds and below the limit of detection
tive feedback to the hypothalamus and pituitary gland and.
in up to 33%. Therefore, the diagnosis of hypothyroidism in 
therefore, increased TSH production. The increased TSH
one of the sight hound breeds should include tests other
stimulates follicular cell hypertrophy and hyperplasia, result-
than TT4. For sight hound breeds it may be more important
ing in an enlarged, goitrogenic thyroid gland. Goiter in neo-
         
nates is the most common thyroid disorder in the horse and
the TT4 concentration is. However, hypothyroidism can be
small ruminant. In small ruminants it is usually due to
ruled out in a sight hound breed with confidence if TT4 is
iodine deficiency during pregnancy and is associated with
within the reference interval used for all dogs. Cut-off values
dead fetus, poor suckling. weakness, hypothermia, and
for TT4, fT4 and TSH for hypothyroidism in the sight hound
abnormal wool or hair coat. In foals it is associated with
breeds are not established. The cause for low thyroid hor-
prolonged gestation, poor ossification, ruptured tendons.
mones in sight hound breeds is not known.
con tracted tendons, prognathisim, and unthrifty, weak foals.
It is seen in northwestern USA and western Canada. The
Diagnosis in cats
etiology is not known, but it is associated with lush pastures.
The thyroid gland is not grossly enlarged, but it is hyperplas-
tic microscopically. In weanlings to 2-year-olds hypothyroid-
phocytic  thyroidits  and  secondary  hypothyroidism  are
ism is due to ingestion of excess iodine (supplements, kelp
etc.). It is uncommon to rare in adult horses. It is often clini-
thyroidism is iatrogenic from treatment of hyperthyroidism.
The most common cause of decreased TT4 and/or fT4 in a cat
but is not usually confirmed with lab data. The horses may
is euthyroid sick syndrome. For true hypothyroidism, essen-
have decreased TT4 and TT3, but TSH measurement or stim-
tially all adult cats should have a history of thyroidectomy.
        
radiation, or methimazole treatment. In most of these,
placed on thyroid supplements, reduced feed intake, and
thyroid hormones are being assessed periodically to gauge
increased exercise. It is difficult to know which of these
success of treatment. Nonregenerative anemia and hyper-
treatments is responsible for clinical improvement.
cholesterolemia are expected if the cat is hypothyroid. TT4 is
the initial step and if in reference interval the cat is euthyroid
sick. If it is decreased and the history has an iatrogenic cause.
Adrenal gland disorders
then it is hypothyroid. These cats probably just need their
medications adjusted. If TT4 is decreased and there is no
Hypoadrenocorticism: Addison's disease
Primary
more likely the euthyroid sick syndrome. The most common
Lymphocytic adrenalitis—-destroys all three zones of adrenal
cause of a decreased TT4 in a cat that has not undergone
cortex; accounts for 90% or more of cases.
thyroidectomy is a concurrent illness. Now consider finding
Secondary
the nonthyroid disease and/or evaluate fT4 and TSH via a
Pituitary neoplasm or prolonged exogenous steroid; either
canine assay. The canine assay for TSH has been validated for
decreases ACTH causing bilateral adrenocortical atrophy of 
cats. If fT4 is decreased and TSH is increased and the clinical
zona fasiculata and reticularis.
signs and laboratory fit then it is hypothyroid. If in doubt
consider a TSH or TRH stimulation test or a trial response to
Hyperadrenocorticism: Cushing's syndrome
levothyroxine, followed with removal of levothyroxine to
Primary
see if clinical and laboratory abnormalities return.
Adrenal
 dependent—functional adrenal neoplasm—one
large adrenal and atrophy of contralateral adrenal.
Horses and small ruminants
Hypothyroidism in large animals is almost always due to the
Secondary
intalke of some exogenous substance that interferes with the
Pituitary dependent—functional pituitary neoplasm, secretes
production of TT3 and TT4. These animals have goiter, char-
ACTH stimulating bilateral adrenal gland hyperplasia and
acterized as a mild to massive thyroid gland enlargement
hypertrophy: accounts for 80% or more of cases.
513
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Adrenal gland background
hormone. The major disease of the ZF is hyperadrenocorti-
The adrenal gland has a cortex and a medulla. The outer
cism or Cushing's disease. This is usually secondary to a
most region of the cortex is the zona glomerulosa (ZG). It
pituitary adenoma that secretes excessive amounts of ACTH.
produces the mineralocorticoid aldosterone that helps regu-
Hyperadrenocorticism may also be caused by an adrenal
late the serum concentration of sodium and potassium,
cortical tumor that autonomously produces glucocorticoids
extracellular fluid volume, and blood pressure. The major
or iatrogenically by the exogenous administration of gluco-
regulation mechanism is via serum potassium concentra-
corticoids. Regardless of the cause, all of the clinical signs and
tions and by the renin-angiotensin system, with a minor
laboratory abnormalities of hyperadrenocorticism are due to
contribution from ACTH. Hyperkalemia will stimulate the
increased serum cortisol. The inner most region of the adrenal
release of aldosterone from the ZG to increase potassium
cortex is the zona reticularis (ZR) that produces glucocorti-
excretion via many epithelial cells including renal, salivary.
coids and sex horrmones. In dogs, cats, and horses this zone
intestinal, and sweat glands. Concurrently aldosterone stim-
has a minor role in hyperadrenocorticism. In ferrets, this
ulates renal sodium reabsoprtion that may increase blood
zone has a significant contribution because most of the clini-
 pressure. Renin is released from the juxtaglomerular appa-
cal abnormalities are due to increased sex steroids.
ratus near glomeruli in response to decreased blood pres-
The medulla is in the middle of each adrenal gland, it
sure, decreased sodium, and several other factors. Renin
produces epinephrine and norepinephrine. The major
then stimulates a cascade of events that leads to increased
disease is neoplasia of the adrenal medulla or pheochromo-
angiotensin II that stimulates vasoconstriction and release of
cytoma that causes increased serum epinephrine production
aldosterone. The majority of the stimulus to release aldoste-
and resultant hyperactivity, hypertension, and tachycardia.
rone comes from the steps outlined above. Approximately
10% of the overall stimulus to release aldosterone comes
Hypoadrenocorticism: Addison's disease
from ACTH and in the absence of ACTH there is mild atrophy
The following is an outline of the two types of hypoadreno-
of the ZG, but severe atrophy of zona fasiculata (ZF). The
corticism with expected major abnormalities and associated
major disease of the ZG is hypoadrenocorticism, or Addison's
diagnostic test findings (Table 32.8).
disease, due to lymphocytic adrenalitis. An uncommon
 disease is hyperplasia of the ZG, primary hyperaldosteronism
Primary
that increases aldosterone production.
Typical: lymphocytic adrenalitis that destroys the zona glo-
Subjacent to the ZG is the largest region of the cortex, the
merulosa, fasiculata and reticularis; there is decreased min-
zona fasculata (ZF) producing many hormones of which
eralocorticoids and  glucocorticoids:  hyponatremia 
and
glucocorticoids are the most clinically important. Cortico-
hyperkalemia due to decreased aldosterone. The sodium:
potassium ratio is most useful in these cases. A rare variant
stimulates ZF to release glucocorticoids immediately. Gluco-
corticoids complete the regulatory loop by providing nega-
hypoadrenocorticism. This may be the early form of primary.
tive feedback to (l) corticotrophs which decrease ACTH
but in which most of the manifestations are referable to
secretion and (2) receptors in the paraventricular nuclei in
glucocorticoid deficiency. Some of these cases will develop
the  hypothalamus 
to decrease corticotrophic
release
mineralocorticoid deficiency. but some do not.
Primary
Atypical
Secondary
Lesion 
Lyrmphocytic adrenalitis:
Early?
 Atrophy ZF
ZG ZF ZR
Basal cortisol
Dec
Dec
Dec
 ACTH stirnulation
 No response, post stimulation cortisol <2 μg/dL for alltypes 
 Plasna ACTH
Inc
Dec
Na
Dec
RI
RI
K
RI
RI
D
Dec
RI
RI
Na : K ratio
<23:1
>25:1
>25:1
Glucocorticoids
Dec
Dec
Dec
 Mineralocorticoids 
Dec
OK
OK
Irreversible
Progressive?
Reversible
514
Secondary
known or is an unusual form of primary hypoadrenocorti-
Either a pituitary lesion or prolonged exogenous steroid 
administration  followed by rapid withdrawal causes
phases of lymphocytic adrenalitis when there is adequate 
decreased ACTH and atrophy of zona fasiculata and reticu-
cortical reserve such that some, but not all manifestations of
laris: glucocorticoids are decreased, mineralocorticoids and
primary hypoadrenocorticism are present. It is also associ-
sodium potassium ratio are not affected.
ated with drugs that selectively attack zona fasiculata (mito-
tane and trilostane) and concurrent diseases that mask the
Primary
characteristic electrolyte abnormalities. These dogs initially
do not have serum sodium potassium abnormalities. Some
90-95% of Addison's disease in the dog. The two most
of these dogs will progress and have a decreased sodium
common lesions, lymphocytic adrenalitis and idiopathic
potassium ratio while others do not develop electrolyte
atrophy, represent different stages of the same disease. Early.
abnormalities even after a year or more of follow up. Beca use
the lesion is an immune mediated lymphocytic adrenalitis
of increased awareness of this subtype of hypoadrenocorti-
cism, ACTH stimulation is performed on dogs with vague
hypothyroidism. The adrenal cortex cannot regenerate from
clinical signs coupled with suspicion of the disease. Failure
these destructive lesions and therefore these patients require
of ACTH stimulation to increase cortisol >2 μg/dL is diagnos-
lifelong replacement therapy. Lymphocytic thyroiditis, para-
tic of hypoadrenocorticism even if sodium and potassium
thyroiditis, adrenalitis, and lymphocytic destruction of islets
concentra tions are normal.
are processes that occur in dogs usually as separate diseases.
It is rare that they occur in the same animal and produce
Secondary
polyglandular failure. Failure of multiple endocrine glands
The lesion of secondary hypoadrenocorticism is atrophy of
is more lilkely due to pituitary destruction. Infrequent other
zona fasiculata. Naturally occurring cases are caused by a
primary pituitary lesion such as a tumor or cyst. The process 
granulomatous inflammation, infarction, and iatrogenic
destroys corticotrophs in the pars distalis resulting in
chemotherapy (mitotane, trilostane). Mitotane (lysodren) is
decreased ACTH production (Fig. 32.4). Probably the most
used in the treatment of hyperadrenocorticism and it selec-
common cause of secondary hypoadrenocorticism is iatro-
tively causes necrosis of zona fasiculata and reticularis. In
genic from the sudden withdrawal of exogenous steroid
about 5% of treated dogs or in overdosed dogs destruction
of the zona glomerulosa may occur. In the majority of these
tive feedback to corticotrophs, decreased serum ACTH and
dogs the necrosis is permanent. The cortical zones do not
subsequent atrophy of zona fasiculata. In contrast to irre-
regenerate and the dogs subsequently require lifelong
versible lymphocytic adrenalitis, the adrenal cortex will
therapy with mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids. This is
secreting pituitary tumor is surgically removed. Atrophy is
associated with induction or maintenance therapy with
in ZF and ZR, therefore there is glucocorticoid deficiency.
       
but ZG and mineralocorticoids are spared. Atrophy may be
cortical necrosis or bacterial emboli from neonatal septice-
mia that destroy sufficient adrenal cortex to produce hypo-
glucocorticoids. Cortical function usually returns approxi-
adrenocorticism. Additionally there is a condition referred
     a  
to as relative adrenal insufficiency syndrome that is diag-
-dns Aeu pue siuessanddns suaiod aie spioians sunoe iaauon
nosed in weak and/or septic foals.
  s    d  a s
Approximately 75-90% of both adrenal cortices must be
destroyed before clinical signs are observed. Partial defi-
Clinical signs
ciency is probably the early stage of lymphocytic adrenalitis
Usually dogs are young to middle aged, 3-6 years. It can
occur in dogs and cats as early as 2-3 months of age. Seventy 
is cortical reserve, but the reserve is inadequate to cope with
percent are females and intact females have a greater preva-
stresses such as shipping. boarding. and fights. Like all dis-
lence other than for standard poodles, Portuguese water
eases it can be difficult to establish a definitive diagnosis
dogs, and bearded collies. There are multiple breeds associ-
while the disease, the clinical signs, and clinical pathology
ated with this disease; several with a higher risk are standard
data are evolving. Eventually the lesions progress and the
poodles, Great Danes, Rottweilers, West Highland white ter-
clinical signs and laboratory data become fully developed
riers, Saint Bernard, Nova Scotia duck trolling retrievers.
and more clearly diagnostic.
bearded collies, and Portuguese water dogs. Inheritance of
Atypicalglucocorticoid-deficient hypoadrenocorticism
the disease is established for standard poodles, Portuguese
These cases could represent either secondary hypoadreno-
water dogs, Nova Scotia duck trolling retrievers, and bearded
corticism in which the cause of the decrease in ACTH is not
      s 
515
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Pituitary
ACTH increased
ACTH decreased
A Normal
B. Adrenalitis
C. Pituitary tumor
D. Jatrogenic
ACTH decreased
Steroids negative feedback
Adrenal atrophy
Figure 32.4 Mechanisms of hypoadrenocorticismn (Addlison's): Arrows represent relative armounts of hormones being secreted with a norrmal pituitary-
adrenal axis and in three disease states. Adrenal gland sizes are relative for normal (A), primary Addison's caused by adrenalitis (B), and two types of
secondary Addison's disease (C, D). In primary adrenalitis (B) an immune mediated process destroys all three zones of the adrenal cortex resulting in 
decreased cortisol and therefore no negative feedback to the pituitary that results in increased production and secretion of ACTH. If a pituitary tumor
(C) destroys corticotrophs in the pars dlistalis, the result is decreased ACTH and bilateral adrenocortical atrophy. latrogenic Addison's (D) is also due to
exogenous steroids that cause negative feedback to the pituitary resulting in decreased ACTH and bilateral adrenocortical atrophy. These latter patients
may appear Cushingoid on physical examination due to excess steroids, but if the steroids are stopped too abruptly the atrophic adrenal glands cannot
respond rapidlly enough to stress and the patient may have an Addlisonian crisi5.
identified in Portuguese water dogs. The disease is rare in
renal disease mimic each other clinically and in much of the
aq seu usodsipad xas no ae ou aranaun pue sien
routine lab data: 90-95% of dogs with Addison's are az0-
recognized. Some of the clinical signs are due to deficiency
temic. the majority have hyperphosphatemia, and many
in glucocortiocoids and some are due to mineralocortioids
cannot adequately concentrate their urine. Therefore these
and electrolyte abnormalities or combinations. Lethargy.
Addisonian patients may be clinically indistinguishable from
weakness, vomiting. diarrhea, abdominal pain, and anorexia
patients with renal failure. Other signs seen in hypoadreno-
are due to glucocorticoids. Bradycardia is due to hyperkale-
corticism include weakness, muscle tremors, intestinal and
mia and therefore decreased mineralocortioids. Polyuria and
 gastric bleeding. shaking. and hypoglycemic seizures.
polydipsia is due to chronic hyponatremia leading to renal
 Some cases present as a medical emergency in an "Addi-
medullary washout. Microcardia is due to hypovolemia and
sonian crisis": total collapse, weak pulse, dehydrated, shocky.
hypotension from the hyponatremia, as are decreased blood
hypothermic, and with marked bradycardia. The paradoxical
pressure, lethargy, nausea, and depression.
 combination of bradycardia and shock should trigger the
The history often indicates the dog has periodic bouts of 
differential of hypoa drenocorticism.
not feeling good, vomiting. anorexia, lethargy. and either
Dogs and cats with a pituitary lesion will have nonspecific
recovered spontaneously or required treatment with fluids
signs and lab data referable to decreased glucocorticoids
and steroids. A history reporting some of the problerms listed
because mineralocorticoids are spared. However, patients on
above, especially if they recur and respond to symptomatic
steroid therapy may have clinical signs and laboratory data
therapy of cage rest, fluids and steroids is "classic" for chronic
that look like hyperadrenocorticism due to the excess corti-
hypoadrenocorticism. Symptomatic treatment of a sick vom-
sol they were receiving. These dogs may have alopecia, pot
iting dog often includes fluid therapy and steroids, which, in 
belly appearance, and prominent cutaneous blood vessels 
the case of an Addisonian, is an ideal symptomatic treatment.
due to the cortisol as well as increased serum allkaline phos-
A differential diagnosis for dogs that appear to have renal
phatase and dilute urine. If steroids are stopped abruptly the
patient may collapse, have hypoglycemia and signs of
drome" should include hypoadrenocorticism, especially if
decreased cortisol. The atrophic ZF cannot respond quickly
clinical symptoms are vague and recurring. Addison's and
enough to produce sufficient cortisol to prevent the crisis.
516
CHAPTER 32 Laboratory Evaluation of the Thyroid, Adrenal, and Pituitary Glands
fluid therapy. The anemia is attributed to lack of steroid
 Table 32.9 Laboratory abnormalities of hypoadrenocorticism.
 stimulus to the bone marrow and gastrointestinal bleeding.
Lab abnormality
If the anemia is more severe, look for gastrointestinal bleed-
% of
 Related to or caused by
s6op
ing or a second disease. Less frequently there may be
polycythemia—PCV 60-70 due to dehydration. There is no
Hyponatremia
60-80
Aldosterone decreased
direct effect from mineralocorticoids on the CBC.
Hyperkalermia
95
Aldosterone decreased 
Na:K<23:1*
95
 Aldosterone decreased
Urinalysis
Hypochloremia 
50-75
Aldosterone decreased
The urine specific gravity is expected to be increased due to
Hyperphosphatemia 
90
 Dehydration
dehydration, but in about 60% of cases it is <l.030. Infre-
Hypercalcemia
 Obscure
quently it is even hyposthenuric in primary Addison's due
Hypocalcemia 
10
 Hypoalbuminemia
Azotemia
90-95
 Prerenal
renal medulla is not saturated adequately with sodium ions
Hypoglycemia 
20-30
Glucocorticoids 
and therefore tubules cannot passively reabsorb water from
 Increased albumin
50
Dehydration
the glomerular filtrate. Dogs with medullary washout may
Increased serum protein 
 Dehydration
Decreased albumin 
10+
 Unknown
not be able to concentrate their urine adequately even with
Urine s.g. variable; <1.030
60
 Medullary washout 
concurrent dehydration. Dilute urine or at least urine with
No stress leukogram
90
Glucocorticoids decreased
a specific gravity of 1.020 or less while the patient is dehy-
Anemia
10-30
Glucocorticoids; Gl bleeding 
drated, coupled with azotemia and hyperphosphatemia.
 Polycythemia
 Dehydration 
leads to a logical, but erroneous, diagnosis of chronic renal
failure. If fluid therapy rapidly reverses the azotemia the
* Na :K <15:1, when ratio is this low Addison's is the most likely
patient did not have true chronic renal failure, it had prer-
dliagnosis, but it is still not pathognomonic and may be seen with
enal azotemia. Prerenal azotemia was not recognized beca use
other diseases.
the urine was dilute due to a concurrent problem of medul-
lary washout. The remainder of the urinalysis in cases of
primary hypoadrenocorticism usually has no abnormalities
and if abnormalities are detected, they are unrelated to
Although steroid usage has stopped, and cortisol has
hypoadrenocorticism.  Long-term steroid  administration
decreased, it will take some time before the cortioctrophs in
leading to secondary hypoadrenocorticism in dogs may pre-
the pars distalis produce ACTH. Even under the influence of
dispose them to development of cystitis and associated
ACTH there is a further delay in glucocorticoid production
inflammatory elements in the urinalysis.
as the ZF must regenerate. During this phase the dog or cat
is susceptible to a crisis should a stressful event happen:
Clinical chemistry
shipping. fight, etc.
Results for clinical chemistry vary depending on if it is
primary or secondary hypoadrenocorticism (Table 32.9).
Routine clinical laboratory data
Hyperkalemia and hyponatremia are the classical abnor-
A summary of expected routine laboratory findings is pre-
sented in Table 32.9.
A Na:K ratio <23:l is the key abnormality to indicate
Some of the laboratory data are caused by deficiency of
primary hypoadrenocortisim and is present in up to 95% of
glucocorticoids, while others are caused by mineralocorti-
the cases. If the ratio is <l5:l it is very suggestive for hypo-
coid deficiency. Therefore dogs with a pure glucocorticoid
adrenocorticism, but still not by itself pa thognomonic for the
deficiency (secondary) or those with atypical Addison's
diagnosis. Other ratios reported include <27:l or <25:1;
do not exhibit the classical problems of mineralocorticoid
normal ratios are 27:l to 40:l. Most of the ratio shift is due 
deficiency such as reduced Na:K ratio and associated
to hyperkalemia, present in 95% of cases rather than hypo-
bradycardia.
natremia, present in 80% of the cases. Cases of secondary
CBC
renocorticism) should not have these electrolyte abnormali-
Absence of a stress leukogram or a totally normal leulkogram
 s l n o n d in a as n i
in a sick/stressed dog may be the first indicator, but is often
canine Addisonian's will not have abnormal Na:K ratios.
overlooked. Eosinophilia and mild lymphocytosis can be
Hypochloremia is also present and may be belowlo0 mEq/L.
attributed to decreased glucocorticoids and therefore may be
Azotemia is reported in up to 95% of cases and is almost
present in both primary and secondary cases. Red blood cell
always due to dehydration and prerenal azotemia. Dehydra-
parameters can vary from a mild, nonregenerative anemia
tion is due to hypovolemia, fluid loss, and decreased aldo-
to a low-normal PcV that then enters the anemic range after
sterone. Renal failure is an obvious differential diagnosis and
517
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
must be ruled out via urinalysis, UN:Ct ratio, and response
Addison's disease is nicknamed the great pretender
to fluid therapy. Hyperphosphatemia is also due to dehydra-
because it mimics so many other diseases. These include GI
tion, decreased GFR, and prerenal azotemia. The differentia-
disturbances, liver disease, and in particular renal failure. As
tion of prerenal versus renal azotemia is critical in these
mentioned, over 90% of dogs with Addison's have azotemia
patients and is best done by examination of urine specific
and some have a concurrent urine s.g. suggestive of renal
gravity and response of the azotemia to fluid therapy. If the
failure. However, if fluid therapy corrects the azotemia
urine s.g. is >l.030 in a dog and 1.035 in a cat that is azo-
within hours or a day then it was not renal failure. Another
temic it indicates adequate concentrating ability and prere-
"clue" to support hypoadrenocorticism rather than renal
nal azotemia. Renal azotemia is associated with urine s.g. in
failure is hypercalcemia which is present in about one-third
the 1.007-1.020 range. However, many cases of hypoadre-
of the dogs with Addison's. Hyperkalemia can occur with
   oo ii i a  's a  
acute renal failure, but concurrent hyponatremia is seen
these patients this range combined with azotemia makes the
distinction confusing because it suggests primary renal
acute renal failure. Urethral obstruction in male cats will
failure. The reduced ability to concentrate urine is due to
produce azotemia and a low Na :K ratio that is due to marked
chronic hyponatremia and medullary washout. If the serum
hyperkalemia, but these cats are not hyponatremic and the
UN is disproportionately increased compared to serum cre-
diagnosis of a urethral obstruction is obvious from physical
atinine, a UN:Ct ratio >25, it suggests prerenal azotemia
examination. Uroabdomen will produce hyponatremia and
rather than renal azotemia. Lastly, if azotemia is corrected
hyperkalemia, Na :K ratios <23, and azotemia. Identification
rapidly by fluid therapy this indicates prerenal azotemia.
of uroabdomen is done by concurrent measurement of cre-
Hypercalcemia is seen in approximately one-third of dogs
atinine in peritoneal fluid and blood with peritoneal fluid
with hypoadrenocorticism. When present with azotemia
concentrations being greater than blood. Differential diag-
and a decreased Na :K ratio the hypercalcemia helps favor
noses for these electrolyte abnormalities and tests to help
the diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism over renal failure. The
differentiate diagnoses are presented in Table 32.10.
pathogenesis of hypercalcemia is not clear, it is considered
multifactorial due to increased calcium absorption from the
Screening tests—basal cortisot and ACTH stimulation
GI tract and urine filtrate in the absence of glucorticoids
ACTH stimulation flat line, <2 μg/dL rule in; basal cortisol
(cortisol promotes calciuria), increased serum citrate permits
decreased, <1 μg/dL 100% sensitivity 98% specificity, < 2μg/
more calcium to be complexed in the serum, and the cortisol
dL 100% sensitivity and 78% specificity: basal cortisol>2 μg/
effect of inhibition of osteoclastic bone resorption is not
dL rule out.
present. Ionized calcium was increased in five of seven dogs
 Basal cortisol is decreased and is an adequate screening
that had increased total serum calcium and there were no
test for primary and secondary hypoadrenocorticism due to
consistent increases in PTH, PTH rp. or 1,25 dihydroxyvita-
a pituitary lesion. However, if the cause of secondary hypo-
min D concentrations to explain the hypercalcemia. The
adrenocorticism is exogenous steroids then basal cortisol
hypercalcemia seen with hypoadrenocorticism is moderate.
may be increased if the steroid crossreacts with the assay
12-15 mg/dL as compared with the more marked hypercal-
(hydrocortisone, prednisone, and prednisolone) or decreased
cemia characteristic of hyperparathyroidism or hypercalce-
if the steroid used does not crossreact with the assay (dexa-
mia of malignancy. Hypoglycemia is present in about
methasone). If glucocorticoids are being given to treat a
10-30% of the cases and is due to decreased glucocorticoids.
suspected patient they should be stopped for at least 24-48
Hypoalbuminemia  or  hyperalbuminemia  can be 
seen.
hours before cortisol is measured. If a steroid is used select
Hyperalbuminemia is due to dehydration; hypoalbumin-
dexamethasone as it does not crossreact with assays for cor
emia is difficult to explain in light of hypovolemia and
tisol and one dose of dexamethasone at 5 mg/kg causes only
hemoconcentration, but is reported to be present in 10-40 %
mild decreases in cortisol post ACTH stimulation. Basal cor
of the cases. Possible causes of hypoalbuminemia may
tisol will be less than 1 μg/dL in 85% of canine cases and less
include intestinal hemorrhage, concurrent protein losing
than 2 μg/dL in 90+ % of cases. A basal cortisol <l μg/dL has
enteropathy, or hepatopathy. Mild to moderate increases in
100% sensitivity and a specificity of 98% in dogs, excellent.
liver enzymes in 30-50% of dogs with primary is also dif-
A basal cortisol <2 μg/dL still has a 100% sensitivity but the
ficult to explain and is probably nonspecific. They resolve
a aa m aa  i o p si Aas
post treatment of the hypoadrenocorticism. Total carbon
dogs that have serum cortisol <2μg/dL that do not have
dioxide and bicarbonate concentrations are decreased due
hypoadrenocorticism and therefore are false positives, about
to decreased tissue perfusion and decreased tubular excre-
22%. If the basal cortisol is >2 μg/dL it is highly unlikely the
tion of hydrogen ions secondary to decreased aldosterone.
dog has hypoadrenocorticism and the differential can be
The metabolic acidosis contributes to hyperkalemia beca use
ruled out. The gray zone for basal cortisol is l-2 μg/dL and
potassium shifts out of cells in exchange for movement of
when values fall in this range ACTH stimulation is needed.
hydrogen ions into cells in an attempt to buffer acidosis.
In cats the pre and post cortisol concentrations should be
518
Table 32.10 Differential diagnosis (DDx) for Na :K less than 25:1
Table 32.11 ACTH response test: baseline measurement of cortisol,
inject ACTH then measure cortisol again; Addisonian patients fail to 
 Hypoadrenocorticism
increase cortisol in response to exogenous ACTH.
Uroabdomen 
Urethral obstruction with intact bladder
Reference interval (Rl) cortisol μg/dlL (or nmol/L) Dogs
Renal failure—acute, chronic
Basal normal (RR) 0.5-6μg/dL (10-160 nmol/L)
Gl dlisease—whip worms, salrmonella; calves and foals with diarrhea
Spurious-—due to failure to separate serum and cells 
 Basal cortisol >2.0 rule out hypoadrenocorticisrm
Practical DDx are above this line and a mmore complete list is below;
Post ACTH stirnulation:
 most of these cause the ratio shift by inducing hyperkalemia:
Normal post stim 6-18μg/dL; 2-3 × increase in dogs is a normal
Severe acidosi5
Chlyothorax—-especially with repeated drainage 
response
"Third space" expansion by any cause: pregnancy pleritis, ascites
Hypoadrenocorticism <2.0 flat line
(with or without drainage)
ACTH sti does not dlifferentiate prirmary from secondary Addisonian
Spurious-—from RBCs and/or platelets and leukocytes 
and endogenous ACTH will aid this differentiation:
Unique breeds and species have potassium-rich RBCs
● Adrenal dependent (common) = Increased ACTH
Dogs—Akita, Sheba, and others: potasium rich RBCs
● Pituitary dependent (rare) = Decreased ACTH
Horses—Young RBCs; certain breeds 
● latrogenic = Decreased ACTH
Sheep—certain breeds: potassium rich RBC5
If there is hemmolysis or if the RBCs are not separated from the
plasma, then K will leach out of the RBCs increasing the
concentration of K in the plasma/serum. Separate serum from RBC5
to prevent this event
Leukocyto5is >100,000/μL
ondary Addisonian's fail to respond to exogenous ACTH by
Thrombocytosis >1,000,000/μL
either doubling their cortisol or increasing post stimulation
Phosphofructokinase Deficiency—Springer spaniels with respiratory
cortisol beyond 2μg/dL (Tables 32.11 and 32.12). ACTH
alkalosi5
stimulation is expensive, but it is the gold standard and the
Variety of Gl diseases—dliarrhea: gastric dllation volvulus
case management decision at stake is lifelong therapy with
Release of potassium: crush injury, aortic thrombosis, rhabdomyolysis,
mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid medications. Further-
heat stroke
more the use of a low-dose ACTH stimulation test reduces
Diabetes mmellitus
  s n ni a n  
Tests to perform to rule in or rule out the common
data, then ACTH stimulation should be performed. Basal
differentials:
nocorticism. A basal cortisol of >2μg/dL (>60 nmol/L) will
Differential Dx
Test to Rl/RO
rule out hypoadrenocorticism.
 If the Na:K ratio is decreased and other clinical and lab
Hypoadrenocorticism
Basal cortisol; ACTH stimulation
data fit with primary hypoadrenocorticism then a basal cor-
Uroabdomen
Compare serum and abdominal creatinine
tisol <l μg/dL is probably sufficient to rule in primary hypo-
Male, cat, history, anuria, palpation
adrenocorticism. Another important consideration is that
Urethral obstruction 
the dog or cat was not given steroids, mitotane, ketacon-
 Renal failure
 All data, urinalysis and response to fluids
azole, or other drugs that interfere with steroid production.
Gl disease
Fecal for parasites and culture
Samples should be collected for basal cortisol and routine
lab data before treatment is started and based on the results 
snounds
 Separate serum from blood 
of these tests decide if ACTH stimulation is needed.
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism, glucocorticoid deficiency
with normal Na:K ratio, should be confirmed with ACTH
stimulation. Although basal cortisol will be decreased in
cases of secondary hypoadrenocorticism caused by a pitu-
itary lesion, the clinical signs and laboratory data are to0
   
nonspecific to rely on just a basal cortisol. Secondary hypo-
hypoadrenocorticism  and iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism
adrenocorticism due to iatrogenic use of steroids requires
have been observed in cats.
ACTH stimulation and knowledge of the type of steroid
The gold standard to confirm diagnosis of hypoadrenocor-
used. Depending on the steroid used, the basal cortisol mea-
ticism is the ACTH stimulation test. Both primary and sec-
sured could be decreased or increased.
519
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Table 32.12 Expected results for primary and secondary hypoadrenocorticism.
Na :K Ratio
ACTH Stimulation
Adrenal Lesion 
Cortisol μg/dL
Basal
Post
e-ACTH
Primary
<25:1
<1.0
<1.5
00E<
Acdrenalitis zg. zf, zr 
(>40 pmol/L)
Secondary
>27:1
<1.0
<1.5
<20
Atrophy zf
 Pituitary lesion 
(<2pmol/L)
Secondary
>27:1
<1.0*
<1.5
<20
Atrophy zf
latrogenic
(<2pmol/L)
 Reference interval
27:1 to 40:1
0.5-6
6-18
 20-1 00 pg/mL 
 Normal 
(2.2-20 pmol/L)
Either basal cortisol less than 1.5-2.0 μg/dL and/or post stimulation cortisol of <1.5-2.0 μg/dL are findings indicative of hypoadrenocorticism. Consult 
with the reference lab for specific recommmended cut-off values. Consult with the reference lab for reference intervals and cut-offs for e ACTH. a5
these vary with the methodology.
* This value could be increased if the steroid used crossreacted with the assay for cortisol, e.g., prednisone, prednisolone, hydrocortisone.
ACTH stimulation requires a basal sample and samples at
that any dose of synthetic ACTH greater than 5μg/kg will
30, 60, 90 or 120 minutes post ACTH administration depend-
maximally stimulate the adrenal corticies 60 minutes post
ing on the protocol used. Failure of ACTH stimulation to
administration and therefore higher doses are not needed.
either double the basal cortisol or to increase it above 2.0μg/
Additionally, it can be repeated in 24 hours or 2 weeks with
dL is diagnostic of hypoadrenocorticism in dogs and cats. It
similar results. It distinguishes dogs with hypoadrenocorti-
is recommended to consult the reference lab used for the
cism from dogs with nonadrenal illnesses that appear clini-
diagnostic guidelines they use for pre and post ACTH cortisol
cally similar to hypoadrenocorticism. If repetition of the
values for diagnostic purposes. Common protocol recom-
ACTH stimulation test was needed because of sample mis-
mendations include the following. Collect a serum/plasma
handling or other causes. then the low dose ACTH or the
sample for prestimulation basal cortisol. For a high dose
high dose of 0.25 mg/dog can be repeated in 24 hours with
ACTH procedure, administer 0.25mg (250 μg) of synthetic
reliable results.
ACTH IV to dogs and cats >5kg and 0.125 mg IV if <5 kg.
The low dose of 5μg/kg of cosyntropin will maximally
Collect a second sample for cortisol in 30-60 minutes post
stimulate the adrenal corticies of normal dogs and dogs with
ACTH for dogs. For cats collect two samples post ACTH, one
at 60 minutes and again at 90-l20 minutes. A low-dose
hyperadrenocorticism. False positive or increased cortisol
ACTH stimulation protocol uses synthetic ACTH (cosyntro-
post stimulation in dogs without hyperadrenocorticism is
pin) at 5μg/kg IV in dogs. Collect a basal sample and the
seen in about 15% of dogs.
second sample 60-90 minutes later.
 Protocols for intramuscular ACTH that are used to diag-
Confirmatory tests
nose hyperadrenocorticism may not be as reliable in Addi-
 Endogenous ACTH (e ACTH) is increased in primary and
sonian suspects as ACTH absorption may be impaired due
decreased in secondary hypoadrenocorticism.
 Basal cortisol and ACTH stimulation are used to diagnose
tocols collect a serum sample for prestimulation basal corti-
d  u o  i '
sol, administer 2.2U/lb of ACTH IM, and two hours later
from secondary hypoadrenocorticism. Measuring the endog-
collect a sample for poststimulation cortisol. Newer reagents
enous concentration of ACTH is an easy way to distinguish
use a l hour stimulation protocol; consult the reference lab
these two diseases. Dogs with primary hypoadrenocorticism
 sI iaui sie un Hov aui ya ai aeed nou
(  
of cosyntropin IM and collect samples at 0. 30 and 60
and dogs with secondary primary hypoadrenocorticism have
minutes.
e ACTH < reference interval (typically 1-2 pmol/L) (Table
Multiple ACTH stimulation protocols are available and all
32.12).1
 Dogs  with  primary  hypoadrenocorticism  have
work well. An advantage of low-dose ACTH stimulation
markedly increased concentrations of e ACTH, dogs with
protocol is reduced costs. Clinical trials have demonstrated
atypical primary hypoadrenocorticism have increased
520
cortisol during critical illnesses, especially with sepsis. One
cism have decreased or undetectable concentrations of e
report indicated that the mean ACTH to cortisol ratio was
ACTH. Absolute statements such as this are dependent on
significantly higher in septic foals that did not survive than
the disease being fully developed. As the lesions develop.
in septic foals that did survive. In a more recent report the
the concentrations of basal cortisol and e ACTH are in transi-
authors did not confirm this correlation and also found that
tion. The earlier diagnostic tests are used during the progres-
the majority of ill foals had adequate responses to cosyntro-
sion of a disease, the more likely that the results may be
pin administration and only a small group had low cortisol.
equivocal. The stages of the patient's disease development
low ACTH concentrations and low responses to cosyntropin
will greatly influence the clinical signs and laboratory results
indicating a dysfunctional hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
   r r pssxa q  r
axis. However, the authors did not conclude this subgroup
renocorticism has increased e ACTH because the entire
actually had RAI or that the endocrine status contributed to
adrenal cortex is being destroyed and serum cortisol is
the illness in these foals. In fact, some foals with septicemia
decreasing. Eventually there is no negative feedback to the
had markedly increased concentrations of ACTH. Endotoxin
pars distalis and coticotrophs will secrete ACTH in attempt
and the cytokines interleukin-l and tumor necrosis factor
to stimulate cortisol production. This cycle continues
alpha have been shown to cause an increase in ACTH in
unabated until treatment is started. Serum concentration of
various species. They also reported that foals that survived
e ACTH can be marked in these cases, >300pg/mL to
had a higher concentration of cortisol in response to low
>500 pmol/L depending on the laboratory. Although helpful
dose cosyntropin stimulation than did foals that did not
in the distinction of primary and secondary hypoadrenocor-
survive. This finding suggested that an ACTH stimulation
ticism the collection, shipment and measurement of e ACTH
test may be useful to establish a prognosis in these cases.
is delicate. It is recommended that the laboratory be con-
Approximately 50% of critically ill foals will have decreased
sulted regarding protocol and interpretation.
basal cortisol and an inadequate response to ACTH. It would
If there are the characteristic electrolyte abnormalities.
be beneficial to resolve these conflicting data in foals with
sepsis and formulate a consensus to know if steroids should
90% of the cases are primary and when the Na:K ratio is
be administered to ill foals and which endocrine tests may
<23:1 and basal cortisol and/or ACTH stimulation results
be of use in case management.
indicate hypoadrenocorticism, measurement of e ACTH may
Paired low-dose (10μg) and high-dose (100μg) protocols
be optional with this set of findings. Secondary hypoadre-
have been developed to evaluate normal and critically ill
nocorticism will have decreased to undetectable e ACTH.
foals. Basal samples for cortisol are collected, 10 μg of cosyn-
The pituitary lesion destroys corticotrophs and therefore
topin is given IV as a bolus, and a sample is collected 30
ACTH production is decreased. Alternatively. the steroids
minutes later to assess peak response. Ninety minutes after
being administered cause negative feedback to corticotrophs
the 10μg dose a basal sample is collected and 1lo0 μg of cosyn-
that then decrease the production and secretion of e ACTH
tropin is given IV as a bolus and samples are collected 30 and
90 minutes later for peak cortisol response. Other protocols
Other species
inject cosyntropin intravenously at 0.l μg/kg. and measure
Hypoadrenocorticism occurs rarely in cats and the informa-
plasma cortisol concentrations before (baseline), and at 30
tion provided above is essentially the same for cats. An
and 60 minutes after cosyntropin. Plasma ACTH concentra-
   o  s 
tion can be determined via an automated analyzer by enzyme
iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism have been observed in cats.
based immunometric assay with chemiluminescent detec-
It is rare in all other domestic animals and when present
tion. This has been validated for use with equine samples.
 in calves and foals it is usually due to diarrhea or septicemia
Othertesfs
with an embolic shower to the adrenal gland, as well as
Plasma to aldosterone, aldosterone to renin, and cortisol to
  d     
ACTH ratios have been used to help diagnose hypoadreno-
hyperkalemia with hypoadrenocorticism similar to dogs, but
corticism in a limited number of dogs. As clinical studies
these electrolyte abnormalities are much more likely to
progress these tests may help differentiate primary, atypical.,
occur with infectious diarrhea or sepsis than primary hypo-
and secondary Addisonian's and replace or supplement
adrenocorticism. Calves with E. coli septicemia are an animal
ACTH stimulation testing.
model for the Waterhouse Freidrichson syndrome—
Primary hyperaldosteronism
produce adrenal cortical necrosis in fetuses and neonates
Primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn's syndrome) is a rare
such as piglets, calves, and foals.
disease in veterinary medicine, but has been reported in
         
dogs, cats, and ferrets. The lesion is hyperplasia or neoplasia
a relative adrenal insufficiency (RAI) syndrome, as reported
of the adrenal cortex that involves the zona glomerulosa.
in people. The concept is there is inadequate production of
Cells in the zona glomerulosa produce excess aldosterone
521
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
which causes hypokalemia and hypernatremia along with
Reference intervals for aldosterone are best obtained from
increased blood pressure and other effects. Aldosterone
the laboratory analyzing the samples. A guideline is 14
binds to mineralocorticoid receptors on cells in the distal
957 pmol/L for dogs and 194-388 pmol/L for cats.
convoluted tubules and collecting ducts stimulatingincreased
production of Na-K ATPase and an increased number of
Hyperadrenocorticism—HAC—Cushing's disease,
-xa issod ui susan uordau aun u sdund w
syndrome
tion and sodium reabsorption. Confirmation requires mea-
There are several causes of hyperadrenocorticism that are
surement of serum aldosterone and renin combined with
described below (Fig. 32.5). All will have similar clinical
physical examination to rule out congestive heart failure
signs and basic laboratory data. Special endocrine tests are
and other possible causes of increased blood pressure. Sec-
useful in distinguishing the cause and this is useful for tar-
ondary hyperaldosteronism is a normal reaction to decreased
geted therapy in case management.
blood pressure and activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldo-
sterone system to retain sodium and increase blood pressure.
Pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH)
The laboratory differentiation of primary and secondary
The primary lesion is a pituitary tumor that secretes ACTH
hyperaldosteronism requires concurrent measurement of
autonomously and stimulates bilateral adrenal gland hyper-
aldosterone and renin.
trophy and cortisol secretion. Serum ACTH is increased. PDH
Primary hyperaldosteronism has increased serum concentra-
is the cause of HAC in over 80% of dogs and 100% of cats.
tions of aldosterone and decreased renin.
It is also the cause in loo% of horses with a tumor being
Secondary hyperaldosteronism has increased concentrations
in the pars intermedia that secretes various intermediary
of aldosterone and renin.
substances.
A. Normal pituitary
B.PDH
Microadenoma
ACTH
secreting ACTH
：
positive
negative
Adrenals
Cortisol
ACTH dec
Vetalog
Prednisone
Dexamethasone
C. Iatrogenic
D. Cortical tumor secretes cortisol
Figure 32.5 Mechanisms of hyperadrenocorticism (HAC): Arrows represent relative arnounts of hormones being secreted with a normal pituitary-
adrenal axis and in three dlisease states. Adrenal gland sizes are relative for normal (A), pituitary dependent HAC (B), iatrogenic HAC (C), and functional
 adrenal tumor HAC (D). Secondary HAC is due to a functional pituitary tumor (B) producing ACTH which stirmulates bilateral adrenocortical hypertrophy 
aliehau sasnen jeul osuon saainas teyn (o) jont leonouape jeuoouny e ot anp s! oth Aewd ([had] wsionouapeady iuapuadap Aeniniid)
feedback to the pituitary resulting in decreased ACTH and atrophy of opposite adrenal gland. latrogenic HAC is due to an exogenous steroid (C) that
causes negative feedback to the pituitary that results in decreased ACTH and bilateral adrenocortical atrophy. The cormmon feature of al three disease
states is increased glucocorticoids that produce the physical and clinical pathologic features of HAC .
522
Adrenal dependent hyperadrenocorticism
therefore, may cause visual defects (pressure or invasion
(AT or ADH)
into optic chiasm) or other endocrinopathies due to com-
The primary lesion is an adrenal cortical tumor that autono-
pression of trophic cells in the pituitary (secondary hypo-
mously secretes cortisol. Serum ACTH is decreased. This
cause is responsible for l0-l5% of HAC cases in dogs. It is
tumor invades the brain. If some of these problems are
rare in most other species. About half of functional adrenal
detected in a Cushingoid dog then a malignant pituitary
cortical tumors are benign. In ferrets adrenal cortical tumors
tumor is more likely. These cases can be challenging to diag-
are the most common cause of hyperadrenocorticism and
nose as the suppressive tests can respond similar to the
these tumors secrete both sex hormones and cortisol.
results obtained in dogs with adrenal tumors.
Another 10-15% of hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) cases in
latrogenic
dogs are due to adrenal cortical tumors that secrete cortisol
Exogenous steroids produce the same clinical signs and
autonomously. Approximately half of the tumors are benign
routine laboratory abnormalities seen in spontaneous cases.
the other half may metastasize into the vena cava, liver.
Basal concentrations of cortisol will vary with the type of
regional lymph nodes, and lung. Bilateral tumors are present
steroid used. It can be increased or decreased depending on
in 10% or less of the dogs with HAC; they may be cortical
crossreactivity with cortisol assay. Serum ACTH is decreased
or medullary in origin. Not all adrenal cortical tumors secrete
ACTH stimulation is the confirmatory test of choice.
cortisol; some tumors are nonfunctional as is possible for any
endocrine tumor. Adrenal cortical tumors do not respond as
Others
well to the suppressive and stimulatory tests used to diag-
There are a few reports of ACTH ectopically produced by
nose HAC and these differences can be used to help distin-
nonadrenal tumors and one report due to food-dependent
guish PDH from AT.
hypercortisolemia in the dog. These mechanisms are very
The distinction of pituitary versus adrenal dependent HAC
rare. Ectopically produced ACTH is much more common in
in cats is not as critical because both forms of the disease are
human beings because they have a neuroendocrine lung
   a e   i
tumor, oat cell tumor, that produces this syndrome. Perhaps
less affected by chemotherapy. In cats the pituitary tumor is 
because this tumor is rare in veterinary medicine we do not
see this paraneoplastic syndrome.
benign. Most cats, 90-l00%. with hyperadrenocorticism
will have concurrent diabetes mellitus. Concurrent diabetes
General considerations
mellitus in dogs with Cushing's disease is variably reported
This is primarily a disease of dogs and ferrets, but it also
as 10-33%. However, if resistance to insulin is discovered in
either species then investigations for concurrent HAC is a
the distinction of primary (adrenal dependent 10-15%)
recommended case management consideration.
from secondary (pituitary dependent 80-85%) is important
 In horses, Cushing's disease or pifuitary pars intermedia
surgical removal of the adrenal tumor and pituitary depen-
plasia present in the pars intermedia. The pathogenesis and
the clinical problems in horses are different from dogs and
or by surgical removal of the pituitary. Mitotane (Lysodren,
are discussed later in this chapter under pituitary disease.
op'DDD) is capable of selective cytotoxicity of the adrenal
About 80-85% of Cushingoid dogs. 90% of cats and
cortex. If chemotherapeutic adrenalectomy is the preferred
nearly loo% of horses should have a pituitary tumor. These
treatment option, it is still important to differentiate the
expected results should be considered when trying to inter-
cause of HAC because the dose of mitotane is increased
pret the results of endocrine tests. Before the least common
when used on an adrenal tumor. The cause also has bearing
cause of HAC is ruled in, an adrenal tumor in a dog and
on discussion of the prognosis related to treatment. First, the
especially an AT in a cat, the test results should be unequivo-
fact that about half of the adrenal tumors are malignant
cal. Any equivocal test results should be reconciled by per-
affects prognosis. Second, efficacy of chemotherapy is more
forming multiple tests. Imaging studies to visualize the
variable in AT than in PDH. Furthermore drugs that inhibit
adrenal tumor and possibly the pituitary tumor have become
viable options and should be considered in cases that have
Approximately 80% of the dogs with pituitary dependent
confounding endocrine data.
HAC disease have a microadenoma in the pituitary that
altonomously produces excess ACTH. The increased ACTH
Clinical problems
a e ad  re  s
Almost all the clinical signs and lesions in dogs and cats are
plasia and increased secretion of cortisol. Only about 10-
due to the increased concentration of glucocorticoids. There-
20% of PDH cases are due to a macroadenoma or a pituitary
fore iatrogenic Cushingoid dogs look identical to spontane-
carcinoma. The tumor in these dogs is larger, invasive, and.
ous Cushingoid dogs. There are numerous abnormalities in
523
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
 Table 32.13 Clinical signs of HAC and approximate percentage of
Table 32.14 Laboratory abnormalities seen with HAC and 
dogs and cats with these abnormalities.
 approximate percentage of dogs and cats with these abnormalities.
Dogs
Cats
Dogs
Cats
 Polyuria and polydipsia
80-90
90
 Alkaline phosphatase increased
85-95
15
Alopecia
60-75
60
 Alanine amminotransferase
50-80
40
increased
 Fragile skin 
50
Hyperglycermia, fasting 
30-40
95
 Polyphagia
50-60
70
 Urea nitrogen decreased 
05-0E
 Pot-belly 
70
85
Hypophosphatemia
20-40
 Hepatomegaly
50-70
35
Lethargy
Hyperlipidernia
50-80
80
50
 Cholesterol increased 
50
40
Anestrus
55
Calcinosis cutis
Urine 5.g. <1.020
80
Infrequent,
10, but considered
usually conc
 pathognomonic
Urinary infection*
50
Infrequent 
Pyoderma
40
 Proteinuria
75
Hyperpigmmentation 
EE
Glucosuria
10
90
Comedomes
EE
Stress leukogram
Common 
 Concurrent diabetes mellitus 
Infrequent
EE-01
90
 depending on report
Nucleated RBCs
Infrequent
Thrombocytosis
Others: Muscle wasting. promminent cutaneous blood vessels, testicular
85
 atrophy, decreased libido, bronchopneumonia. pulmonary
 Decreased thyroxine
50
mineralization, cystitis, facial nenve paralysis, and pulrnonary
Decreased free T4
25
thromboembolisrn.
 Alkaline phosphatase steroid
85-90
10u sa00
isoenzyrne
dogs and cats with HAC: alopecia, polyphagia, polyuria and
* Some canine cases will have bacteriuria, dilute urine and no or few
polydipsia, pot-belly, muscle wasting. prominent cutaneous
white blood cells.
blood vessels, comedones, (
calcinosis
cutis,
. anestrus,
decreased libido, bronchopneumonia, cystitis, and possible
pulmonary thromboembolism (Table 32.13). If the cortisol
concentra tion can be decreased, the clinical problems recede,
which is inappropriate and is suggestive of HAC or micro-
even if a pituitary tumor remains. If blindness or other signs
angiopathies. Thrombocytosis is often present.
referable to the central nervous system are present, then a
Cats receiving steroids will have a stress leukogram, but
large pituitary tumor compressing the optic chiasm and the
cats with naturally occurring HAC do not consistently
brain should be suspected. Cats and ferrets have many of
exhibit a stress leukogram. Erythroid and platelet determi-
the clinical problems seen in dogs with HAC.
nations are normal.
Ferrets may have anemia and/or leukopenia and throm-
Routine laboratory data
bocytopenia late in the disease due to secretion of estradiol.
Complete blood count (CBC)
 The estrogen induced bone marrow toxicity may cause pan-
A stress leukogram is expected in dogs and is characterized
cytopenia similar to that induced by persistent estrus in
by leukocytosis, mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, eosino-
 intact female ferrets.
penia, and monocytosis. Lymphopenia and eosinopenia are
the most constant of these. This is present frequently in
Clinical chemistry (Table 32.14)
Cushingoid dogs, but is obviously not specific. An increased
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is increased in over 90% of dogs
PCV is seen in a small percentage of cases and some dogs'
with HAC (sensitive). but it is also increased with many
exhibit nucleated red blood cells without regeneration,
other diseases (not specific). If serum ALP is not increased
524
it is a good indicator that HAC is not present. The increase
ACTH secreting pituitary tumor that is compressing thyro-
in ALP is mild, moderate, or marked. Mild and moderate
trophs; this is a rare situation. Increased fT4 is seen in about
increases are not very helpful to the diagnosis, but marked
one-third of the dogs and may be similar to the increase seen
increases, e.g., 2,000-10,000 IU/L, are very suggestive of
in cats with nonthyroidal illness. Glucocorticoids may also
HAC. However, there is no correlation between the magni-
suppress the release of TSH from the pituitary. If endogenous
tude of the increase and severity of the disease or predicting
TSH is in reference interval then the decrease in TT4 is
response to treatments. The increase in ALP in dogs is due
attributed to drug interference. Similar abnormalities in
to hepatic and a species-unique steroid induced isoenzyme.
thyroid hormones are seen with exogenous steroids and
Although the corticosteroid induced isoenzyme increases in
iatrogenic Cushing's. Steroids should be stopped for at least
almost all dogs with HAC (sensitivity 95%) it is also increased
4 weeks before thyroid profiles are performed.
in the serum of many dogs with nonadrenal illnesses. There-
     sn
fore the low specificity (about 18%) limits the diagnostic
 many clinical problems such as alopecia, obesity, lethargy.
value of the steroid isoenzyme determination. Even small
and enlarged liver. They also share similar clinical chemistry
increases in serum cortisol, such as those occurring with
exogenous steroid administration in ocular preparations.
cholesterol, and triglycerides. Furthermore, TT4 is often
can induce the steroid isoenzyme. GGT parallels the increase
included in geriatric panels and is therefore observed early
in ALP in dogs. ALP has a short half-life in cats and therefore
in the evaluation of these cases. When these two diseases
li e a as a i  a aun ou so
are differential diagnoses testing to rule in or rule out HAC
does in dogs with HAC. Any increase in ALP is significant 
should be done prior to thyroid profiles. Thyroid hormone
in cats and should be investigated. Cats and horses do not
paieain Alyssns aie ieui sop ul papaau lou sl Adeiaul
have a steroid isoenzyme.
for HAC as thyroid values return to reference intervals.
Other liver enzymes may also be increased due to hepa-
tomegaly caused by glycogen accumulation that produces
Urinalysis
hepatocellular vacuolation (not lipid). Glycogen accumula-
Dilute urine, l.004-l.020; cystitis, bacteriuria with or
tion in hepatocytes is characteristic of HAC, and lipid accu-
without inflammation, proteinuria with or without
mulation is characteristic of diabetes mellitus. Cats therefore
inflammation.
will have a fatty liver or a mixture of fat and glycogen. The
 Dilute urine is due to interference with ADH and/or its
increases in ALT and AST are mild to moderate and are seen
receptors by the increased cortisol, resulting in a "biochemi-
in the majority of dogs. Serum bile acids are increased in
cal nephrogenic diabetes insipidus." Urine specific gravity
about one-third of the dogs and are a nonspecific change
<1.020 is seen in 85% of dogs with HAC. Polyuria and poly-
that is likely due to hepatomegaly caused by the glycogen
hepatopathy. Hyperglycemia is due to the effects of cortisol.
of the dogs. If water is withheld these dogs can usually con-
If serum glucose is greater than 300mg/dL in a dog or a cat
centrate into the l.025 range. Glucosuria is uncommon in
with HAC consider concurrent diabetes mellitus. Consider
dogs. present in l0% of the canine HAC cases, but is present
HAC in any dog or cat in which it is difficult to regulate
in 90%+ of feline cases. Ketonuria does not occur in HAC.
If ketonuria is present it should alert one to the possibility
nist. The majority of feline cases are diagnosed after discov-
of concurrent diabetes mellitus. Persistent glucosuria and/or
ery of insulin resistance. Serum fructosamine may be
moderate to marked hyperglycemia are more consistent
increased due to chronic hyperglycemia in dogs and
an
with diabetes mellitus. Proteinuria is seen in up to 75% of
increase is expected in cats. Cholesterol is increased in about
the dogs and in many dogs this is due to cystitis. Proteinuria
half of the dogs and cats. Triglycerides are increased in nearly
is also seen in the absence of cystitis and in these cases it
90% of dogs, but are not increased in cats.
may be due to concurrent glomerulonephritis which is
Serum phosphorus is decreased in dogs. The mechanism
common in dogs over 9 years old. It could also be due to 
is not clear, but is attributed to the phosphaturic stimulus of
steroid induced glomerular lesions. Urine protein :creatinine 
glucocorticoids. Urea nitrogen and creatinine may be low
ratios range from 1 to 6 (normal <1l.0), and successful treat-
due to diuresis in approximately 33-50% of the dogs.
ment of HAC does not always reverse proteinuria; therefore
concurrent glomerulonephritis seems likely in some dogs
Thyroid stafus
with HAC. Typically there is not concurrent hypoalbumin-
Approximately 50% of dogs with HAC have decreased total
emia or other features of nephrotic syndrome if the dogs
thyroxine (TT4) and 15-50% will have decreased free thy-
only have HAC.
roxine (fT4) . Endogenous TSH is normal or decreased in most
Bacterial urinary tract infections are present in half of the
of these dogs, which means they do not have primary hypo-
dogs with HAC. Bacterial infections are attributed to the
thyroidism. If TT4, fT4, and endogenous TSH are decreased
compromised immune state due to the corticosteroids. Some
they should have secondary hypothyroidism due to the
dogs will have bacteria in their urine without inflammatory
525
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
cells. Dilute urine and bacteria without inflammation is an
minimum. Urine for this test should not be collected during
unusual combination and when observed is suggestive for
a visit to the veterinary hospital as the stress of visitation
Cushing's disease. Consider urine culture in dogs even if no
will produce increased concentrations of serum and urine
inflammation or bacteria are observed.
cortisol that produce false positive results. Dogs that visit a
veterinary hospital, especially if an orthopedic examination
Screening tests
is performed, will have moderate increases of UcCR that are
Low Dose Dexamethasome Suppression (LDDS) Urine Cor-
in the range seen with Cushing's. Have the owners collect a
tisol:Creatinine Ratio (UCCR) and ACTH Stimulation.
midstream urine sample, deliver it to the office, and submit
If the history, clinical signs, and routine laboratory data
at least l milliliter of centrifuged urine to the laboratory. The
are suggestive for HAC then the diagnosis at this stage is a
lab measures cortisol and creatinine and reports a number
two-step process: first rule in or rule out HAC with screening
without units. A UCCR >20 × 10-d is consistent with a diag-
tests and then try to differentiate PDH and AT with confir-
nosis of hyperadrenocorticism, depending on the lab and the
       
techniques used to measure cortisol. Reference interval
treated differently: chemotherapeutic destruction of the
values vary with the laboratory. Cortisol may be present in
hypertrophic adrenal cortex for PDH and adrenalectomy for
the urine in free form or as metabolites and the assays used
adrenal tumors. If surgical correction is not an option and
will vary in what they recognize, and therefore so will the
the AT will also be treated with mitotane, differentiation is
reference intervals. Creatinine is used in the denominator
still appropriate as the dose of mitotane selected is generally
as it is excreted at a relatively constant rate in the urine and
higher for an AT than for PDH. Since approximately half of
therefore adjusts for differences in urine volume and degree
the adrenal tumors are carcinoma, the correct identification
of urine concentration. UCCR permits the use of spot urine
of the cause of HAC has prognostic implica tions. Regardless.
or single point determinations as opposed to 24 hour collec-
this first step is critical. Obtain a correct diagnosis of HAC
tions of urine. A good way to utilize this test is the following.
because either treatment is rigorous.
If HAC is a differential on initial examination or after the
Each of the screening tests has value. LDDs is the most
CBC and chemistry panel are reviewed, then rather then
popular test and is the test of choice if the dog has character
returning the dog to the hospital, have the owners collect a
istic signs and lab data of HAC. It also has the highest false
morning urine sample for the next screening test. If it is
positive rate and should therefore not be used, or used caul-
within reference interval then RO HAC and if it is increased
tiously, if clinical signs and lab data are not classical of HAC. If
continue to pursue HAC.
then LDDS is the test of choice. ACTH stimulation has the
Summary-UCCR
lowest false positive rate and should be used when clinical
Good estimate of cortisol production for last 24 hours
signs and lab data are not classical of HAC. UCCR is an inex-
●90% + of dogs with normal UCCR do not have Cush-
pensive and easy screening test to rule out HAC, but should
ing's = RO disease
 not be used to rule in HAC. When these tests are used in com-
· 95 % + of dogs with Cushing's have increased UCCR (sen-
bination very few cases are misdiagnosed. These tests must be
sitivity 95 %}
used in conjunction with routine clinicopathologic data; they
· 80% of sick dogs with nonadrenal disease have increased
are not stand-alone diagnostic tests used in isolation.
UCCR, specificity 20%: false positives (80%) too high to rule
in HAC.
UCCR (urine cortisol: creatinine ratio)
● UCCR is sensitive to detect increased cortisol in dogs with
Depending on the study, 90-100% of dogs with HAC will
Cushing's and in dogs with other nonadrenal diseases
have excess quantities of cortisol in the urine (high sensitiv-
(stressed).
ity). However, urine cortisol will also be increased in 80%
· If a dog with undiagnosed PU PD has a UCCR in reference
of dogs with nonadrenal diseases that look like HAC (20%
interval and serum ALP is not increased then HAC is highly
specific). and therefore it cannot be used to rule in HAC.
unlikely and can be ruled out
 a  l a  r s n  
 interval or below do not have HAC. Therefore, this is a very
Reference interval
good, easy, and inexpensive screening test to rule out HAC.
0.5-17.7 × 10- check with lab that performed assay
If a dog has an increased UCCR then LDDS or ACTH stimula-
<15 rule out HAC
tion is required before HAC is diagnosed. The greatest ratios
≥20 consistent with HAC
for UCCR are seen in dogs with PDH as opposed to dogs with
15-19 gray zone
AT. If UCCR is >loo the dog is very likely to have PDH. A
UCCR is the least expensive screening test.
Low dose dexamethasone supression (LDDS) test
It is imperative to perform this test on urine collected at
Patients with HAC will not suppress and "non-Cushingoid"
home in the morning when physiologic stress is at a
 patients will suppress.
526
The principle of the LDDS test is that dogs or cats that
for, a very positive feature. However, it "recognizes" another
have HAC (PDH or AT) will not decrease their serum cortisol
50% of dogs that do not have the disease, but the results of
in response to the administration of a low dose of dexa-
the test suggest that they do. The specificity of LDDS is
methasone. Dexamethasone will cause a decrease in serum
between 75% and 44% depending on the study, which
means the false positive rate is 25-56%. Sick, stressed dogs
about 50% of dogs with other diseases. In normal dogs
    sss   e 
dexamethasone is recognized by receptors in the pituitary/
hypothalamus resulting in a decreased release of ACTH. The
and the more severe the nonadrenal illness, the more likely
decrease in ACTH results in decreased release of cortisol
there will be a false positive test result.
from the adrenal cortex that is interpreted as suppression.
An additional use of LDDS is to differentiate PDH from AT
This suppression is used to rule out HAC. In normal dogs.
in a dog that has classical signs and lab data of Cushing's.
LDDS will decrease serum cortisol in 2-3 hours and cortisol
see confirmatory or differentiating tests, below.
will remain decreased for 24-48 hours. LDDS is an excellent
test to distinguish normal dogs from Cushingoid dogs, but it
Summary LDDS
is not entirely reliable to distinguish Cushingoid dogs from
● An 8hr cortisol <l.5 μg/dL is suppression, rule out HAC
sick, stressed dogs that have a variety of other diseases.
● An 8hr cortisol >l.5μg/dL is no suppression, rule in HAC
The concentration of cortisol at 8 hours post dexametha-
● 95% of dogs with HAC do not suppress, 95% sensitivity
sone administration is used to determine HAC. Dexametha-
· 25-56% of dogs without HAC do not suppress, false posi-
sone sodium phosphate or dexamethasone in polyethylene
tives: 44-75 % specificity: therefore could rule in HAC when
glycol can be used. The recommended dosage is 0.ol mg/kg
the dog does not have HAC
intravenously for the low dose protocol. Samples are col-
● 5% of dogs with HAC suppress; false negative; may miss
lected before (basal) the administration of dexamethasone
the diagnosis
and at 4 and 8 hours post administration. Use the 8-hour
● Excellent test to RO Cushing's when suppression occurs;
sample to rule in or rule out HAC, use the 4-hour sample
Saat yia sassaiddns sop e pue paseaou nou st aoon 
        o
rule out HAC
cortisol do not crossreact with or recognize dexamethasone.
·● LDDS can also be used to differentiate PDH and AT in
    s, o   '
about 25% of dogs
administration of dexamethasone. Because of crossreactiv-
● Popular test, but false positive is 25-50%: therefore signs
ity. prednisolone or prednisone cannot be used as the sup-
and lab data must be characteristic of Cushing's before this
pressing steroid. Dexamethasone is approximately 40 times
test is used to rule in HAC.
as potent as cortisol, hence it can suppress ACTH when the
concentration of endogenous serum cortisol cannot.
ACTH stimulation test
        
The principle of the ACTH stimulation test (ACTH stim) is
6.0 μg/dL (10-160nmol/L). Reference intervals and sug-
 ia  aa l  i Si  so 
gested cut-offs for interpretation should be provided by the
in the concentration of serum cortisol in response to an
reference laboratory used. LDDS will decrease serum cortisol
injection of ACTH. Normal dogs will increase their serum
to<1.5 μg/dL (<30 nmol/L) at 4 and 8 hours post dexametha-
cortisol approximately two fold; but remain at less than
sone in normal dogs. If a dog has PDH or AT the 8-hour post
15 μg/dL. Dogs with hypoadrenocorticism will not increase
dexamethasone sample will be >l.5μg/dL (>40 nmol/L).
their serum cortisol (<2μg/dL) and dogs with PDH or AT will
Some labs use greater than or equal to 30 nmol/L or 1.4μg/
have increases of serum cortisol greater than 2-5 tirmes the 
dL. If a dog has PDH, the low dose of dexamethasone will
basal concentration and greater than 22μg/dL (>500 nmol/L):
not decrease ACTH secretion from the pituitary tumor suf-
see Table 32.15. The protocols for this test require 1 or 2
ficiently to suppress cortisol secretion from the hyperplastic
hours depending on the product used. This test will recognize 
adrenal glands. If a dog has an AT the concentration of ACTH
approximately 80-85% of dogs with PDH, but only 60% of
is already suppressed, the AT continues to secrete cortisol
dogs with AT. Dogs with PDH have hyperplastic adrenal
independent of ACTH. If the 8-hour cortisol is equal to or
cortices that are primed to respond to exogenous ACTH. The 
greater than 1.5 μg/dL (>40 nmol/L) then there was no sup-
AT dogs have neoplastic cells that are functioning indepen-
pression. The patient has HAC, either PDH or AT, or the test
dent of endogenous ACTH and therefore may not respond
result is a false positive. All dogs with AT fail to suppress and
to exogenous ACTH. However, only l0% of dogs with HAC
90-95% of dogs with PDH fail to suppress.
have AT and AT is rare in cats. So although this test only
Many veterinarians prefer this test because 95% of the
recognizes 60% of dogs with AT, this is an uncommon cause
s si na 'ssars n op aias sr  so
 of HAC and therefore few HAC cases are missed. This nega-
to the high sensitivity of UCCR. LDDS is a test that recog-
tive fact is offset by one its best features: it has the lowest
nizes 95% of the dogs with the disease that is being looked
false positive rate of any of the screening tests, only 15%. A
527
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
to ACTH stimulation have iatrogenic HAC and the steroid
 Table 32.15 Expected responses to ACTH stimulation test in cog5.
being used crossreacts with the cortisol assay, e.g. predni-
 sone. If a LDDS was performed on this latter group, they
Cortisol μg/dL
would react lilke an AT with high basal cortisol that does not
 Normal basal 
0.5-6μg/dL; 10-160 nmol/L
suppress at 4 or 8 hours post dexamethasone.
 Normal post stim 
6-18μg/dL; >220-560 nmol/L; 2-5 times 
When both ACTH stim and LDDS were used on a group
basal
of approximately 65 dogs with HAC, no dog had normal
HAC dliagnostic
>22μg/dL
results for both tests. Results of any test are not always clear-
Gray zone
18-22 μg/dL
cut and therefore tests may need to be repeated at different
latrogenic HAC
<5 if product does not cross react
times or used in combination, especially when investigating
Basal Addison's
<1.5
endocrine diseases. Multiple ACTH stimulation protocols are
 Post stirn Addison's 
<1.5 flat line response
available for dogs, cats, and horses and all work well (Table
ACTH Stirnulation Protocols:
32.15). The protocols are presented in this chapter under
Easy, done in 1-2 hours; several types of products
discussion of hypoadrenocorticism. An advantage of the
 2.2U/kg IM ACTH aqueous porcine gel
low-dose ACTH stimulation protocol is reduced costs, at
Basal sarmple and 2 hours post ACTH dog or cat and 8 hours horse
least for smaller dogs. The low dose of 5 μg/kg of cosyntropin
or
Cosyntropin IM or IV 250μg (1vial)
will maximally stimulate the adrenal cortices of normal
 5 μg/kg will maximally stirmulate adrenal cortex 
dogs and dogs with hyperadrenocorticism and can be used
Basal sarmple and 60 minutes post ACTH for dog: two post ACTH
as a screening test for both hyperadrenocorticism and
samples for cats, at 60 and 90min
hypoadrenocorticism.
Store reconstituted ACTH in plastic syringes at -20oC for 6 months
Results: Cortisol μg/dlL reference interval (RI)
Summary ACTH STIM
· Approximately 80-85% of dogs with PDH will stimulate
 Cortisol
Dog
Cat
Horse
abnormally high
 Basal normal (RI)
0.5-6μg/dL
0.5-4
9-E
● Highest specificity. 85%. and therefore lowest false posi-
tive results of the screening tests
 False positive, or increased cortisol poststirmulation in dogs without 
· It is affected less by nonadrenal illnesses than the other
HAC is seen in about 15% of dog5.
screening tests
· Recognizes iatrogenic HAC and atypical HAC, and is used
to monitor treatment
false positive test result for HAC has serious case manage-
Various attributes and comparisons of screening tests are
ment consequences. Therefore this test may be the test of
presented in Tables 32.16, 32.17, and 32.18.
choice in a dog that only has a few of the problems associ-
ated with HAC and the clinician is searching for a diagnosis.
Confirmatory-differentiating tests: endogenous
A reasonable first step in cases that have limited features of
ACTH, HDDS, LDDS, oral dexamethasone, UCCR,
HAC is to perform UCCR as it is inexpensive, easy, and does
and ultrasonography
not require a new office visit. If UCCR is in reference interval,
These tests are designed to distinguish AT from PDH. This
and especially if serum ALP is not increased, then rule out
will aid in the selection of treatment and providing a prog-
HAC. If UCCR and ALP are increased, then follow up with
nosis (Table 32.19).
an ACTH stimulation test. ACTH stim is a relatively expen-
sive diagnostic test due to the cost of ACTH.
Endogenous ACTH (e ACTH)
There are other uses for the ACTH stimulation test. It
recognizes iatrogenic HAC. It is the test of choice to monitor 
Pituitary dependent = increased e ACTH
response to therapy and provides a baseline response for
Adrenal dependent = decreased e ACTH
monitoring therapy. Lastly, it may identify rare and unusual
cases of HAC that have increases in precursors to cortisol
Iatrogenic = decreased e ACTH
(17-hydroxyprogesterone). but normal concentrations of 
the end product, cortisol
Pituitary tumors that cause HAC synthesize and secrete
 Patients that look Cushingoid, but have low UCCR, low
ACTH and therefore plasma from these dogs will have high
basal cortisol, and a flat line response to ACTH stimulation
concentration of e ACTH. AT secrete cortisol which sup-
may have iatrogenic HAC when the steroid being used does
presses ACTH synthesis and release and therefore these dogs
not crossreact with the cortisol assay, e.g., dexamethasone.
will have decreased or undetectable plasma e ACTH. Like all
Patients that look Cushingoid and have a high UCCR, high
tests this works well on advanced cases or cases that are
basal cortisol that remains high, and in a flat line in response
 classical, but there will be cases that fall into the gray zone
528
CHAPTER 32 Laboratory Evaluation of the Thyroid, Adrenal, and Pituitary Glands
Table 32.16 Screening tests for hyperadrenocorticism in dog5.
Test
Use
Interpretation
Cortisol μg/dL
Comment
UCCR
RO HAC
RO HAC if <15 × 10-6
Basal
Post-stim
1 and 2 hr protocols
ACTH stim
Dx HAC
RO HAC
2-10
8-19
RI HAC
2-10
>24
15% false positive
 Favor HAC
2-10
18-24
latrogenic
8
8
4hr
8hr
LDDS
Dx HAC
RO HAC
<1.5μg/dL
RI HAC
>1.5μg/d
25-50% false
positive
 Consult reference laboratory for reference intervals and interpretation.
RO = rule out, Rl = rule in, HAC = hyperadrenocorticism.
Table 32.17 Commparison of screening tests for HAC.
Table 32.18 Comparison of LDDS and ACTH stimulation.
Screening test
 Positive
False
False
 ACTH stimulation
LDDS
(Sensitivity)
positive
negative
Good features
UCCR
95 %
75-85 %
% 5-0
Fewest false positive
Popular 
LDDS
95 % at 8h
55 % at 8h 
0-5 %
 Easy. 1-2 hours
95% sensitivity
ACTH (when PDH)
80-85 %
15%
10-25 %
Recognize iatrogenic 
May differentiate AT vs. PDH 
ACTH (when AT)
60%
40 %
 Used for atypical HAC
Rules out HAC
 Basal cortisol
 Do not use 
35 %
25-35 %
 Provicdes baseline for treatment 
Not so good features
Somme dogs with nonadrenal disease will have false positive test
60% sensitive for AT
High false positive 25-55 %
 results. Therefore it is essential to correlate results with clinical signs,
Expensive
Eight plus hours
lab data, and when more than one screening test when needed. The
percentages summarized above change depending on the cut-off 
values used for abnormal test results.
AT. When new samples were analyzed from dogs in which
the initial result was equivocal, 235 out of the 245 dogs. or
96%, had diagnostic results. Although there may be overlap
of equivocal results. Reference intervals should be generated
with reference intervals, e ACTH is being used to distinguish
by the lab performing the assay and the assay must be vali-
PDH from AT after HAC has been ruled in. It is not used to
dated for dogs. Reference interval for e ACTH via radioim-
distinguish normal dogs from dogs with HAC. Endogenous 
munoassay is approximately 20-100 pg/mL; values <20
ACTH is a differentiation test and is not to be used as a
indicate AT, values in the 20-45 range are nondiagnostic or
screening test to rule in HAC.
equivocal, and values >45 are consistent with PDH. Some
 Endogenous ACTH concentration measured via a two-site 
cases of PDH may have values greater than 200 μg/dL
solid-phase chemiluminescent immunometric assay (immu-
Approximately 90% of dogs with PDH will have e ACTH
noluminometric assay) was very discriminating in 109 dogs
>45 pg/mL, 70% of dogs with AT will be <20 pg/mL. There
is some overlap of each category with each other and with
with AT. The reference interval was determined to be
reference intervals. These latter cases require another dif-
6-58pg/mL and a threshold for diagnosis was set at 5pg/dL:
ferentiating test or resubmission for e ACTH at a latter time.
e.g.. adrenal dependent hyperadrenocorticism <5 pg/mL>
Approximately 80% of samples tested from 245 dogs had
pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism. The limit of
concentrations of e ACTH that were diagnostic for PDH or
detectable ACTH is 5pg/dL, and the working range of the
529
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Table 32.19 Differentiating tests for hyperadrenocorticisn in dogs.
isal
Interpretation
Cortisol
ACTH
μg/dL
pmol/mL
e-ACTH
AT
<20
via RIA
PDH
>100
Gray zone
20-100
e-ACTH via inmunomedtric 
AT <5 μg/dL> PDH
4hr
8hr
LDDS
RO HAC
<1.5
PDH
<1.5
>1.5
 PDH 
<50% basal
>1.5
PDH
>1.5 & <50% ba5al
PDH or AT
>1.5
>1.5
HDDS
8hr
 PDH 
<1.5
Suppression
PDH
<50% basal
 Suppression 
PDH 25% of case5
>1.5 or >50% basal
 No suppression 
AT
>1.5 or >50% basal no suppression
UCCR post dexarmethasone
Oral Ds
PDH
<50% basal
PDH or AT
≥50 % basal
 Consult reference laboratory for reference intervals and interpretation.
assay is 5-1250 pg/mL. All 18 dogs with adrenal dependent
freezing at -20 to -70°℃. Pack samples on dry ice for over
HAC had concentrations of ACTH below the limit of detect-
night shipping to the lab. ACTH is very unstable at room
ability and all dogs with PDH had detectable ACTH that
temperature. The most critical event to avoid is freeze
ranged from 6-1250 pg/mL with a median concentration of
thawing. as this will degrade almost all proteins, especially
30 pg/mL. Using a cut-off of 5 pg/mL there was no overlap
hormones. Aprotinin (Trasylol) is a proteinase inhibitor that
between dogs with AT and dogs with PDH. However, there
blocks trypsin, plasmin, and kallikrein and greatly prolongs
is considerable overlap of e ACTH between dogs with PDH
activity of ACTH. It is used as a preservative that can be
and normal dogs. The reference interval is 6-58 pg/mL and
added to the blood as soon as it is collected and it will help
therefore many dogs with PDH had concentrations of ACTH
prevent in vitro decay from time and temperature. It is
within reference interval.
available from diagnostic labs or the manufacturer. Follow
This is perhaps the easiest and most straightforward way
directions supplied; add 500 units per mL of blood collected.
to differentiate PDH and AT; however, sample collection
With this preservative the activity of ACTH is preserved at
requires attention to details. It is recommended that samples
4 or -20°℃ for 4 days. Samples are acceptable if shipped in
be collected in the morning. between 8 and 9 AM, but dif-
a container with frozen packs for 4 days. Loss is approxi-
ferent studies reporting on e ACTH have not adhered to
mately 10% activity at 22°℃ in 4 days. Avoid freeze-thaw
this time frame and achieved diagnostic results. ACTH is
cycles. However, do not use aprotinin if the assay for ACTH
best measured in plasma, heparin or EDTA as anticoagulant,
 is immunoluminometric as aprotinin causes a negative bias
 and the sample should never be in contact with regular
that may result in inability to quantitate ACTH. It is best
glass tubes as this will bind the ACTH and artifactually
to follow all instructions provided by the laboratory where
decrease ACTH. Use only plastic syringes and tubes for the
the samples are sent.
collection and the storage of sarmples that are used to
    q  
measure e ACTH. Silicon-coated EDTA tubes can also be
radiometric and immunoluminometric assays. Reference
used to collect blood. Then use plastic tubes for all other
intervals and units will vary with the assay used therefore
steps to harvest plasrma. Most EDTA tubes are silicone
use a reference lab that has validated the assay for animals
coated. Try to collect in chilled tubes. Centrifuge chilled
and that provides reference intervals and expected values
right after collection and transfer plasma to plastic tubes for
for AT versus PDH for their methodology.
530
CHAPTER 32 Laboratory Evaluation of the Thyroid, Adrenal, and Pituitary Glands
These dogs already have low concentrations of ACTH
eACTH*
(decreased by the negative feedback of cortisol secreted from
the adrenal tumor). therefore, the administration of dexa-
Reference
 20-100 pg/mL
methasone has no observable effect on ACTH and cortisol
interval 
secretion continues from the adrenal tumor, hence, there is
 Adrenal tumor
<20 pg/ml; seen in approximately 75% of cases
no suppression in the serum concentration of cortisol.
However, approximately 25% of dogs with PDH also do not
Gray zone
 20-45pg/mL repeat in a few weeks or perform
 another test
mas or carcinomas or the tumor may be arising from the
 Pituitary tumor
>45 pg/mL; seen in approximately 90% of PDH:
pars intermedia which does not respond to negative feed-
and often markedly increased, e.g. >200
back from corticosteroids. Differentiation of the dogs that are
resistant to dexamethasone suppression requires e ACTH
+e ACTH measured via radioirmmunoassay; consult reference lab that
and/or ultrasonography. Dexamethasone resistance means
perforns the assay for their recommended values to interpret results.
the dog has either PDH or AT and the odds are about 50:50.
There is also some data to suggest that a HDDS only provides
a clearer interpretation of the 4- and 8-hour LDDS in about
10% of the cases.
This test is performed similar to the LDDS except the dose
eACTH*
of IV or IM dexamethasone is now 0.1-1.0mg/kg or 10 times
 Reference interval 
 6-58 pg/mL
 greater than LDDs. Basal, 4-, and 8-hour samples are col-
 Adrenal tumor
<5pg/mL 
lected. An alternate protocol omits the 4-hour sample. Sup-
Pituitary tumor
>5pg/nl
pression indicates PDH and is defined as:
● cortisol less than 1.4μg/dL (40nmol/L) at 4 or 8 hours
+* e ACTH measured via irmmunoluminometric assay: consult reference
● cortisol <50% of basal cortisol at 4 or 8 hours
lab that performs the assay for their recommended values to interpret 
 If a portion of the IV injection becomes extravascular
results and where they set the threshold for dliagnosis: e.g. adrenal
cancel and repeat the procedure after 72 hours or longer.
dependent hyperadrenocorticism <5 pg/mL> pituitary dependent 
hyperadrenocorticismn. Do not use aprotinin for ACTH measured via 
LDDS as a differentiating test
immunoluminometric assay.
An additional use of LDDS is to differentiate PDH from AT
in a dog that has classical signs and lab data of Cushing's. If
suppression is detected, the diagnosis is PDH. If there is no
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
suppression, the diagnosis may be either AT or PDH. Sup-
75% of dogs with PDH suppress: 100% of dogs with AT and
pression is defined as any of the following in a dog that has
25% of dogs with PDH do not suppress; dogs that suppress
an 8-hour corisol >l.4 μg/dL
have PDH and dogs that do not suppress have either AT or
· 4hr cortisol <l.4μg/dL (consult reference lab for cutoff
PDH; this latter group is small overall and will require
value they use}
another test to differentiate: e ACTH and/or abdominal
● 4hr cortisol <50% of basal cortisol (4hr could still be
ultrasound.
>1.4μg/dL)
A high-dose dexamethasone suppression test (HDDS) can
● 8hr cortisol <50% of basal, but >1.4μg/dL
identify approximately 75% of the dogs that have PDH, but
Critical to correct interpretation is that there is no sup-
it cannot definitively identify an AT. The principle of HDDS
pression at 8 hours, they "all" have a value of cortisol >l.4 μg/
is that when the concentration of dexamethasone gets high
dL, consistent with HAC. Overall, approximately 60-80% of
enough, it will decrease the release of ACTH from pituitary
dogs with PDH meets one or more of the above criteria and 
microadenomas and the decrease in ACTH will cause a
therefore demonstrates a type of suppression with LDDS.
decrease in serum cortisol that is interpreted as suppression.
These results make the LDDS a useful adjunct to distinguish
This decrease in cortisol post HDDS also occurs if the dog is
PDH and AT. However, approximately 20-40% of dogs with
normal, or if the dog is sick and stressed by a nonadrenal
PDH do not demonstrate suppression via these criteria. Simi-
disease. This has important diagnostic implications because
larly, 25% of dogs with PDH also do not suppress with HDDS.
if a HDDS is performed on a dog with a false positive LDDS
There are data to suggest that the dogs with PDH that do
result, this dog would now suppress with HDDS and lead to
not suppress, those that are resistant to dexamethasone.
an erroneous diagnosis of PDH. HDDS should not be per-
have larger pituitary tumors, macroadenomas or carcinomas.
formed on dogs in which the clinical diagnosis is uncertain
It is logical that the pituitary tumor could be so large that a
and it should never be used as a screening test. Dogs with
low dose of dexarmethasone would not totally suppress the
an adrenal tumor secrete cortisol independent of ACTH.
secretion of ACTH or that the tumor lacks receptors for
531
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
cortisol or is located in the pars intermedia. One hundred
raphy is dependent on the experience of the ultrasonogra-
pher and confounders in the patient such as abdominal fat.
fore when no suppression is observed with a LDDS the dog
large body size, hepatomegaly, gastrointestinal distension,
has either an AT or PDH, perhaps a large pituitary tumor.
renal mineralization, nodular adrenocortical hyperplasia of
Abdominal ultrasonography or e ACTH may help differenti-
old dogs, small size of normal adrenals, and their position in
ate these. The pattern of suppression at 4 hours followed by
the abdominal cavity. Similar to endocrine testing abdomi-
an increase at 8 hours is called a "rebound" response and is
considered diagnostic of PDH. Critical to the correct inter-
there is a diagnosis of Cushing's disease. Also similar is that
pretation of all the confirmatory tests is that the patient
there are false positive and false negative results.
meets clinical and laboratory criteria for a diagnosis of HAC.
Computed tomography (CT) can be used to look for char-
acteristic abdominal lesions or visualize the pituitary. It is
Oral dexamethasone at high dose and UCCR
more discriminating than abdominal radiographs or ultraso-
Urine is collected at home in the morning for two consecu-
nography. but it also has limitations and conflicting reports
tive days and stored individually in the refrigerator in closed
as to its discriminating capabilities. CT and magnetic reso-
containers. After urine is collected on day two, dexametha-
nance imaging (MRI) are used to visualize a pituitary tumor.
sone is given orally by the owner at 0.1 mg/kg every 8 hours
especially if a large tumor is suspected. They are more useful
(three doses). Urine is collected on the third morning and
in the cat due to the larger size of pituitary neoplasms in
all urine samples are analyzed for cortisol and creatinine and
cats with HAC or acromegaly. They do not replace endocrine
UCCR determined. The UCCR on the first two samples is
testing as they can only visualize about half of the pituitary
averaged for a baseline value. A baseline value in reference
tumors in dogs because the tumors are so small. Imaging
interval will rule out HAC. If the baseline value is increased,
cannot differentiate a functional versus nonfunctional pitu-
then compare this value with the post dexamethasone ratio.
itary mass. However, if the endocrine data suggests a large
If the UCCR post dexamethasone is <50% of baseline it
pituitary tumor versus an AT, then CT or MRI are useful
indicates suppression occurred and the diagnosis is consis-
tent with PDH. If the post dexamethasone sample is >50%
exist then CT or MRI may identify a large pituitary tumor.
of basal it indicates suppression did not occur and this is
Newer technology will continue to improve diagnostic
consistent with an AT or PDH, similar to the HDDS test when
imaging and eventually they may be sensitive enough to
accurately distinguish PDH from other forms of adrenal
tive rate with spot UcCR, it is recommended that a positive
hyperplasia and to visualize pituitary microadenomas. Just
test result be correlated with a poster card ideal case of Cush-
like the suppression and stimulatory tests, there will be false
ing's and that one other screening test confirm HAC is
positive and false negative test results with imaging studies.
present.
 done a good job reporting false negatives, positives, sensitivi-
Diagnostic imaging: US, CT, MRI
ties, and specificities.
These are obviously not clinical pathology tests, but they are
procedures used in conjunction with laboratory data.
Summary of endocrine testing
Abdominal ultrasonography can differentiate AT from PDH.
Dogs and cats that have classical signs for HAC are relatively
However, it is not sensitive enough to differentiate hyper-
easy to identify based on clinical signs and laboratory results.
plastic adrenal glands secondary to PDH from other causes
However, it can be a diagnostic challenge to recognize HAC
of adrenal hyperplasia or even some normal adrenal glands.
in animals that only have some of the signs of HAC or are
Therefore, it is not a screening test to diagnose HAC. Fur-
early in the development of the disease. These are the cases
thermore, not all adrenal tumors can be found. Some are
that laboratory testing is needed the most. Each test has its
 missed because the tumor is too small to be visualized or the
advantages and disadvantages. UCCR is a good first screen-
affected adrenal gland could not be located. If present,
ing test to rule out the differential of HAC as it is easy; the
adrenal mineralization is a strong indicator of HAC and is
sample can be collected at home, it does not require another
seen in hyperplastic and neoplastic adrenal glands in plain
office visit, and it is relatively inexpensive. The test's high
radiographs as well as other imaging techniques. Approxi-
sensitivity and low specificity mean that most of the time
mately half of the adrenal tumors have mineralization.
the result is increased (positive). So if it is normal or
Ultrasonography may identify invasion of blood vessels or
decreased, it is very unlikely the patient has HAC. A negative
UCCR combined with a reference interval ALP is sufficient
from carcinomas unless there is evidence of metastasis such
evidence to rule out HAC. LDDS is the test of choice when
as vascular invasion, masses in the liver, or enlarged regional
the patient loolks Cushingoid because of its high sensitivity
lymph nodes. The larger the adrenal mass the more likely it
of 95%. Like the UCCR there are numerous false positives
is malignant. Diagnostic accuracy of abdominal ultrasonog-
adnu aaey lou saop lad aui f! saat pioae os 'f%ss oi dn)
532
clinical signs or lab data characteristic of HAC. Because an
● Unit conversion: to convert cortisol to μg/dL (mcg/dL)
animal may be stressed by its primary disease, its LDDS can
from nmol/L divide cortisol reported in nmol/L by 27.6.
be falsely "positive": that is, it does not suppress, but it does
not have HAC. If HDDS is used in this situation, the results 
Differentiating tests
will show suppression that indicates PDH; this is a false posi-
● e ACTH: Easy, just submit one sample; differentiates PDH
tive diagnosis with serious consequences. Never use HDDS
and AT.
as a screening test. In patients that do not look typical for
● LDDS: Can rule in HAC and identify 60-80% of dogs with
HAC and may only have a few of the lab data characteristic
PDH
of HAC, then ACTH stimulation is preferred as it has the
● HDDS: Traditional test to differentiate AT and PDH; dogs
fewest false positives, 15%. In patients that look typical for
that suppress have PDH and dogs that do not suppress have
HAC and that have multiple laboratory results characteristic
either AT or PDH.
of HAC, then LDDS is preferred. Phenobarbital therapy
· HDDS: Only 10% of the cases that LDDS did not distin-
infrequently produces abnormal results for LDDs, but it does
guish, a HDDS may successfully identify.
not induce abnormalities for ACTH stimulation tests or e
· 100% of AT do not suppress with HDDS or LDDS
ACTH.
● If resistant to dexamethasone consider imaging to look for
AT and/or measure e ACTH
the sensitivity and specificity are of lab tests. For endocrine
● If suspecting a large pituitary tumor, consider imaging by
testing that has led to clarification and some confusion
CT or MRI.
beca use the ranges provided and cut-off values for diagnoses 
may vary due to different methodologies. If the reference
Unusualcases
intervals are wider, the lab tests are less discriminating.
Most dogs that look Cushingoid but that do not test positive
Where the cut-off is set for diagnostic values changes sen-
with ACTH stim and LDDS do not have HAC. However, some
sitivity and specificity. Therefore use reference intervals and
of these dogs could have "atypical or occult hyperadreno-
cut-off values from the lab providing results. No test can be
corticism." This form of HAC may have increased concentra-
100% positive or negative, or loo% sensitive and specific
tions of one or more precursors of cortisol. The most
because there are too many biologic and methodologic
variables.
(17-OHP). If dogs with this atypical form have a deficiency
in one of the enzymes needed to convert precursor molecules
Summary ideas
into cortisol, then the molecule before this enzyme defi-
● If serum ALP is not increased, HAC is very unlikely
ciency will increase. For example, 17-OHP will increase if
· If UCCR is not increased, rule out HAC. If both ALP and
the enzyrme 21 beta hydroxylase is deficient or ll -deoxycortisol 
UCCR are not increased rule out HAC. Consider retesting in
will increase if the enzyme ll beta hydroxylase is deficient.
future if HAC remains a differential.
● UCCR is a good test to rule out HAC; never use to rule in
of choice is ACTH stimulation. The protocol is modified to
HAC.
measure both cortisol and 17-OHP pre and post stimulation
· UCcR avoids a visit, easy first step.
and comparing both concentrations to reference intervals
● If characteristic signs and lab data are present, use LDDS.
provided by the laboratory. Post stimulation cortisol that is 
● If limited signs and lab data are present = UCCR to rule
not out of the reference interval combined with an increased
out, follow with ACTH stim if UCCR increased; avoid LDDS
concentration of 17-OHP is consistent with what is called
as false positive rate is too high.
atypical or occult hyperadrenocorticism.
· If a nonadrenal illness is more likely than HAC: use UCCR,
Although increases in 17-OHP can be measured in dogs.
ACTH stim if needed.
-us, aun j io ssa ssn auu sl j ia io s i!
· PU PD with characteristic other signs: use LDDS.
drome" actually causes clinical disease. Dogs without adrenal 
· PU PD with few signs of HAC: Use UCCR to rule out and
  e in di   aa  as
follow with ACTH stim.
increased serum cortisol due to stress of a concurrent disease.
· Suspect an adrenal tumor: LDDS is preferred; ACTH stim
There also are reports of cases treated with trilostane that
has lower sensitivity for AT; consider imaging to search for AT.
improved despite continued increase in serum 17-OHP. Fur-
● Suspect iatrogenic: Use ACTH stim and evaluate history.
thermore, others have observed that as adrenal function is
● Suspect hypoadrenocorticism: measure basal cortisol and
stimulated by a true adrenal disease or nonspecifically by
ACTH stim if needed.
stress that the production of all hormones increase, cortisol
and sex hormones. Other sex hormones that can be mea-
ficult to be certain when the pituitary adrenal axis will
sured are progesterone, estradiol, testosterone, and andro-
return to normal. It ranges from 2 to 8 weeks depending on
stenedione, basal and post ACTH stimulation. This has led
dosages and duration of steroid administration.
to "steroid hormone profiles" or measurement of the parent
533
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
products, cortisol and estradiol, as well as their various pre-
in the blood, but they may also be due to direct effects of
cursors. In ferrets these profiles are diagnostically helpful. If
the tumor or concurrent neoplasia. Signs reported in dogs
measured, estradiol is often increased in dogs being investi
and horses include tachycardia, arrhythmias, tachypnea.
gated for HAC. However studies that correlate these hormone
panting. weakness, collapse and seizures. Polyuria and poly
profiles with clinical disease in dogs and cats are needed, as
-d  s u a  a 
well as the determination of false positives and negatives. If
tomas. Routine clinical pathology is usually of little help.
17-OHP can increase post ACTH in dogs that do not have
Nonspecific observations include increased liver enzymes in
adrenal disease it seems reasonable that other sex hormones
10-50% of dogs. mild proteinuria in 50% perhaps secondary
would increase as well, further weakening the concept that
to increased blood pressure induced glomerular leakage, and
occult hyperadrenocorticism causes clinical disease. Addi-
dilute urine due to inhibition of vasopressin by the increased
tional studies are needed before the syndrome of occult HAC
catecholamines. Approximately half of the dogs will have a
is recognized widely.
stress leukogram and 75% will have increased ALP. A few
21-Hydroxylase deficiency does cause prolonged gestation
of these dogs have concurrent HAC. Sometimes the first
in Holstein cattle because the adrenal gland cannot produce
time a pheochromocytoma is considered is when abdominal
suffcient cortisol to stimulate delivery. The result is a fetal
ultrasonography reveals a mass in the adrenal region and/
giant.
or masses in the vena cava. Metastases in dogs are reported
in 20-50% of the cases.
Ferrets
 Norepinephrine is the principal catecholamine secreted
Hyperadrenocorticism is a common disease in ferrets and
from pheochromocytomas in dogs. Urinary vanillylmandelic
produces many of the clinical signs and lab abnormalities
acid and free unconjugated catecholamines are increased in
described for dogs and cats, with the most striking physical
bulls with pheochromocytoma. Stimulatory and inhibitory
abnormality being baldness. The adrenal lesion and the hor-
tests are used, but have side effects and the measurement of
mones that cause the disease, however, are very different.
catecholamines in these tests should be coordinated with a
 The lesion is in the adrenal gland. Approximately half of the
lab that will perform assays and provide reference intervals.
lesions are hyperplasia and half are neoplastic. About 80%
Cytology of the suspected tumor reveals "naked nuclei" or
nuclei with very little cytoplasm.
are bilateral. Unilateral adrenalectomy provides successful
treatment for those cases with proliferations in the left
adrenal. The principle hormone that causes the clinical signs
Pituitary disorders
is estrogen. Serum cortisol is rarely increased. If the disease
exists for a long enough period the increased estrogens will
The pituitary gland is composed of the adenohypophysis
cause bone marrow suppression leading to anemia and
(pars distalis or anterior lobe). neurohypophysis (pars
thrombocytopenia. Diagnosis is confirmed by measurement
nervosa or posterior lobe), pars intermedia (intermediate
 of estradiol or estradiol precursors (17-hydroxyprogesterone
lobe), and pars tuberalis (infundibular stalk). The adenohy-
and/or androstenedione). The precursors to estradiol con-
pophysis is formed by the differentiation of embryonic oral
tribute to the disease and if estradiol is not increased, then
ectoderm, Rathke's pouch, into trophic secretory cells pro-
the precursors should be measured. Commercial assays for
ducing growth hormone (GH) or somatotropin, prolactin,
these hormone profiles are available.
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). follicle-stimulating
Most of the adrenal lesions classified as neoplastic are
hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and adrenocor-
considered carcinomas via histologic features. However.
ticotrophic hormone (ACTH). The most common disease
very few metastasize and therefore their biologic behavior
and lesion from the pars distalis is hyperadrenocorticism due
is similar to an adenoma. Some cases have life-threatening
to an adenoma secreting ACTH (Table 32.20). Neoplasms
hemorrhage from necrosis within the tumor.
that produce other trophic hormones and that cause disease
are rare. An example is a growth hormone producing
Pheochromocytoma-tumor of adrenal medulla,
adenoma that causes acromegaly. Nonsecretory neoplasms.
increased epinephrine and norepinephrine
inflammation, and embryonic cysts that destroy the pitu-
Pheochromocytoma is the most common tumor of the
itary gland are uncommon and result in panhypopituita
adrenal medulla, but it is rare. It occurs in all species, prob-
rism, dwarfism, or selective decrease in specific trophic
ably most frequently in cattle, dogs and rats, and in a few
hormones. Hypoadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism are
horses. In bulls and people it is associated with concurrent
the most common diseases due to pituitary destruction.
tumors of C-cells and is part of multiple endocrine neoplasia
These diseases are described in the adrenal and thyroid sec-
(MEN). A concurrent tumor in other adrenal locations is
tions of this chapter.
seen in about half of the dogs with a pheochromocytoma.
The neurohypophysis is composed of axons that originate
Clinical signs are attributed to the increased catecholamines
within the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the
534
 Table 32.20 Regions in the pituitary gland and associated lesions and the most common diseases.
 Pars distalis
Neoplasia
Hyperadrenocorticism; acromegaly—cat 
Pars dlistalis
Cyst
Dwarfisrn 
Neurohypophysi5
Varied
Diabetes insipidus
Pars intermedia
Neoplasia 
Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction—-horse
Pars tuberalis
Obstruction 
 Diabetes insipidus
hypothalamus. Separate neurons within both nuclei synthe-
pressure on the hypothalmus from the expanding tumor in
size vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH) and oxytocin.
the pituitary is responsible for the clinical signs of polypha-
These hormones migrate through the infundibular stalk in
gia, hypertrichosis, and fever. Tumors may compress the
axons as precursor proteins to be stored in secretory gran-
hypothalamus due to their relatively large size and an
ules in the neurohypophysis, pars nervosa, and are released
incomplete sella turcica in the horse. Pressure on the hypo-
under appropriate stimuli. Oxytocin stimulates uterine con-
thalamus and increased concentrations of intermediary sub-
traction and milk secretion. ADH stimulates water reabsorp-
stances and cortisol produce the characteristic physical
tion in the distal and collecting tubules.
abnormalities that are diagnostic of this syndrome. Despite
Various pituitary disorders are described below.
large pituitary tumors in some horses, neurologic or visual
signs are infrequent and variably reported at 5-50%. PPID
Equine Cushing's like syndromes
is also seen in horses with small pituitary lesions that are
Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID)
hyperplastic. Therefore size is not the major reason for the
Equine Cushing's disease is more appropriately called pitu-
disease, but larger lesions correlate with older age of affected
itary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID). This term is
horses and more fully developed clinical signs that have
deemed more appropriate because the pituitary lesion does
characteristic endocrine profiles. PPID is a progressive disease
not have to be neoplastic. It is located in the pars intermedia.
and identification of the starting point is vague. Early disease
There are dysfunctional biochemical events and it stimulates
recognition is difficult because the lab tests and physical
a unique pathogenesis with a different profile of pituitary
characteristics are not definitive in the early stages.
hormones that do not result in marked adrenal cortical
The pars distalis processes the precursor peptide pro-
hypertrophy. The pituitary lesions range from hyperplasia to
opiomelanocortin into ACTH. Melanotrophs in the pars 
large tumors. Clinical disease, hormone profiles, and bio-
interrmedia synthesize pro-opiomelanocortin and cleave it
chemical changes may occur without overt pituitary
into ACTH and further processes it into α-and β-melanocyte
adenoma formation. Rare causes of Cushing's in the horse
stimulating
hormone
(MSH},
β-endorphins.
and
is a neoplasm in the pars distalis or in the adrenal cortex.
 corticotrophin-like interrmediate lobe peptide (CLIP). Plasma
Nodular adrenocortical hyperplasia does not cause clinical
and tumor concentrations of ACTH are only mildly increased
disease and is similar to the lesion in older dogs.
in horses with this syndrome, but the tumor and plasma
Classical signs such as an aged horse (mean age 24 years.
concentrations of the intermediary peptides listed above are
range 15-32) with swayback, hirsutism, laminitis. muscle
markedly increased. These data help explain the mild to
atrophy, lethargy. abnormal fat distribution, hyperhidrosis.
moderate increases in ACTH and cortisol combined with
polyphagia, intermittent fever, and secondary infections are
modest adrenocortical  hyperplasia  versus the marked
adequate to diagnose many cases and start treatment with
increases in plasma concentrations of MSH, CLIP, and beta
pergolide. Owners often complain that each year the horse
endorphin seen in horses with PPID. Measurement of these
sheds hair later or not at all and the excessive sweating leads 
peptides is more useful in the diagnosis of PPID in horses 
to the characteristic long curly coat that mats and persists in
than is the measurement of basal cortisol or ACTH. Cortisol
warm months. Hirsutism is a unique abnormality present in
strongly inhibits ACTH secretion from the pars distalis. but
80-loo% of horses with PPID and it is considered patho-
has little effect on peptides secreted by the pars intermedia 
gnomonic. It probably is a manifestation that occurs late in
because melanotrophs do not express glucocorticoid recep-
the course of the syndrome. PUPD is reported, but owners
tors. Hence the dexamethasone suppression tests used in
do not consistently observe it. Secondary skin infections and
dogs are less useful in horses and require modifications.
poor wound healing are observed in 25-50% of horses. Up
Physical and historical data are more helpful to the diag-
to 80% of horses with PPID develop laminitis., apparently
nosis than are routine clinical pathology abnormalities that
from carbohydrate intolerance. The hypothalamus is the
are common in small animals. Urine specific gravity ranges
primary control center for cyclic shedding of hair, appetite
from 1.022 to 1.047. which helps explain why PUPD is
control, and temperature regulation. One proposal is that
infrequently reported in horses. This seems paradoxical
535
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
given that cortisol can be increased and large pituitary
Measurement of c-MSH may be better than ACTH in
tumors could interfere with function of the pars nervosa and
horses because MSH is produced primarily in pars interme-
ADH release.
dia and ACTH is primarily secreted from pars distalis. Plasma
When PPID is fully developed, the horse has marked
α-MSH hormone concentration >9l pmol/L is considered
hypertrichosis and the diagnosis is easy to confirm with
diagnostic of PPID. However, there is seasonal variation in
endocrine tests. It is the early cases that are problematic to
mean concentrations and ranges: fall= 50-60pmol/L +
diagnose. When confirmation is desired in a horse with
65 pmol/L, spring. summer, winter = 1l pmol/L + 4 pmol/L.
hypertrichosis the standard method of testing is the 19-hour
Therefore additional guidelines considered diagnostic for
(overnight) dexamethasone suppression test (DsT). Normal
PPID are if either plasma c-MSH is >l9pmol/L of mean
horses should suppress and failure to suppress is diagnostic
for PPID. Inject dexamethasone IM 40 μg/kg and serum cor-
is >l48 pmol/L of mean concentration in the fall. Plasma
tisol should be <l μg/dL (27.6 nmol/L) 19 hours later in 97 %
C-MSH and ACTH concentrations increase as daylight
of normal horses. Horses with PPID do not suppress, cortisol
decreases, from maximum daylight hours to 12 hours of
is >l.0 μg/dL, at least when the disease is fully developed.
daylight (September), but serum insulin does not fluctuate.
Confounding factors of the DsT include concurrent lamini-
This occurs in normal horses and ponies and in horses and
tis, time of the year, and stage of the disease. Therefore test
ponies with PPID, hence the season of the year should be
results should be correlated with all the other clinical and
considered when interpreting results. Ambiguous results can
laboratory information. DsT may fail to suppress normal
be repeated at a later time, even in a different season. Horses
horses and ponies in the fall (false positives). Steroids may
and ponies receiving pergolide, dopamine antagonists have
induce laminitis and early on in the disease horses with PPID
a significantly less increase in c-MSH and lower plasma
may suppress with DST, false negative. A concern of DST is
ACTH. Another diagnostic approach is to measure c-MSH
that it may exacerbate laminitis in horses with a history of
after a DST. A c-MSH >90 pmol/L post DST is the cutoff
current or past laminitis. However, in a study of 43 PPID
value between normal horses and horses with PPID.
horses in which DsT was used, this was not observed. There
 The pars intermedia is partially regulated by dopaminergic
are no other diseases that look similar to PPID in its late
input from neurons in the hypothalamus and loss of dopa-
stages and therefore the main distinction is to separate
minergic inhibition is hypothesized to stimulate the pars
horses with PPID from horses with norrmal aging changes.
intermedia causing the hyperplastic lesions that lead to neo-
DST is successful in distinguishing these two groups.
plasia and PPID syndrome. Domperidone is a synthetic benz-
However, recognizing PPID early in its development, when
imidazole used to treat fescue endophyte agalactia in mares
the pituitary lesion is small and the clinical signs mild,
and it blocks dopamine receptors. Therefore the correct dose
requires tests other than DST.
 of domperidone should block dopamine receptors thereby
Other tests that have value are endogenous ACTH, C-
permitting melanotrophs to release the pars intermedia pep-
MSH, TRH (thyrotropin-releasing hormone response test).
tides c-MSH, β-endorphin, CLIP, and ACTH and the concen-
combined hormone response tests, and measurerment of
trations of these substances should be greater in horses with
ACTH after oral administration of domperidone. These tests
PPID than in normal horses. A recent study tested this
theory on 33 horses and discovered that horses with histo-
DST is useful for more advanced cases and it is easy to
logic lesions in the pars intermedia characteristic of PPID had
perform. Basal cortisol is not diagnostic and loss of diurnal
increased concentrations of ACTH in response to domperi-
secretion of cortisol is controversial. ACTH stimulation is not
done that distinguished them from aged horses without
a useful test as it recognizes <20% of the cases. This lack of
pituitary lesions. Samples were collected before oral admin-
stimulation is likely because adrenocortical hyperplasia is
istration of domperidone, 3.3mg/kg and at 4 and 8 hours
not a prominent feature of PPID. Endogenous ACTH is also
post administration (see below):
used to diagnose PPID. Using a 10-50 pg/mL reference inter-
val and a cutoff of >55pg/mL indicates PPID with a disease
range of 104-1000 pg/mL. Variables include where the cutoff 
 Pituitary grade
ACTH
Lesion, n; mean age (yr);
value is set (critical). time of day. and different reference
pg/mL
33 total horses
intervals for ponies versus horses. It is critical to use values
Grade 1
20.0
set by the reference lab that analyzes the samples. Although
Normal 3. 7.5y
this is a simple one-collection procedure it does not recog-
Grade 2
27.1
Focal lesion of hyperplasia 9. 14.5y
Grade 3
64.4
 Diffuse hyperplasia 5, 21.0y
nize horses in the early stages of PPID and misses some
Grade 4
128.0
Microadenoma 12, 23.3y
horses in the late stages of the disease. Therefore basal ACTH
Grade 5
720.5
Adenoma 4, 25y
is not ideal and provocative testing is recommended. Assays
Reference interval
10-59
for ACTH should be validated for equine and collection
procedures for ACTH outlined for dogs should be followed.
536
This study used horses without hirsutism or obvious signs
PPID. However, DST is negative for PPID and thyroid stimu-
of advanced PPID. It found that although basal ACTH was
lation tests are negative for hypothyroidism even though
there may be a low TT4 concentration on single point deter-
ACTH post domperidone was increased consistently in
minations. Owners report the horses are "easy keepers" and
horses with pituitary lesions characteristic of PPID. Horses
they maintain their weight despite dietary attempts to
 categorized as grade 3 and above had pituitary lesions and
reduce it. Fat cells in the abdominal region are important in
mean ACTH concentrations greater than twofold above
horses without significant pituitary lesions and were consis-
abdomen are hormonally different from fat cells in other
tent with a diagnosis of PPID. However, approximately 25%
locations and compound the effects of obesity.
of the horses in grade 3 and 4 did not increase ACTH post
Horses with EMS have hyperinsulinemia and a resistance
domperidone beyond the upper limit of the reference inter-
to the action of insulin that results in increased serum
val. Although horses were tested in all seasons of the year.
glucose and glucose intolerance or delayed reduction of
the authors suggested the need to perform these evocative
glucose similar to type 2 diabetes. The mechanism of the
tests on a greater number of normal and affected horses to
insulin resistance is unknown. Substances released or pro-
determine if there is any seasonal effect or any effect from
duced in fat cells that lead to insulin resistance are free fatty
repeated testing. It is known that season of the year influ-
acids, tumor necrosis factor leptin, cortisol, and resistin.
ences concentrations of c-MSH, although it seems unlikely
Resistin is an adipocyte hormone that may be pivotal in this
that repeat testing could interfere with the utility of evoca-
syndrome. Apparently there is conversion of inactive corti-
tive tests. Blood for ACTH is collected into silicon-coated
sone to cortisol in peripheral tissues with excess cortisol
EDTA tubes or plastic tubes with EDTA, plasma harvested.
activity in skin, fat and laminar tissue of horses with EMS.
and kept frozen until assayed; chemiluminescent immuno-
The enzyme 1l beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1 con-
 assay. immulite ACTH has been validated for the horse.
verts inactive cortisone to active cortisol in adipocytes and
Horses with PPID have increased basal concentrations of
other tissues. Equine diets rich in grains are referred to as
insulin: 35-260 μU/mL, reference interval 27-53μU/mL. This
having a high glycemic index because they stimulate
is not a diagnostic test for PPID as insulin will be increased
increased serum glucose and insulin for sustained periods.
for other reasons, but it may help explain carbohydrate intol-
Feeding adult horses excess grain for the amount of exercise
erance, obesity. and propensity for laminitis. The increase in
performed leads to obesity and may start the cascade of
insulin may be due to a combination of the antagonistic
events in susceptible individuals. Typically, fasting blood glucose
effects of cortisol and increased concentrations of CLIP that
in the horse is 60-90 mg/dL and insulin is <5-20 uIU/mL.
can stimulate release of insulin. UCCR reference interval is
Glucose >250mg/dL and insulin >200 uIU/mL is clearly
reported as 4.7-16 × 10-d and a cut-off of >20 × 10- is con-
abnormal.
sistent with PPID; however, additional studies are needed.
Horses that have classical signs for PPID are easy to iden-
tify from the results of physical examination and laboratory
Diabetes insipidus
test results. However, it can be a diagnostic challenge to
 no    r s  n d 
Central diabetes insipidus (CDI) may manifest as partial or
signs of PPID. These are the cases that laboratory testing is
complete forms. They are characterized by decreased con-
most needed. Increased awareness of this disease and medi-
centration of ADH, PUPD, and low urine specific gravity
cations to treat the disease has resulted in increased testing
ranging from 1.002 to 1.012. They may be dehydrated in
for PPID when the disease is still developing. Horses can be
the face of dilute urine. They have few to no abnormalities
treated medically with low doses of pergolide (0.0017 mg/
in the CBC or chemistry panel. Typically there is no renal
kg/day divided in two oral doses or 0.75mg/day for a 450kg
 disease and the patient responds to exogenous ADH by grad-
horse, cyproheptadine (antiserotonergic) and bromocrip-
lally increasing urine specific gravity. The main differentials 
tine (dopaminergic agonist ).
are nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and psychogenic polydip-
sia. Polydipsia is usually water consumption of >l00 mL/kg/
Peripheral cushing's syndrome or equine
day and polyuria is urine production >50 mL/kg/day in dogs
metabolic syndrome (EMs)
and cats.
This is a metabolic disorder of older horses (8-18 years) that
      
General
tissues, obesity, and laminitis. The disease develops in genet-
ADH is released or retained under appropriate stimuli from
ically susceptible horses (Morgans and Spanish breeds) that
osmoreceptor neurons located in the hypothalamus that
are overfed and under-exercised. These horses will be over-
sense changes in plasma osmolality. As plasma osmolality
weight, have excess fat in the rump region, "cresty necks."
increases beyond 310 mOsmo/kg these osmoreceptors stim-
and laminitis that is often attributed to hypothyroidism or
ulate the release of ADH that binds to specific V2 receptor
537
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
sites and stimulate cellular events leading to the creation of
Table 32.21 Causes of polyuria (polydipsia) and dilute urine via
channels in the distal tubular and collecting duct epithelial
associated mechanismns.
cells to transport water from the glomerular filtrate into the
medulla and then into blood vessels. Failure to produce or
 Decreased ADH—Central diabetes insipidus (DI)
release ADH results in excretion of dilute urine with a spe-
 Pituitary (hypothalamic rare) tumor, abscess, idiopathic, congenital 
cific gravity (s.g.) less than 1.012, but typically much lower.
Central diabetes insipidus (CDI) is due to inadequate
Inadequate response of tubular cells to adequate ADH--
release and/or production of ADH (vasopressin). Idiopathic
Nephrogenic DI
    ,    
Hypercalcemia, steroids, hypokalemia, pyometra E. coli endotoxin,
congenital lack of response of tubular cells to ADH
lesion cannot be found or one is not looked for. Known
causes include tumors, inflammation, head trauma, para-
Decreased renal mass = lesions in kidneys, loss of tubular cells
sitic, cysts, and pituitary surgery. CDI secondary to surgery
With azotemia = >75% involvement; especially if lesions in medulla
on the pituitary may be transient or permanent. Tumors are
 and pelvis
usually of pituitary origin, but can be neural in origin. In
Without azotemia = 66% to 75% involvement of total renal ma55
dogs and cats there are two forms of cDI, partial and com-
Excess fluid intake
plete. Complete is essentially no ADH and is associated with
Psychogenic polydipsia 
little to no increase in urine osmolality with increasing
 Fluid overload diuresis 
plasma osmolality. Animals with complete CDI will have
 Medullary washout-medullary interstitium not saturated with
persistent hyposthenuria, severe urine diruesis, and urine
sodium and urea
specific gravities of 1.005 or less, even if dehydrated. Partial
 Addison's—prolonged hyponatremia
diabetes insipidus is associated with a small, but insufficient
Liver failure—decreased urea nitrogen (other lab data also):
increase in urine osmolality with increasing plasma osmolal-
 congenital and acquired shunts: end stage liver disease
ity. These animals can concentrate urine into the isosthen-
Psychogenic polydipsia
ric range of 1.o08-l.0l5, but cannot increase the specific
 Fluid overload diuresis 
gravity beyond 1.020 even if dehydrated.
 Solute overload
Inhibition of adequate quantities of ADH at the level of
 Diabetes mellitus, Acromegaly, Fanconi's syndrome, salt toxicity 
 renal tubules is referred to as nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
(NDI) and can be due to decreased tubular cells or com-
 Diuretics—many: they act on different regions of the tubules
pounds in the blood that interfere with the action of ADH.
Others, poorly understood mechanism
These include corticosteroids, hypercalcemia, E. coli toxin in
Hypoparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, polycythermia, myeloma
pyometra, and hypokalemia. A rare congenital form occurs
without hypercalcemia
in Siberian huskies and cats and may be due to a receptor
defect.
these diseases because assays are not readily available or
 In severe cases nocturia may be hourly and incontinence
used. As assays become available and affordable they may
may be of sudden onset or of several months duration.
be used to define the syndromes and aid diagnoses. Until 
Weight loss occurs because drinlking is so excessive it inter-
then the diagnoses will be established via formulation of
feres with eating. The Brattleboro rat has a hereditary form
differential diagnoses, rule in/rule out tests for each, and use
of complete DI such that it will exceed 70% of its body in
of water deprivation studies to distinguish CDI, NDI, and
water consumption and urine output daily.
psychogenic polydipsia. The other causes of PU PD are iden-
Routine complete blood count and serum biochemical
tified without water deprivation studies (Table 32.21).
panel are normal in animals with CDI. Persistent low urine
specific gravity, <l.012 is often the only abnormality detected 
History, signalment, and routine laboratory data
on routine clinical pathology data. If plasma osmolality is
There is no age, breed, or sex predilection for CDI, but young
measured it is often high (>310 mOsm/L) due to mild dehy-
adults are most commonly affected. The disease has been
dration; they cannot drink sufficient water to keep up with
recognized in dogs ranging range 8 weeks to 14 years, with
urinary water loss. Mild hypernatremia may be observed in
a mean of 5 years. In cats the observed age range is 8 weeks
a chemistry panel and is secondary to the dehydration. If
to 6 years, with a mean of 1.5 years. The major clinical signs
water is withheld from dogs with the complete form of CDI
of DI are moderate to marked polyuria (up to 100mL/kg/
they can develop marked hypernatremia, >l70mEq/L,
day) and a nearly constant demand for drinking water, poly-
marked hyperosmolality. >380 mOsmol/kg, and lethal
dipsia. Neurologic signs are infrequent and if present are
hypertonic encephalopathy within hours of water restric-
associated with neoplasms of the CNS or pituitary. The
tion. The combination of hyposthenuria and hypernatremia
severity of clinical signs varies if CDI is partial or complete.
    s e  
538
CHAPTER 32 Laboratory Evaluation of the Thyroid, Adrenal, and Pituitary Glands
hematocrit or hypernatremia are present at initial evalua-
Diagnostic tests
tion, they usually are secondary to dehydration from water
Table 32.21 lists the causes of PUPD, and most of these are
restriction by the owner. Animals with primary polydipsia
diagnosed from history, physical examination, routine lab
have low plasma osmolality (<290mOsm/L) as a result of
data, and appropriate diagnostic tests. The first step is to
overhydration. The reference interval for plasma osmolality
determine urine s.g. at several times during the day; one of
in normal dogs and cats is 280-310 mOsm/L.
these must be a morning collection when concentration is
At the time of initial presentation the majority of dogs
usually at its maximum. The main differentials that have
with DI will have urine s.g. <l.006 and many will be 1.001-
few to no helpful diagnostic results other than dilute urine
1.003 if unlimited water is available. If the urine specific
are central DI, nephrogenic DI, and psychogenic polydipsia.
gravity can go below 1.o05 then occult renal disease is
The test used to differentiate these is one of the water-
unlikely because a specific gravity this low implies the
 deprivation tests or response to ADH supplementation. The
kidneys functioned sufficiently to remove solutes, diluted
modified water-deprivation test is indirect evidence of ADH
pu uaun iq 'stun sool aun on ay ea aul
responsiveness designed to deterrmine whether endogenous 
inadequate ADH to remove water in the collecting tubules.
ADH is released in response to dehydration and whether the
Urine specific gravity 1.007-1.013, proteinuria, and white
kidneys respond by concentrating the urine. The more
blood cells in the urinalysis favor renal failure, often chronic
common causes of polyuria and polydipsia, however, should
 pyelonephritis in which there is fibrosis in the renal medulla.
be ruled out before this procedure is performed. Failure to
Examples of urinalysis findings useful for disease differ-
recognize azotemia before water is restricted is a major clini-
entiation are:
cal error. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDl) is due to a
structural lesion that decreases renal tubular cells or a bio-
chemical lesion, substances in the blood that interfere with
the action of ADH. These include corticosteroids, hypercal-
cemia, E. coli toxin in pyometra, and severe hypokalemia.
These inhibitory factors are ruled out by diagnostic proce-
Patient
A
B
C
D
E
dures for each substance or the disease that causes them.
 That leaves the possibility of an occult renal lesion that has
 Urine 5.g.
1.003
1.016
1.011
1.002
1.010
Proteinuria
Neg
Neg
GaN
resulted in loss of greater than 66% of the renal mass, hence
+
+
Glucosuria
Neg
Neg
Neg
Neg
 polyuria and dilute urine before enough mass is lost to result
+
Cells
Neg
Neg
Neg
Neg
in appreciable azotemia. This situation is easier to diagnose
+
 Interpretation 
CDI
Renal
Renal
CDI
Renal
 or at least suspect if the history indicates the patient survived
a previous bout of renal azotemia, but PU PD have persisted 
A and D: Severe hyposthenuria with no abnormalities in urinalysis 
favor complete CDl; urine 5.g. lower than expected for renal; other 
pyelonephritis, then this scenario is even more likely. An
dlifferentias are: partial CDl, psychogenic polydipsia, and NDI caused 
inherent risk of a water deprivation study is the possibility
by interfering substances such as hypercalcemmia or steroids.
of exacerbating renal problems in these patients. They have
B: Urine 5.g. higher than expected for CDl, in combination with 
renal failure (polyuria, dilute urine) and a structural renal
proteinuria, glucosuria and cells favor nephritis, structural lesion.
lesion, but they are not yet azotemic. The diagnosis of occult 
possible pyelonephritis, recommend culture of urine; do not perform
renal lesions should be suspected if there is proteinuria
water deprivation study. Partial CDl can concentrate into this range if
water is restricted. This type of renal failure patient may not be
(increased protein:creatinine ratio), isosthenuria, and/or
azotermic (<75% nephron lo5s), but may be polyuric (>66% nephron
white blood cells in the urine. If these are present avoid a
[055)
water deprivation study and perform fractional excretion of
C: If urine 5.g. is persistent in this range it is isosthenuric. With no 
sodium or creatinine clearance study to rule in/rule out
other abnormalities in UA, then chronic renal is most likely. with or
structural renal lesions. If the urine specific gravity can go
without azotemia; partial CDl can concentrate into this range if water
below 1.005 then occult renal disease is unlikely. If the urine 
is restricted
specific gravity can increase beyond 1.020 then occult renal
E: If the urine 5.g. is persistent in this range then the patient has
disease and CDI are unlikely and psychogenic polydipsia is 
isosthenuria. Proteinuria at one plus in dilute urine is abnormal
more likely. Another risk of a water deprivation study is
Recornmend protein : creatinine ratio, microalbuminuria determination.
induction of marked hypernatremia, hyperosmolality, and
and periodic UA to confirm urine 5.g. range and persistence of
proteinuria. If cellular abnormalities develop consider urine culture.
hypertonic encephalopathy within hours of water restriction
This pattern favors chronic renal insufficiency: therefore consider 
in patients with complete CDI. For these reasons patients
must be evaluated frequently during water deprivation
fractional excretion of sodium, creatinine clearance and/or palpation.
 visualization studies of kicdneys before a water deprivation study is 
studies.
recommended.
The water deprivation principle is to stimulate endoge-
nous ADH production and release by withholding water and
539
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Urine specific gravity
1.028
1.026
1.024
1.022
B
1.020
1.018
1.016
1.014
1.012
1.010
1.008
1.006
1.004
1.002
Hours
Vasopressin administration
Figure 32.6 Water deprivation study results for dogs with renal insufficiency (A), central dliabetes insipidus (B), and psychogenic polydipsia (C). All three
dogs are not azotemic. The dog with renal insufficiency has urine specific gravity (s.g.) that starts and remains in the isosthenuric range, even after 
adrministration of vasopressin (ADH). The dog with CDI has more dilute urine than the dog with renal insufficiency because the tubules can function and 
ayn lae Auo ateuauon ot shers pue ahuen sunuayrsody aul ui sers jeun h's auun sey bop sill ate jeinawoln aul painp aaey aoyaiaue
adrministration of ADH. A dog with psychogenic polydipsia (C) should have a urine 5.g. in the hyposthenuric range that starts to concentrate after water
is withheld and before it is necesary to give ADH. The dogs with CDl and psychogenic polydipsia increased urine 5.g. in a gradual or stepwise fashion
because the concentration gradient in the medulla had been "washed out" and needed to reestablish.
inducing mild dehydration of less than 5%. If an animal can
ADH. When urine s.g. is in the 1.025-1.035 range it indi-
start to concentrate urine with water withdrawal then psy-
cates the kidneys can concentrate urine and the study can
chogenic polydipsia is the diagnosis. If the patient does not
be stopped. The urine s.g. may not increase rapidly in a
concentrate until exogenous ADH is administered.
.then
water deprivation study. The urine s.g. may sometimes
 central DI is diagnosed and if water withdrawal and exog-
increase in a stepwise fashion due to medullary washout
enous ADH administration do not stimulate urine concen-
(Fig. 32.6). The prolonged polyuria and rapid transit of the
tration, then renal disease is diagnosed. Never perform this
tubular filtrate has resulted in dilution of the medullary
test on an azotemic patient. Before the study is started the
interstitium sodium and urea concentrations. Until the
bladder is emptied and baseline data is gathered. Urine is
interstitium is re-saturated with solutes, the kidneys can
then evaluated and recorded every l-3 hours, depending on
only concentrate the glomerular filtrate a limited amount.
the severity of the PU PD until the study is stopped. The
Depending on the severity of the medullary washout it may
bladder is emptied at each collection period and body weight,
take up to 24 hours or longer of complete or partial water
skin turgor, PCV, plasma protein, UN, urine s.g., and osmo-
restriction for dogs with primary polydipsia to concentrate
 lality of plasma and urine are optimal parameters to monitor.
into the 1.030 range. Monitor the UN and if azotemia devel-
Osmolality does not have to be measured, but it is ideal if
ops stop the study. Serum UN and/or creatinine should not
immediately available. Urine s.g. and body weight are
increase in a water deprivation study. The renal failure
usually more practical substitutes. Three to five percent
patient has between 2/3 and 3/4 decreased renal mass and
weight loss is maximum stimulus to release endogenous
the closer the reduced mass is to the 3/4 mark the easier it
ADH. If the urine is not concentrating at this point in the
will be to induce azotemia via dehydration.
study, then it is time to administer exogenous ADH. Another
 If the urine s.g. increases beyond 1.025 with just water
means to determine it is time to give ADH is if urine s.g. has
restriction, then primary polydipsia is the diagnosis. If urine
increased less than lo% for three consecutive collections. If
remains nonconcentrated after several hours with concur-
plasma osomolality is known during the study then admin-
rent mild dehydration then the disease present is either CDI
ister ADH when plasma osomolaltiy is >3l0mOsm/kg
or NDI (Fig. 32.6). The NDI patient will not concentrate
because this is adequate stimulus to release endogenous
urine in response to ADH. The CDI patient that has a
540
complete form of the disease will increase urine s.g. by
Acromegaly (hypersomatotropism)
approximately 50% and the partial form will increase s.g.
Increased serum GH may be due to a GH secreting pituitary
by 15-20% in response to exogenous ADH. The time it takes
tumor in cats or endogenous or exogenous progesterone
to lose 3-5% of the body weight (dehydration) is also a clue
that stimulates GH production from the mammary gland in
to the diagnosis. CDI patients often attain this weight loss in
dogs. Measurement of increased IGF-l is a screening test.
less than 6 hours while partial CDI and psychogenic poly-
Clinical features include soft tissue proliferation, thick coarse
dipsia dogs will take 8-l0 hours or longer.
mellitus.
Chronic excessive GH causes insulin resistance and acro-
Pituitary dwarfism and acromegaly
megaly in adult dogs and cats. Canine acromegaly is due to
increased progesterone from the luteal phase of the estrous
General
cycle or the administration of progestational compounds for
Growth hormone (GH). or somatotropin, is a single-chain
suppression of estrus in intact female dogs. Both of these
protein that is species-specific in its activity. It is produced
cause excessive secretion of GH from mammary epithelial
by acidophilic somatotrophs. Hypothalmic GH-releasing
cells. The GH producing pituitary tumor in cats is rare or at
hormone stimulates production and release of GH, while
least infrequently recognized. They are of acidophilic origin,
somatostatin is inhibits release. Further inhibition is
large. grow slowly, and may be present for a long period of
caused by insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) that stimulate
time before the onset of clinical signs. Feline acromegaly
somatostatin release from the hypothalmus and directly
occurs in older male cats (8-l4 years of age).
inhibit GH in the adenohypophysis. Canine mammary
Initial signs in dogs are usually changes in their physical
gland epithelial cells produce GH that is identical to pituitary
 appearance. This may include soft tissue proliferation of the
GH. Administered progestins stimulate production of
neck, head, tongue, mouth, gingiva, and pharynx, with
mammary GH, increase plasma GH concentrations, are
abnormal respiratory noises. Characteristic enlargement of
not inhibited by somatostatin, and can cause acromegaly.
extremities, body size, jaw, tongue, gingival hyperplasia.
The luteal phase of the estrous cycle of healthy bitches
widened interdental spaces, thick folds of facial skin-subcutis.
has high serum progesterone concentrations that also
and inspiratory stridor from proliferation of laryngeal soft
increase serum concentrations of GH. This progesterone-
tissue (5o% of cats) are characteristics of the disease. Vis-
induced production of mammary GH is important in stimu-
ceromegaly, including enlarged kidneys, liver, and endocrine
lating lactational mammary tissue and in the development
 organs, may result in abdominal enlargement. Cardiomeg-
and progression of mammary tumors in the bitch. GH
aly, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, murmurs, and congestive
concentration in colostrum is hundreds of times greater than
heart failure develop late in the course of disease in cats.
in plasma and may stimulate neonatal gastrointestinal
Neurologic signs in cats, if present, are due to the large
development.
pituitary macroadenoma. Physical changes are not as dra-
GH stimulates the production of IGFs (IGF-l or somato-
matic in cats and therefore most of the easily recognized
-  ss  n nn  a  
signs are referable to diabetes mellitus. PU PD and polypha-
thesis, chondrogenesis, and longitudinal and appositional
gia are common problems in cats with acromegaly and these
bone growth. GH may also stimulate these events directly.
will also occur in some dogs. Acromegaly is most often tested
Absence of GH during the period of growth results in pitu-
for in cats when insulin resistance cannot be explained via
itary dwarfism and excessive amounts of GH in adults cause
other mechanisms.
acromegaly. GH also inhibits the action of insulin and there-
fore increases the serum glucose concentration via reduced
Routine clinical pathology
 glucose transportation into cells, increased gluconeogenesis.
Laboratory tests may reveal hyperglycemia and increased
and lipolysis leading to insulin resistant diabetes. This form
liver enzymes, but there are no specific abnormalities. The
of diabetes mellitus is transitory if associated with the estral
more common causes of hyperglycemia and increased liver
cycle or pregnancy. However, diabetes can be permanent if
enzymes must be ruled out before acromegaly is considered.
Dogs tend to have hyperglycemia without glucosuria. Cats
on insulin are prolonged. Beta cells will increase insulin
have hyperglycemia with glucosuria, but are not usually
production in an attempt to balance the hyperglycemia. If
ketotic. Hypercholesterolemia and mild increases in serum
transitory, there is glucose stabilization, but if prolonged this
liver enzymes activities are attributed to hepatic lipidosis
can result in beta cell exhaustion, vacuolation, degenera-
from the diabetic state. Alkaline phosphatase may be
tion, and permanent diabetes mellitus.
increased due to bone or liver production. Hyperphosphate-
Diseases caused by increased concentrations of GH are
mia without azotemia is reported, but was absent in another
acromegaly, diabetes mellitus, and mammary neoplasms.
study. Increased serum phosphorus may be due to GH-
Dwarfism is caused by decreased concentrations of GH.
stimulated bone growth. Urinalysis is unremarkable, except
541
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
for glucosuria and persistent proteinuria. There is usually
208-443ng/mL. Concentra tions >1000 ng/mL are suggestive
increased serum protein in the range of 8-9.5g/dL. Azote-
of acromegaly and can be used to screen for this disease.
mia develops late in the course of disease in approximately
However, increased IGF-l has been reported in diabetic cats
50% of acromegalic cats. Azotemia may be ca used by chronic
unrelated to acromegaly and the concentrations of IGF-1
interstitial nephritis, a common disease of old cats, concur-
can vary widely. Administration of large doses of insulin,
rent dehydration, or unregulated diabetes. Measurement of
endogenous insulin reveals increased serum insulin concen-
neck, can cause a crossreaction with the IGF-l assay. Addi-
trations. Resistance to insulin (insulin requirement >2-3 U/
tionally, cats with hyperadrenocorticism have weight loss as
kg/BID; or >20U/day) is common in diabetic cats and con-
sideration of a concurrent pituitary tumor inducing hyper-
skin that tears easily as opposed to thick, coarse soft tissue
adrenocorticism or acromegaly is done after more common
proliferation and skeletal abnormalities of acromegaly. Some
causes of insulin resistance are ruled out.
individuals consider acromegaly more common than previ-
Establishing a definitive diagnosis of acromegaly in an
ously thought and is an underdiagnosed endocrinopathy
animal with characteristic signs is accomplished by one or
in ca ts.
more of the following: cessation of exogenous progestogen
in dogs, staging the estral cycle, response to ovariohysterec-
Pituitary dwarfism
tomy in dogs. measurement of increased plasma GH, and
Major features include decreased GH, cystic Rathke's pouch,
measurement of increased IGF-l. All of the endocrine assays
proportionate dwarfism, and panhypopituitarism.
are infrequently performed and some may not be commer-
 Pituitary dwarfism results from failure of the embryonic
cially available. The reference laboratory used should be
ectoderm to differentiate into trophic secretory cells of the
consulted for protocol. Basal GH concentration greater than
 n        io
primary or secondary to the failed differentiation. It is seen
present. Concentrations of GH greater than the upper limit
most frequently in German shepherd littermates or related
of reference interval is considered diagnostic, >5 μg/L dogs.
litters and has a simple autosomal recessive mode of inheri-
>7μg/L cats, especially if other data is corroborative. Like
tance. Affected German shepherds have a deficiency of GH,
     s   
TSH, and prolactin, but adequate ACTH secretion. There is
increased early in the progression of the disease. The diag-
a panhypopituitarism in Carnelian bear dogs associated with
nosis of acromegaly in dogs is centered on response to treat-
decreased production of TSH, ACTH, LH, FSH, and GH.
      
Other affected breeds include Spitz, miniature pinschers,
abnormalities may be a clue to consider acromegaly. Diabe-
Labrador retrievers, and Weimaraners. It may also occur in
d aaun pe oenn an si sop u s sii
cats. Pups with pituitary dwarfism are indistinguishable
glycemia and glucosuria are reversed and can be used to
from littermates until 2-4 months of age when reduced
monitor response.
 growth rate is noticed and mental retardation is manifested
The diagnosis in cats uses a combination of insulin resis-
as difficulty in house-training. Two diagnostic physical
tance increased IGF-l, physical characteristics of acromeg-
examination findings are proportionate dwarfism and
aly. and if available imaging of the pituitary region and GH
retained puppy hair coat. The hair coat is wooly due to
values. It is very difficult to regulate insulin and hypergly-
retention of puppy or lanugo hairs which epilate easily and
cemia in acromegalic cats. Insulin rates >2-3 U/kg/BID or
therefore a gradual alopecia is seen that may involve the
>20 U/day should prompt consideration of concurrent acro-
total body that sometimes spares the limbs. Other clinical
megaly. Often the main reason these cats are seen is resis-
problems are delayed dental eruption, alopecia, cutaneous
tance to insulin and the only clinical pathology abnormalities
hyperpigmentation, skin infections, infantile genitalia.
are referable to diabetes mellitus. Imaging studies of the
cryptorchidism, and anestrus. Craniopharyngioma is a very
pituitary are not loo% accurate, but are very useful. Cats
rare tumor of remnants of craniopharyngeal duct that also
 can produce dwarfism in dogs.
tance and both have macroadenomas of the acidophils and
Results of CBC, serum biochemistry panel, and urinalysis
 therefore imaging studies of the pituitary do not distinguish
are usually normal. Eosinophilia, lymphocytosis, mild nor-
these differentials. Serum IGF-1 combined with stimulatory
mocyctic normochromic anemia, and occasionally hypogly-
and inhibitory tests of the pituitary adrenal axis (LDDS.
cemia are seen if ACTH is deficient. GH deficiency is
ACTH stimulation) should be used to screen for these dif-
associated with abnormal development of glomeruli,
ferentials. Serum IGF-l or somatomedin C is increased by
decreased glomerular filtration rate, and azotemia. Second-
GH and can be used as a screening test for acromegaly in
ary hypothyroidism occurs in most forms of pituitary dwarf-
cats. It has a sensitivity of 84% and a specificity of 92%.
ism, therefore TT4, fT4, and TSH are decreased. Response
IGF-1 is not a species-specific assay therefore assays designed
tests for TSH, ACTH, and GH are decreased and can be used
for humans can be used. The reference interval for cats is
to establish a diagnosis. Basal GH and IGF-l (somatomedin)
542
are decreased. In pituitary dwarfs, GH fails to increase 2-4
Peterson ME er af. (2oo l) Measurement of serum concentrations of
fold after administration of intravenous stimulants such as
free thyroxine, total thyroxine, and total triodothyronine in cats
GH-releasing hormone (l μg/kg). clonidine (l0 μg/kg). or
with hyperthyroidism and cats with nonthyroidal disease. JAVMA
xylazine (lo0 μg/kg). Samples are collected basal and at 20
218: 529-36.
  s      
or 30 minutes after the stimulant is given. A GH value
pluripotent stem cell differentiation toward erythropoiesis
<l0 μg/L is an inadequate response.
through the production of pluripoietin-like factors. Exp Cell Res
187: 174-6.
 Other diseases of the pituitary
Scott-Moncrieff JC er al. (2002) Evaluation of antithyroglobulin
 Other diseases of the pituitary gland are prolonged gestation
antibodies after routine vaccination in pet and research dogs.
in Jersey and Guernsey cattle due to inherited aplasia of the
JAVMA 220: 515-21.
Shiel RE er al. (20l0) Assessment of criteria used by veterinary
adenohypophysis in the fetus. Gestation may be prolonged
practitioners to diagnose hypothyroidism in sighthounds and
by >200 days; the fetus is underdeveloped, often hairless.
investigations of serum thyroid hormone concentrations in
and looks lilke development stopped at 6-7 months. It may
healthy Salukis. JAVMA 236: 302-8.
have alopecia and short legs. and it will have hypoplasia of
Simpson AC, McCown JL (2009) Systemic hypertension in a dog
 all endocrine organs that are dependent on the pituitary for
with a functional thyroid gland adenocarconoma. JAVMA 235:
trophic stimulation. Holstein and Ayrshire cattle have pro-
14749.
longed gestation due to an inherited autosomal recessive
enzyme deficiency in the adrenal cortex of the fetus such
Adrenal
that cortisol is not produced. In the absence of cortisol, there
Barthez PY er al. (1997) Pheochromocytoma in dgos:61 cases (1984
is stimulation to secrete ACTH, which in turn causes marked
1995). J Ver Interm Med 1l: 272-8.
bilateral adrenal cortical hypertrophy with fetal giants of up
 Benitah N er al. (2005) Evaluation of serum 1 7-hydroxyprogersterone
 concentration after administration of ACTH in dogs with hyper-
t0 225 lbs with long shaggy hair. The cycle of decreased
adrenocorticism. JAVMA 227: 1095-1101.
cortisol, increased ACTH and adrenal cortical hypertrophy
 con tinues because of the inherited enzyme deficiency. Sheep
nocorticism. Ver Clin N Am 3l: 985-1004.
grazing the teratogenic plant Verafrum californicum at 9-14
 Desmarchelier M er al. (2008) Primary hyperaldosteroism in a
days of gestation will have fetuses that have an abnormal
domestic ferret with an adrenocortical adenoma. JAVMA 233:
pituitary gland or a pituitary that functions autonomously
1297-1301.
 from the hypothalamus. The result is prolonged gestation,
 Donaldson MT et al. (2005) Variation in plasma adrenocorticotropic
cyclopia, facial abnormalities, and other musculoskeletal
hormone concentration and dexamethasone suppression test
malformations.
results with season, age and sex in healthy ponies and horses.
J Ver Intern Med 19: 217-22.
Galac S et al. (2005) Hyperadrenocorticism in a dog due to ectopic
secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone. Domest Anim Endorrino!
Suggested reading
28: 33848.
 Galac S er al. ACTH-independent hyperadrenocorticism due to food-
PLAL
Barber LG (2007) Thyroid tumors in dogs and cats. Ver Clin North
141-3.
Am Small Anim Pracr 37: 755-73.
Gold JR er al. (20o7) Plasma adrenocorticotropin, cortisol, and
adrenocorticotropin/cortisol ratios in septic and normal-term
hau jaa r ssau [eoauou pue wsooy Ared q
foals. J Ver Inrern Med 2l: 791-6.
Med 23: 100-7.
Fyfe JC et al. (2003) Congenital hypothyroidism with goiter in toy
tion in hospitalized neonatal foals. J Ver Interm Med 23: 90l-12.
fox terriers. J Ver Inrern Med 17: 50-7.
Hart KA er al. (2009) Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis assess-
Kantrowitz LB et al. (200l) Serum total thyroxine, total triiodothy-
/asop mo paed e uzn s[eog [eieoau uan Auea u lua
ronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations in dogs
high dose ACTH stimulation test. J Ver Inrerm Med 23: 344 51.
with nonthyroidal disease. JAVMA 219: 765-9.
Hurcombe SD er al. (2008) Blood arginine vasopressin, adrenocor-
Kemppainen RJ, Behrend EN (200l) Diagnosis of canine hypothy-
ticotropin hormone, and cortisol concentrations at admission in
roidism. Perspectives from a testing laboratory. Ver Clin North Am
septic and critically ill foals and their association with survival.
Small Anim Pracr 3l: 951-62.
J Ver Intern Med 22: 639-47.
Nachreiner RF et al. (2002) Prevalence of serum thyroid hormone
Lathan P er al. (2008) Use of a low-dose ACTH stimulation test for
diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism in dogs. J Ver Intern Med 22:
JAVMA 220: 466.
1070-3.
Peterson ME et al. (1997) Measurement of serum total thyroxine,
Rodriquez Pineiro Ml er al. (2009) Accuracy of an adrenocor-
triodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentrations
ticotropic hormone (ACTH) immunoluminometric assay for
for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs.
JAVMA211:
1 396-1402.
adrenocorticism in dogs. J Ver Interm Med 23: 850-5.
543
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Scott-Moncrieff JC er al. (2003) Validation of a chemiluminescent
-ody iae iuaueanl unsu snouaoxg (oo) 7n ja  suna
enzyme immunometirc assay for plasma adrenocorticotropic
fractionated radiotherapy in cats with diabetes mellitus and acro-
hormone in the dog. Ver Clin Parho! 32: 180-7.
megaly. J Vet Intern Med 23: 243-9.
Wong DM et al. (2009) Adrenocorticotropic hormone stimulation
Dybal NO, et al. Diagnostic testing for pituitary pars intermedia
tests in healthy foals from birth to 12 weeks of age. Can J Ver Res.
dysfunction in horses. JAVMA 1994; 204:627-632.
73: 65-72.
Fall T et al. Gestational diabetes mellitus in 13 dogs. J Ver Inrern Med
Wong DM er al. (2009) Baseline plasma cortisol and ACTH concen-
22: 1296-1300.
 trations and response to low-dose ACTH stimulation testing in ill
Johnson PJ (2002) The equine metabolic symdrome. Peripheral
foals. JAVMA 234: 126-32.
Cushing's symdrome. Ver Clin Equine 18: 27l-93.
 Kooistra HS et al. (20o0) Combined pituitary hormone deficiency in
German shepherd dogs with dwarfism. Domest Anim Endocrino/ 19:
 Beech J et al. (2009) Evaluation of plasma ACTH, alpha-melanocyte-
177.
stimulating hormone, and insulin concentrations during various
      
 e s e s e  un d
with adrenocorticotrophic hormone response to domperidone
with pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction. JAVMA 235:
-a sd and auna j sue an u uese
715-22.
dia dysfunction. Ver Patho! 454: 26-38.
 Beech et al. (2007) Adrenocorticotropin concentration following
Niessen SJM et al. Feline acromegaly: An underdiagnosed endocri-
administration of thyrotropin-releasing hormone in healthy
nopathy? J Ver Intern Med 21: 899-905.
horses and those with pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction and
Rijnberk A {2009) Diabetes insipidus. In: Texrbook of Inrermnal Medicine
 pituitary gland hyperplasia. JAVMA 231: 417-25
(eds.), SJ Ettinger EC Feldman. 7th ed., 1716-22.
 Berg RIM er al. (2007) Serum insulin-like growth factor-I concentra-
 tion in cats with diabetes mellitus and acromegaly. J Ver Inrern Med
21: 892-8.
544
33
Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and
Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
Donald Meuten
North Carolina State University
serum PTH would be decreased or increased respectively.
General introduction
However PTH is often within reference intervals in each of
these diseases which seems paradoxical, but the PTH value
A change in the serum calcium concentration of as little as
is inappropriate for the serum concentration of calcium.
5-10% can stimulate or inhibit the secretion of parathyroid
These situations happen with regularity because of the close
hormone. Hypopara thyroidism caused by lymphocytic para-
regulation of PTH, calcium, and CaSR. A serum calcium
ponauneied e on anp wspionuienediadau pue sionaul
concentration of 15mg/dL (increased) should trigger the
adenoma are the two primary diseases of the parathyroid
parathyroid gland to decrease and or stop the secretion of
gland.
PTH. Therefore, if the concentration of PTH is within refer-
 The parathyroid gland is a simple endocrine organ with
ence interval it is "inappropriately high" and diagnostic of
intricate cellular events that closely regulate the serum con-
hyperparathyroidism. In fact 75% of dogs with hypercalce-
centra tion of calcium. The parathyroid or chief cells primarily
mia due to primary hyperparathyroidism have serum con-
respond to calcium. Low calcium stimulates the parathyroid
centrations of PTH within reference interval.
cells to undergo hypertrophy and hyperplasia, as well as
increasing the production and release of parathyroid
cells than the absolute concentration of serum calcium is the
hormone (PTH). High calcium inhibits these events resulting
delta in calcium as the CaSR and parathyroid chief cells can
in decreased secretion of (PTH) and eventually, atrophy of
reset their signals based on the change of calcium in the
the glands. A change in the serum calcium concentration of
blood or at the receptor. For example, in nutritional hyper-
as little as 5-10% (total calcium 0.25-0.5 mg/dL, or ionized
parathyroidism the serum concentration of calcium is often
calcium 0.1 mmol/L) can stimulate or inhibit the secretion
in the reference interval, which also seems paradoxical given
of parathyroid hormone within minutes. Therefore calcium
the pathogenesis of the disease and the marked bone resorp-
 does not need to be out of reference interval before it changes 
tion (fibrous osteodystrophy or "rubber jaw"). Even though
the production and secretion of PTH. This concept is impor-
a dietary imbalance of calcium and phosphorus are con-
tant when interpreting serum concentrations of PTH and
stantly lowering the serum and cellular concentration of
calcium. Calcium-sensing receptors (CaSR) in parathyroid
 i   n 
chief cells and other CaSR-expressing cells detect changes in
secretion of parathyroid hormone are normalizing the serum
the concentration of ionized calcium and make adjustments
concentration of calcium, at the expense of decreasing bone
to PTH secretion that rapidly normalizes serum calcium.
mass.
CaSR in the kidney stimulates cellular events that influence
This chapter will discuss the laboratory tests related to
calcium and water homeostasis and these pathways may play
basic blood calcium and phosphorus concentrations as well
a pivotal role in the development of hypercalcemia seen in
 as the less frequently measured parathyroid regulatory pep-
some animals with renal failure.
tides. This is followed by discussion of primary parathyroid 
Parathyroid hormone rarely needs to be measured. The
disorders that affect calcium metabolism. Lastly, numerous
only time it is "required" is to confirm primary hypopara-
causes of calcium and phosphorus metabolic pathology are
thyroidism and in some cases of primary hyperparathyroid-
outlined. Because of the frequency of calcium metabolic
ism. In these diseases it seems logical the concentration of
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
545
SEcTloN Iv Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
all routine chemistry panels. This practice is established con-
is normal or increased or if hypercalcemia is detected. The
vention because hypocalcemia and hypercalcemia usually
adjusted calcium is not a real number; the real concentration
provide clues to diagnosis of underlying disorders that affect
of calcium in the blood is the measured total and or ionized.
calcium metabolism.
Calcium and phosphorus metabolism
measurements
Background on relevant laboratory tests
Total serum calcium
Of the body's calcium 99% is in bones, 1% is intracellular.
Summary
and only 0.l % is in extracellular fluid. It is this small latter
Total serum calcium
fraction that is measured in the blood. Positively charged
Excellent screening test, included on chemistry panels.
-od uo sais uoue in puoq a pog aun ui suon i
teins (primarily albumin) or nonprotein anions (citrate.
lonized calcium
phosphate, lactate) and as an unbound free ionic form.
Biologically active fraction; if available, measure in critical
These are listed as protein-bound calcium, approximately
care patients no matter what their primary disease or total
40%, ionized calcium 50%, and complexed calcium (citrate.
calcium concentration is; it is excellent for STAT needs. It is
phosphate etc.) approximately 5-10%. The latter two frac-
more useful in hypocalcemic than hypercalcemic patients.
tions are freely diffusible, stimulate cellular events, and the
Special sample handling is required (see Chapter l).
ionized fraction is the most prevalent of the two and biologi-
cally active. Each fraction can be measured individually:
Adjusted calcium
however, the only fraction that needs to be measured rou-
Use if hypoalbuminemic; it explains the most common cause
tinely in serum of animals is the total calcium concentration.
of hypocalcemia. This is not needed for hypercalcemia. It
Total serum calcium is stable in vitro. It can be determined
cannot be used to estimate ionized calcium.
in chemistry panels by various methodologies and reference
● Calcium disorders are usually discovered from a routine
intervals from different labs are fairly similar. Interfering
chemistry panel. There are very few clinical signs referable
substances depend on the methodology. For example hemo-
   s a  a  
dogs and paresis is seen in cows.
methods, but not others. Always consult with the lab or
● Differential diagnoses for hyper- and hypocalcemia are the
procedure documentation about possible interference or
same if total or ionized calcium is used.
sample handling concerns. If an abnormality in total calcium
· Examine Ca and P together, then albumin, azotemia, and
is detected, the concentrations of calcium and phosphorus
lipase. Determine the Ca x P product to predict risk of soft
should be compared to help formulate differential diagnoses.
tissue mineralization.
The total serum calcium value multiplied by the phosphorus
· Hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia—two differential
value should be calculated to predict the risk of soft tissue
diagnoses are hyperparathyroidism, which is rare, and
mineralization, especially when there is hyperphosphate-
hypercalcemia of malignancy, which is common. This finding
mia. Then examine albumin, urea nitrogen, and lipase
occurs with renal failure in some horses.
and make a decision if ionized calcium is needed. Ionized
● PTH needed rarely, measure in a panel with PTH rp and
calcium is of value if hypocalcemia is detected and is also
total or ionized calcium
more useful in critically ill patients. The list of differential
● Veterinarians can now select total serum calcium, ionized
diagnoses for hyper- and hypocalcemia are the same if either
calcium, and they can use an adjustment formula for hypo-
the total or ionized calcium is used. The magnitude of hyper
albuminemia if total serum calcium is low. The determina-
calcemia for ionized or total serum calcium does not predict
tion of total serum calcium will remain the screening test on
a disease, but in general hypercalcemia of malignancy and
routine chemistry panels to detect abnormalities in serum
hyperparathyroidism have the highest concentrations of
calcium, predict soft tissue mineralization, and to formulate
either total or ionized serum calcium. Hypoparathyroidism
 differential diagnoses. Measurement of ionized calcium is
and lactational tetany are associated with the lowest calcium
now available in practice. It can be used to formulate dif-
concentrations.
ferential diagnoses just as well as using total calcium. It is
Interpretive discrepancies between abnormal total and
the test of choice for monitoring hypocalcemia in critically
abnormal ionized calcium concentrations may occasionally
ill patients.
occur. Notable discrepancies are that some dogs and cats
· Adjustment formulae for calcium is used to help deter
with renal failure may have increased total serum calcium,
mine if a decrease in total serum calcium is likely due to
but the ionized calcium is in reference interval or mildly
hypoalbuminemia, which is the most common cause of
decreased. However, this is not absolute as some dogs and
hypocalcemia. Only use a formula if the serum concentra-
cats in renal failure will have both increased ionized calcium
tion of albumin is low, it is not needed if the serum albumin
and total calcium. In fact, if ionized calcium is used to rank
546
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
diseases that cause hypercalcemia, then renal failure is the
Table 33.1 Differential dliagnoses for hypocalcemmia.
second most common cause in dogs. The total serum calcium
Aiiedaday Areud ym shop po %otn ui paseaui si
Ca decreased, P variable
Ca decreased, P increased
roidism, and ionized calcium is increased in 90-95%. If
primary hyperparathyroidism is a differential dia gnosis, then
Hypoalbuminemmia intestinal
 Azotemia—pre-renal, renal, or
measure total serum calcium. Some hyperthyroid cats have
liver, renal 
post-renal 
a mild decrease in ionized calcium and normal total calcium.
Hypoparathyroicdism—P mild 
Urinary obstructed cats may have a more pronounced
increase
decrease in ionized calcium as compared to the decrease in
Renal failure—any cause
Secondary hyperparathyroidisrm
total calcium. If hypocalcemia is marked or there are clinical
renal or nutritional 
signs of tetany then measure ionized calcium. If it is not
Ethylene glycol—severe 
available then treatment decisions are made from total
decrease in Ca 
serum calcium and or tetany. Ionized calcium is preferable
Pancreatitis; dliabetic
 Phosphate enemas—P marked
to total calcium in critically ill patients, hypocalcemic
ketoacidosis
increase
patients, and animals with sepsis. These differences point
Lactation—eclarmpsia, milk fever
Tummor lysis syndrome
olt some of the situations when having both the total and
Critically ill/ sepsis 
ionized calcium values are beneficial. Perhaps if total and
ionized were measured in the same sample, or on the same
Hypomagnesermia—dogs; cattle—grass tetany: horses—Blister beetle
day, there would be better interpretive concordance.
Cantharadin toxicity—horse; Blister beetle
Ionized and total serum calcium measurements result in
 Thyroidectomy—damage and or removal of parathyroid glands 
the same list of differential diagnoses for hypocalcemia or
Hyperthyroidism—-ionized decrease, unknown mechanism 
hypercalcemia (Tables 33.1 and 33.2).
 Parathyroid atrophy secondary to hypercalcemia
Ionized calcium
Nutritional hyperparathyroidism—-dietary imbalances Ca:P
Ionized calcium and other electrolytes are now easily mea-
Oxalate rich plants 
Endurance racing—horses
sured in serum chemistry profles, it requires a second
Myopathies—-exertional, hypertherrnia
sample. For routine screening the total serum calcium
will remain the sample of choice. It is important to follow
Sick patients—-all species; critically ill, sepsis, unspecified illness 
 a   s 
Urinary tract obstruction—azotemia 
ionized calcium. Ionized calcium is reported in two different
Preparturient hypocalcermia—cats, severe hypocalcemia
units (Table 33.3). Interpret the values compared to appro-
Hypovitaminosis D—rickets; Gl disease, exocrine pancreatic
priate reference intervals exactly as total serum calcium is
deficiency
interpreted.
Hyperadrenocorticism—uncommon, unknown mechanism
Ionized calcium is most valuable if hypocalcemia is
detected, especially if total serum calcium is less than 7.0 mg/
Metabloic alkalosi5
dL. Decreased ionized calcium is important in the care of
Turmor lysis syndrome
critically ill patients. Ionized hypocalcemia has been shown
 Soft tissue trauma 
to be a predictor of longer duration of care in ICU and hos-
Healing long bone fractures—mild, first 20 days of callus formation
pital stay of critically ill dogs. but is not associated with
 Medullary carcinorma C-cell of thyroid—rare
decreased survival. This study did not examine the same
variables for total serum calcium to determine if it was pre-
Pseudohypoparathyroidism—not reported in animals 
dictive. Septic foals and cattle appear to have calcium aber-
Chelation 
rations as well. Determining the serum concentration of
 EDTA, Oxalate—if in vitro = zero calcium
ionized calcium could be very beneficial during and post
Citrate—-anticoagulant used in blood transfusions
surgery of thyroid glands for hyperthyroidism or para thyroid
adenomas. However, even knowing the ionized calcium
latrogenic: anticonvulsants, furosemmide diuretics, IV phosphate 
does not predict clinical signs, for instance within hours post
 solutions; calciumm free IV solutions; transfusions with citrate a5
 anticoagulant; excess bicarbonate infusions, bolus infusion
treatment of hypocalcemia in lactational paresis of cattle that
tetracycline
the concentrations of ionized calcium have returned to pre-
Diseases above the line are common and account for the majority of
Similarly some of the indicators used to determine if calcium
cases of hypocalcemia. Whenever phosphorus is increased, there is
  s s i ua p
potential for calcium to be decreased.
tomy or postparathyroidectomy in cats and dogs is not only
547
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
Protein adjusted calcium
Table 33.2 Differential Diagnoses for Hypercalcermia.
The majority of the calcium bound to serum proteins is
↑ Ca and N or ↑ p
↑Ca↓ P
bound to albumin. As the concentration of albumin
decreases, the protein-bound fraction of calcium as well as
 Hypercalcermia of malignancy
 Hypercalcemia of malignancy
the total calcium decreases. Therefore, it is recommended to
 Prirmary hyperparathyroidism 
 Prirmary hyperparathyroidismn
"adjust" a low total serum calcium concentration if hypoal-
 Idiopathic—cats 
Renal failure- only horses
buminemia is present. If the adjusted calcium concentration
 Hypoadrenocorticisrm
is within the reference interval, then the cause of hypocal-
Renal failure—chronic more common than acute 
cemia is hypoalbuminemia. There is a limit to this relation-
 acute—-grapes and currant toxicities
ship: if serum calcium is <7.0 mg/dL in a hypoalbuminemic
Vitamin D toxicosis—rodenticides, plants, iatrogenic
 animal there probably is a second cause of hypocalcemia.
Granulommatous diseases—blastomycosis, other fungi. FIP.
Depending on the species, approximately 20-30% of the
 schistosomniasis, mycobacterium, toxoplasrmosis
 decrease in total calcium is due to changes in serum albumin.
latrogenic—calcium supplements 
If ionized calcium is desired it must be directly measured.
The correction formula does not predict ionized calcium. The
Young. rapid growing., esp. large breed dogs and horses
real calcium in the patient is the value that is measured.
Xylitol toxicity—concurrent hypoglycemia can be severe 
Hyperthyroidism—uncommon in dogs vs. decreased calcium in cats
ionized or total. The adjusted calcium is not a real number.
Hypothermia—rare, may not be cause and effect
It simply helps the clinician determine that a decrease in
Spurious—lipemia, hermolysis, type of heparin, methodology
total serum calcium is due to hypoalbuminemia. If serum
dependent
albumin is normal or increased do not use any correction
Acidosis—ionized calcium increased 
and investigate the cause of hypocalcemia; it is not due to a
 Osteolytic bone lesions—doubtful; cases of hypertrophic
protein abnormality.
osetodystrophy are probably due to young age of dogs
The most common cause of hypocalcemia in animals is
 Bone metastases—probably humoral and not just the osteolysis from
hypoalbuminemia. This cause of hypocalcemia is asymp-
local tumor
tomatic. Hyperalbuminemia does not cause hypercalcemia.
The relationship between albumin, total protein and calcium
pas!l saua 'wspioyreediady Aed jo uodanxa aun yi
above the solid line are common and entities listed below the dashed
has resulted in "correction formulas" that adjust the mea-
sured total serum calcium concentration for the degree of
line are physiologic, spurious, or the hypercalcemmia may not be
caused by the entity listed.
hypoalbuminemia, or hypoproteinemia. These formulas are
most reliable in dogs are somewhat helpful in cats and are
less reliable in horses and cows. While other formulae exist,
the recommended, commonly used correction formula is:
the concentration of total or ionized calcium, but if clinical
signs are present. Like any laboratory test, correlation of
Adj. calcium = measured calcium
calcium and phosphorus with clinical signs is vital.
+(3.5- measured albumin)
Shifts in ionized calcium happen with shifts in acid/base
balance. Acidosis shifts calcium to the ionized compartment
and alkalosis decreases ionized calcium. Alkalosis will
Example:
increase the available negatively charged binding sites on
albumin and lead to increased calcium bound to albumin.
Measured Ca = 7.6 and measured Alb = 2.0
These compartmental shifts in calcium may have clinical
importance. Acidotic animals with hypocalcemia may not
Adj. calcium = 7.6 + (3.5- 2.0)
show clinical signs because more calcium is in the ionized
Adj. calcium = 9.1
compartment, whereas alkalotic animals with the same
serum calcium theoretically could have clinical signs of
hypocalcemia. Correcting acidosis rapidly in a patient with
In the example above the hypocalcemia was corrected for
hypocalcemia could produce tetany. This would warrant
by the hypoalbuminemia and the adjusted calcium is now in
calcium supplementation in IV fluids. This could happen
reference interval (8.8-11.2 mg/dL) therefore the cause of the
when correcting the acidosis seen in ethylene glycol toxicity
hypocalcemia in this case has been determined. It is impor-
or neonatal diarrhea in calves, both of which may have
tant to now determine the cause of the hypoalbuminemia.
severe acidosis with total and ionized hypocalcemia. Because
large acid-base changes may occur during critical care, it is
Calcium-phosphorus product (Ca × P)
prudent to monitor both ionized calcium and blood gases if
Calcium and phosphorus should be interpreted together in
any clinical signs of tetany are present.
a chemistry panel as the list of differential diagnoses will
548
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
Table 33.3 Example reference intervals and conversion factors for calcium measurements.
To convert from mmol/L to mg/dL multiply by 4; convert from mEq/L to mg/dL multiple by 2.
To convert from mg/dL to mmol/L multiply by 0.25: convert from mg/dL to mEq/L multiply by 0.5; convert from mEq/L to mmol/L multiple by 0.5 
Reference intervals (Rl) of serum calcium in dogs and cats and expected problem ranges; consult with reference lab performing determination.
Total serum calciumn
lonized calcium
lonized calcium
mg/dL
mmol/L 
5500
RI
9-11
1.2-1.5
2-3
Dog5
RI
8.7-11.2
1.12-1.40
2.5-3.0
Dogs
RI
1.25-1.45
2.3-2.8
Dog5
RI
9.2-11.3
1.12-1.32
Clinical problems may be detected:
Hypocalcemia
<6.5
<1.0
<2
Hypercalcemia
>12
>2
X4
Cat5
RI
8.3-10.5
1.15-1.35
2.2-2.6
Cat5
RI
9.2-10.3
1.15-1.40
2.1-2.7
 Clinical problerms may be detected:
 Hypercalcemia
>11
>1.5
Horses
RI
11.5-13.5
1.45-1.75
Horses
RI
1.53-1.61
Horses
RI
1.61-1.85
Young dogs: 0.2-1.0mg/dL higher in total calcium, with concurrent mild hyperphosphatemia; horses and rabbits have the highest reference interval5
for total and ionized calcium of any species, up to 13 mg/dL total serum calcium.
vary depending on their concurrent values. Additionally, the
mineralized. The mineralization starts in basement mem-
product of these two electrolytes is predictive of soft tissue
branes and mitochondria of tubular cells and progresses to
mineralization. A product of Ca × P > 70 indicates soft tissue
glomeruli and interstitium.
2. Hypocalcemia and marked hyperphosphatemia with a
alization is occurring. Phosphorus and vitamin D are more
product of 170. Despite hypocalcemia, the Ca x P product is 
important in the process of mineralization than is calcium.
markedly increased and soft tissue mineralization is pre-
If phosphorus is increased, the likelihood of mineralization
dicted. These values can occur with renal failure and the
is greater than if calcium is increased. If they are both
uremia will hasten soft tissue mineralization.
increased and or if the product is greater than 90 mineral is
3. Hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia, and a normal
being deposited in characteristic locations such as blood
product; this is seen in dogs with primary hyperparathyroid-
vessels, kidney, stomach, lung, heart, intercostals, and intes-
ism and hypercalcemia of malignancy. Despite hypercalce-
tinal submucosa. If mineralization is severe it can be seen in
mia soft tissue mineralization is not occurring at this time.
radiographs and induce or amplify renal failure via nephro-
However, there can still be side affects from hypercalcemia
calcinosis. Use total serum calcium in the product formula.
(dilute urine, paresis, blood pressure changes).
Clinical signs
The most critical signs of imbalances in calcium relate to
Examples: TCa x P
synaptic neural signal transmission, skeletal muscle contrac-
tion, and cardiovascular muscle function. Ionized and com-
1. Ca 10.2mg/dL, P 14mg/dL = 143
plexed calcium are critical to the development of clinical
2. Ca 8.1 mg/dL, P 21mg/dL = 170
signs. Tetany and seizures are classical signs of hypocalcemia
3. Ca 15.5mg/dL, P 1.8 mg/dL = 28
in small animals and horses, but paresis is the predominant
sign in cattle. The signs referable to hypocalcemia are dis-
tinctive, but are generally only seen with severe hypocalce-
1. Normocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia with an increased
mia. Therefore, signs are usually only seen with lactational
product is common in renal failure. Soft tissue mineraliza-
hypocalcemia or primary hypoparathyroidism. Clinical signs
tion is occurring and making the renal failure worse as
 and history are so obvious with lactational tetany or paresis
kidneys are one of the most common tissues to become
(milk fever) that measurement of serum calcium is seldom
549
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
performed. How rapidly there is a shift in calcium and the
Receptors for PTH reside on osteoblasts and osteocytes and
acid base status at that moment will influence development
 n      
 of impending clinical signs. Rapid onset hypocalcemia, espe-
development/activation of osteoclasts. PTH causes the
cially with alkalosis, may produce tetany or paresis, while a
release of calcium and phosphorus from bone, increasing
comparable concentration of total or ionized would not if
both into the serum. In the kidney. PTH increases the
the onset was slower and or the blood gas status was
reabsorption of calcium and decreases the maximum renal
acidotic.
The clinical signs referable to hypercalcemia are paresis
phosphorus excretion. Ionized and complexed calcium, but
and PU PD. Both are mild and often unapparent to owners.
not albumin bound calcium passes freely into the glomerular
In many cases there are no detectable clinical problems.
filtrate. 99% of the calcium that enters the urinary filtrate
Therefore with both hypo- and hypercalcemia there are
is reabsorbed from various locations within the tubules.
relatively few clinical signs that cause suspicion of calcium
abnormalities. In the majority of cases, the abnormality in
mia because of bone and renal factors (indirectly through
calcium homeostasis is found from routine chemistry panels.
the GI tract and calcitrol). Hypophospha temia occurs because
of the strong phosphaturic stimulus of PTH that exceeds
roidism are two diseases in which the results from a chem-
phosphorus resorption from bone. Parathyroid hormone
istry panel are the clue to the diagnosis in the absence of
related protein (PTH rp). operative in hypercalcemia of
physical examination findings.
malignancy. uses the same PTHlR receptors. Therefore, it
acts identically to native PTH and produces hypercalcemia
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
and hypophosphatemia as seen in hypercalcemia of malig-
Ionized calcium is the key signal to calcium receptors on
     
chief cells of the parathyroid gland. Minor contributions
- a r s n a an a 
come from other factors such as the following. Calcitriol
cemia and hypophosphatemia in dogs and cats. Due to the
decreases production and secretion of PTH. Hypomagnese-
phosphaturic effect of PTH the fractional excretion of phos-
phorus in the urine can be used to estimate an increased
has a minor influence on PTH secretion. Phosphorus directly
serum PTH. If the fractional excretion of phosphorus is
or indirectly stimulates the opposite effects of calcium. PTH
greater than reference interval in a nonazotemic animal
is a peptide hormone; it has a half-life that is so short it is
then PTH (or PTH rp) is increased. This can be determined
measured in minutes and PTH reacts within minutes to
on the day serum and urine are sampled, while waiting for
changes in the serum concentration of calcium. The chief
the return of PTH measurements. This is clinically useful
cells use a calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) to recognize the
when distinguishing between primary or nutritional second-
serum concentration of ionized calcium and adjust the secre-
ary hyperparathyroidism. Serum PTH measurement should
tion and production of PTH. This relationship is sigmoid such
compliment fractional excretion studies.
that at high and low concentrations of calcium the secretion
PTH also stimulates l-alpha hydroxylase located in renal
of PTH flattens. A continued increase or decrease in calcium
proximal tubular epithelium. This enzyme is the rate limit-
does little to change the amount of PTH secreted. However.
ing step in the synthesis of the most potent form of vitamin
in the linear part of the curve a small change in the serum
D, calcitriol or 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol. Calcitriol
concentration of calcium will change the secretion of PTH
stimulates the production of calcium and phosphorus
in minutes so that physiologic adjustments can be made to
binding proteins in the intestinal tract to increase the absorp-
keep the serum calcium in a close reference interval. This is
tion of calcium and phosphorus. Calcitriol also inhibits the
referred to as the calcium set point and the set point of
production of PTH and has a minor effect on the kidney to
ionized calcium is approximately 1.2mmol/L for dogs.
increase calcium and phosphorus reabsorption. It stimulates
1.37mmol/L for horses and 1.0mmol/L for humans.
Acquired and familial diseases may change this set point and
the serum. Only PTH and PTH rp have phosphorus lowering
or CaSR. PTH stimulates an immediate rise in serum calcium
effects hence only primary hyperparathyroidism and hyper-
via multiple steps, one of which is the osteocytic osteolysis
      
pump. PTH also stimulates a sustained increase in serum
and hypophosphatemia. Vitamin D toxicity is associated
calcium by stimulating osteoblasts and osteocytes to secrete
with hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Calcitonin is
cytokines that in turn stimulate osteoclastic osteolysis for
secreted from C cells in the thyroid gland and acts to decrease
long-term calcium homeostasis. It is these latter steps that
the serum concentration of calcium. Calcitonin may prevent
lead to lesions in bones associated with renal and nutritional
postprandial hypercalcemia, but its effect otherwise is rela-
tively weak compared with PTH. C cells can form medullary
exerts its effect primarily through the binding and activation
carcinomas, but reports of tumor induced hypocalcemia in
of PTH receptors, PTH1R.
animals are rare.
550
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
The only other cells in the parathyroid gland that can
    a   a e r 
produce lesions are remnants of the duct that connected the
hyperactive parathyroid tumor(s) has been removed. The
thymus and the thyroid. These cells and the ductular rem-
antibody reagents developed to date are not species specific.
nants can become cystic, referred to as a "Kursteiner cyst."
but they crossreact sufficiently to make meaningful assays.
They are of no clinical significance. The only time they may
This may explain some of the ambiguous or gray zone results
cause problems is during exploratory neck surgery. or
obtained when these assays are used in animals.
imaging of this area, if they were confused with a parathy-
 If the patient is azotemic, PTH should not be measured.
roid adenoma. These cysts will be fluctuant and light gray
in color. A tumor of parathyroid cells will be solid and tan-
 hypocalcemic induced parathyroid hyperplasia, hyperphos-
red in color. It is much more likely that the cysts would be
phatemia, decreased degradation of PTH, and decreased
identified microscopically: in fact, they are
present in
renal clearance of PTH fragments.
approximately 75% of histological sections of the thyroid
Assays designed for humans to measure the complete
and parathyroid glands of dogs. They can be located in the
molecule of PTH rp use an immunoradiometric technique
parathyroid gland, thyroid gland, or in the adjacent tissues.
and have been used in dogs. cats, and horses. PTH rp shares
Occasionally they even have remnants of thymus with
a nearly identical amino acid sequence at its amino terminal
them.
end as native parathyroid hormone. Since the amino termi-
nal end is the biologically active fragment, both molecules
PTH and PTH rp assays
are recognized by and stimulate the same receptors (PTHlR)
Reference labs have assays for PTH and PTH rp that can be
and therefore produce the same biological responses. The
Used on plasma or serum from dogs. cats and horses. Because
midvalent and carboxy regions of native PTH and PTH rp
of peptide stability factors, it is critical to consult the refer-
molecules are sufficiently different that antibodies directed
ence lab for specific sampling procedures and interpretive
at each molecule will recognize one, but not the other, and
guidelines.
therefore can be used in diagnostic assays. The ranges for
The most diagnostic information is gained when PTH, PTH
interpretation should be obtained from the laboratory.
 rp, and calcium are measured in the same sample or at the
Example guideline interpretations for PTH and hypercalce-
same time. Usually the final diagnosis is not established
mia are shown below. It is important to correlate the PTH
when these substances are being measured so request all
value with the total or ionized calcium and PTH rp value.
three as a mini-panel. This will avoid resubmission and
delays if the primary differential is not confirmed. Further-
more clinical interpretation depends on the relative concen-
tration of each compared to the others. Plasma is preferred
PTH
 Equivocal
PTH-
for PTH and PTH rp. but serum can be used.
independent
dependent
Assays for PTH can measure the amino-terminus (biologi-
Cat hypercalcermic
<2.3
2.3-4.6
>4.6 pmol/L
cally active fragment), mid-region, carboxy-terminus (bio-
Dog hypercalcemic
<2.0
2.1-8.0
>8 prnol/ 
logically inactive but immunologically detectable), the entire
1-84 amino acid sequence of PTH, or large fragments of PTH.
Studies have not been done in animals to compare which
assay is the most diagnostically useful. It would seem the
biologically active terminus, amino fragment, would be best,
The coefficient of variation for a measured substance is a
but studies in humans have shown the carboxy-terminal
number that indicates the expected variability with repeat
assays have equal or better diagnostic relevance. A two-site
measurements. For hormone assays the coeffcient of varia-
assay is available and has been validated to measure serum
tion can be as high as 20%. A much lower percent is pre-
PTH in dogs, cats, and horses. This is useful when the cause
ferred, <2% is the approximate coefficient of variation for a
of hypercalcemia or hypocalcemia cannot be determined by
hematocrit. This indicates there is considerable variability for
other diagnostic aids. The principle of this assay is to use two
hormone assays independent of any real change in the con-
antibodies; one is specific for the carboxy-terminal region
centration of the hormone measured in the patient. Assays
and the other for the amino-terminal region. The assay
for PTH and PTH rp report coefficient of variations <l0%
requires that both bind and it is designed such that the final
and for hormone assays this is good. The practical applica-
assay recognizes only intact PTH or at least only large frag-
tion is that the value reported actually has a range; do not
ments of PTH. The sample can be measured via immunora-
take it as an absolute number as there can be considerable
diometric (IRIA) technique which is what most commercial
labs use or via a chemiluminescent technique (Immulite)
runs. When performing mini-panels of hormones from one
that is a rapid assay and results are completed in 20 minutes.
 patient, whether it is cortisol, thyroid hormones or PTH and
This latter technique can be used to measure PTH during
PTH rp request they be placed in the same assay run. If
551
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
aaaoi sandns l puas oi ail auop aq on are suosdo
Signalment
and request all the samples from one animal be analyzed in
Lymphocytic parathyroiditis is seen most frequently in
the same assay run to decrease interassay variability. Stand-
ods may e :sop aan paeds 'ae aii o suo
alone absolute values of hormones are rarely diagnostic.
cases are reported in cats.
They need to be correlated with other laboratory and clinical
findings.
Signs
Tetany, seizures, fever (due to seizure activity). cataracts.
stilted gait, vomiting. diarrhea, panting. and facial pruritus
Primary parathyroid disorders
that results in chewing. rubbing. and licking are reported
However, in most cases hypocalcemia is not suspected on
Hypoparathyroidism
initial examination and the hypocalcemia discovered in a
Lesions and pathogenesis
routine chemistry panel is often the first clue to the diagno-
sis. The only hypocalcemic disease that is consistently associ-
plasmacytic destruction of parathyroid tissue which eventu-
ated with clinical signs is lactation hypocalcemia, tetany in
ally leads to fibrosis, absence of inflammatory cells, and few
bitches and mares and paresis in cattle. If the hypocalcemia
goes on long enough even dogs will become paretic.
The damage is permanent and requires life-long treatment
with calcium and or vitamin D. Do not try to biopsy as very
Routine clinical pathology abnormalities
little of the glands remain and they are extremely difficult
Moderate to severe hypocalcemia and mild hyperphospha-
to visualize during surgery. The histologic lesion is similar to
temia with normal albumin, urea nitrogen, creatinine and
immune mediated destruction of the thyroid or adrenal
lipase is essentially diagnostic. If the serum calcium is less
glands. The disease is uncommon to rare in dogs, extremely
then 6 mg/dL and the patient is not azotemic and not lactat-
rare in cats, and not reported in other animals.
ing then primary hypoparathyroidism is the most likely
Iatrogenic hypoparathyroidism is due to thyroidectomy
diagnosis. Ionized calcium can be measured to confirm
in cats with hyperthyroidism. The inadvertent removal or
hypocalcemia (<l.0 mmol/L; <2.5mEq/L) and monitor treat-
-ou iiins ui sinsan anss pioaed jo a
ment. Total serum calcium can be <6.5mg/dL in animals
thyroidism. If this is recognized during surgery the excised
parathyroid tissue can be reinserted in adjacent muscles and
and are azotemic or will develop azotemia shortly and phos-
it may establish blood supply and function. Despite the
phorus is markedly increased. Of all the causes of hypocal-
removal of the parathyroid glands, these cats rarely require
cemia lymphocytic parathyroiditis, parathyroidectomy and
calcium and/or vitamin D supplementation beyond the first 
lactational tetany produce the lowest concentrations of
month after surgery. Transitory hypocalcemia is expected
calcium. Serum phosphorus is decreased in cattle with milk
post operatively, but most cats stabilize long term and do not
fever.
require life long calcium supplementation. Regeneration of
Serum phosphorus is greater then the serum total calcium
damaged parathyroid tissue may explain this. The mecha-
in some animals with hypoparathyroidism. Hyperphospha-
nism for compensation in others is not known. Studies to
temia is expected due to decreased PTH, however, the mag-
investigate the possible role of ectopic parathyroid tissue
nitude of the increased phosphorus is usually mild and if
producing PTH or the production of PTH rp by other tissues
phosphorus is not increased do not rule out hypoparathy-
are inconclusive. Since most animals eventually normalize
roidism. Renal failure causes hypocalcemia and hyperphos-
their serum calcium it is important not to "overtreat" with
phatemia, but these patients will be azotemic, have dilute
calcium and vitamin D. If these supplements are used in
urine and the hyperphosphatemia is much greater than the
excess they may induce hypercalcemia that will prevent
mild hyperphosphatemia of hypoparathyroidism. The dis-
damaged parathyroid glands from regenerating. Many
tinction of these two diseases is clear. Pancreatitis is associ-
animals with total serum calcium and ionized calcium that
ated with hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, but lipase
are decreased do not exhibit clinical signs. It is nice but not
will be increased 3 to 5 fold and the patient may be icteric.
necessary to have calcium in reference interval; much like
have increased liver enzymes and the clinical signs are very
sis o ar aal h aqi e ui asoi s 
different
 Any cause of hypocalcemia if severe enough can be associ-
cemia is a stimulus for parathyroid hypertrophy.
ated with hyperglycemia. In addition to the stress induced
Animals with lactational tetany or mill fever do not
by the primary disease, calcium is required for microfilament
have hypoparathyroidism. If PTH is measured in cattle with
and microtubular contraction which is needed for the intra-
milk fever it is secreted and responding to the stimulus of
cellular transportation and secretion of neurosecretory gran-
hypocalcemia; this is discussed under differentials for
ules containing insulin. Inability to secrete insulin results in
hypocalcemia.
hypoinsulinemia and hyperglycemia
552
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
Confirmatory test
and the remainder are considered hyperplasia because a
Concurrent PTH and ionized or total calcium is measured on
nodule is in more than one gland. These latter cases may
the same sample or collected at the same time.
represent multiple adenomas, especially if only two glands
Serum PTH will be decreased or undetectable depending
contain nodules, rarely are three or more para thyroid glands
on the stage of the disease. When all the parathyroid tissue
 enlarged in dogs. Histologic and molecular distinction of
is destroyed PTH will be undetectable. However, depending
adenoma versus hyperplasia is not always easy. The tumors 
when the disease process is recognized, there may be viable
can be found via ultrasonography. but they are small.
foci of chief cells, in which case, if the concentration of
4-l0mm in diameter, and are unilateral in most cases. If a
parathyroid hormone (PTH) was measured in the serum, it
large neoplastic mass is found it is more likely of thyroid
may be detectable. However, if PTH is in reference interval
origin. Kursteiner cysts are present in or near the parathy-
and especially at the low end of reference interval while
there is concurrent and severe hypocalcemia this is an
occasionally are macroscopic and could be confused with an
inappropriate response and is still diagnostic of primary
adenoma. These cysts will be fluctuant and light tan to gray
hypoparathyroidism.
in color and contain fluid. A tumor of parathyroid cells will
Examples t
that
all　consistent
with
primary
be solid, tan-red in color and do not contain fluid. The prog-
hypoparathyroidism:
nosis for full recovery following surgical removal is excellent
with a recurrence rate of less than 10%. Postsurgical hypo-
calcemia is expected because the adjacent nonneoplastic
parathyroid glands are atrophic.
Case
Total Ca
P
PTH
The disease is much less common in cats. Most lesions in
cats are benign adenomas, but hyperplasia of all four glands
1
5.5
6.6
2.6
may occur. Most tumors are small, 3-5 mm, but they can be
2
6.1
7.4
0
 >4cm, and may be localized with ultrasonography and less 
E
4.4
6.8
1.3
frequently via palpation.
4
5.8
8.1
0.8
Clinical signs are generally vague, mild, and nonspecific.
5
5.2
4.7
3.9
 Reference interval 
 9-1 1 mg/dL
 3-5 mg/dL
 2-13 prmol/L 
They may include weakness, polyuria/polydipsia (PUPD—
50-80%). hematuria, stranguria, crystalluria, urolithiasis.
urinary tract infections, lethargy. inappetence, and signs
referable to the nervous system. Weakness and PU PD are
due to hypercalcemia and are seen with regularity in dogs.
Eventually all of the parathyroid glands will be destroyed.
PUPD is seen less frequently in cats with hypercalcemia.
in which case, the concentration of parathyroid hormone in
However, many dogs and cats are asymptomatic and the
the serum will be undetectable (case 2). In each case above.
diagnosis is first considered when hypercalcemia and hypo-
hypocalcemia is severe and the concentration of PTH is
 phosphatemia are observed in a routine chermistry panel
"inappropriately" low for the serum concentration of calcium
submitted during an annual wellness exam. Clinical signs
and therefore each case is diagnostic for hypoparathyroidism
op siaumo ieul p pue iepa os aq Aeu ieuial se yons
even though some PTH was detected in cases 1, 3, 4 and 5.
not recognize them.
 Hypocalcemia of these magnitudes should be associated with
Most dogs. 75%, will have no abnormalities on physical
increased concentrations of PTH in an attempt to increase
examination. Dogs are older, mean ll years, with no sex or
serum calcium. Concentrations of PTH below the lower limit
breed predilection. It also occurs in the cat. The disease is
 of reference interval should be regarded as undetectable
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait in Keeshonds and
(zero). When the serum concentration of PTH is very low
genetic testing is available. There is one report of a heredi-
the assay may not be measuring true PTH. Every test has a
 nou o sas so s   u  
limit of detectability. When a sample contains so little of the
detectable bone lesions clinically or radiographically. If the
substance being measured that the value is below the level
mandible or maxillas are enlarged, have osteolysis and new
of detectability or linearity then the lab should report,
bone formation, then the diagnosis is more likely to be sec-
"undetectable.
ondary hyperparathyroidism. Urinary calculi, crystalluria
and hematuria are reported in approximately 30% of cases.
Primary hyperparathyroidism—primary HPTH-
If urinary calculi or crystals are identified as calcium oxalate
parathyroid adenoma (hyperplasia, carcinoma)
or calcium phosphate then consider a diagnosis of primary
HPTH is due to a functional, autonomous secretion of para-
HPTH or idiopathic hypercalcemia.
thyroid hormone resulting in persistent hypercalcemia and
Laboratory abnormalities are fairly characteristic. Total
hypophosphatemia. Parathyroid adenomas account for
serum calcium will be increased in all dogs with primary
>90% of canine cases of HPTH, carcinoma for less than 5%.
HPTH. Serum phosphorus is decreased in 90% of dogs and
553
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
is expected based on the inhibition of phosphorus reabsorp-
ommended to repeat the serum calcium and phosphorus to
tion by PTH in the kidneys. There are only two differentials
be certain there is hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia. If
for a dog or cat with hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia:
they persist, then there are only two diagnoses, primary
hyperparathyroidism (relatively rare) and hypercalcemia of
nancy (HCM) Table 33.2. There are many causes of hyper-
malignancy (HCM) (relatively common). The easiest way to
calcemia and the concentration of serum phosphorus is
distinguish these two differentials is to find the tumor in
usually increased or within the reference interval in other
dogs with HCM. Lymphoma is the most common tumor and
causes. The serum concentration of calcium and phosphorus
 adenocarcinoma of the anal sacs is next most likely, although
should always be compared and not interpreted individually.
any tumor can produce this syndrome. In cats the cancer is
Horses can have hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia with
usually a carcinoma followed by lymphoma, myeloma, and
renal failure, but dogs and cats with renal failure induced
others. However, the HCM syndrome is uncommon in cats.
hypercalcemia have concurrent hyperphosphatemia. Hypo-
If a nonparathyroid tumor cannot be localized, then con-
phosphatemia is expected in over 90% of the cases of
sider confirmatory tests such as measuring PTH, PTH rP, and
primary hyperparathyroidism; however, if the animal devel-
calcium and/or performing ultrasonography of the neck to
ops azotemia, the serum phosphorus may be within the
search for the parathyroid tumor. PTH, PTH rP, and calcium
reference interval because of reduced glomerular filtration
should be measured in the same sample or samples collected
and retention of phosphorus. Hypercalcemic renal injury
concurrently. It is important to measure both PTH and PTHrp
and hyperphosphatemia is much more likely with HCM
and compare results because there can be overlap of the
than primary HPTH.
values for both hormones in dogs with primary HPTH and
 Hypercalcemia is constant and is of variable magnitude.
HCM.
Most cases in dogs will be in the 12-l6mg/dL range. but
  a  te a  
Expected findings
20mg/dL. Of all the differentials for hypercalcemia, the
highest concentrations of serum calcium are seen with
primary HPTH and HCM. Total and ionized calcium concen-
Ca
P
PTH
PTH rp
 Diag nosis
trations are increased and are due to PTH stimulated bone
resorption, renal reabsorption of calcium, and indirectly
Inc
Dec
Rl to inc 
Dec
Prirmary HPTH
from calcitrol stimulated intestinal absorption of calcium.
Inc
RI
RI
Dec
 Prirmary HPTH 
The total serum calcium is increased in l00% of dogs
Inc
Dec to RI 
Dec to RI
Inc
HCM
  n a  d m
RI
Inc
Secondary HPTH
increased in 90-95% of these dogs. If primary hyperpara-
Inc
Inc
Dec
Dec
Vitamin D toxicity
thyroidism is a differential diagnosis, but ionized calcium is
in reference interval then measure total serum calcium.
 Despite marked hypercalcemia, less than 5% of primary
HPTH cases have azotemia. They rarely develop soft tissue
RI = reference interval; see discussion of hypercalcemia for
mineralization because of concurrent hypophosphatemia.
results seen with granulomatous disease, Addison's etc.
The Ca x P product is typically less than 70. The concept that
 If PTH and serum calcium are increased and the patient is 
hypercalcermia is a medical emergency should probably be
modified based on the Ca x P product as chronic hypercal-
thyroidism. However, increased PTH is only present in about
cemia with mild or no symptoms is typical of primary HPTH
Ad ym (%s) sop jo Aoe aun pu sop jo %08
in dogs, cats and people. Azotemia is seen with more regu-
HPTH will have a concentration of PTH within reference
larity in dogs with hypercalcemia of malignancy.
interval: mean = 11.3 pmol/L; RI 2.0-13.0, 210 dogs. In fact
Animals with primary HPTH often have dilute urine and
45% of the cases had serum PTH concentrations in the low
PU PD due to the inhibitory effect of calcium on ADH. The
to middle range. 2.3-7.9 pmol/L. Increased PTH is more
urine specific gravity will be less than 1.020 in 95% of the
typical in humans with primary HPTH probably because of
cases and the average urine specific gravity is 1.0l2. Calcium
 better crossreactivity of the antibody used to measure PTH.
Increased concentrations of PTH are the exception in dogs.
mia. Approximately one-third will have urolithiasis and a
but if PTH is detectable in an animal that is hypercalcemic
similar percentage will have urinary tract infections. The
and not azotemic then this combination is inappropriately
calculi are usually calcium oxalate or calcium phosphate.
abnormal because PTH should be decreased or undetectable
Approximately 20% of the cases will require surgical
   u  n un
removal of calculi.
PTH is within the reference interval, it is inappropriately
The approach to the diagnosis involves use of screening
high in the face of hypercalcemia, and therefore diagnostic
and confirmatory tests. By way of screening tests, it is rec-
for primary HPTH. It indicates the parathyroid gland is
554
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
secreting PTH at a time when secretion should be sup-
The remaining atrophic parathyroid glands will not start
pressed. It is critical to measure PTHrp concurrently as many
secreting PTH for hours to days depending on the severity
dogs with HCM will have measureable PTH. Measure PTH.
of their atrophy. If plasma PTH does not decrease within
PTHrp. and calcium as a mini-panel and compare results of
minutes of parathyroidectomy. then continued surgical
each for the best interpretation. It is not recommended to
exploration  for additional  hyperfunctioning  parathyroid
measure PTH or PTH rP if the patient is azotemic because
tissue is indicated. Ideally a new baseline plasma PTH is
PTH is degraded and excreted via the urinary system and
measured just prior to the start of surgery, during anesthesia
may be increased due to delayed clearance. Increases in PTH
and without palpating the thyroid-parathyroid area (avoids
can be enormous in dogs with chronic renal failure,
spiking secretion of PTH). After the tumor is removed, 5-10
>10,0o0 pg/ dL, especially in assays that measure the carboxy-
  sn d o e sd  s
terminus of PTH but even midvalent and amino terminal
determine if there is a >50% decrease in PTH indicating suc-
assays will measure an increased PTH and confuse interpre-
cessful removal of the offending lesion. While waiting the
 r  a     
10-20 minutes for the assay results exploration should be
ondary HPTH and decreased clearance of PTH
Cats with primary HPTH usually have concentrations of
This is essential in Keeshonds in which more than one
PTH within reference interval, which is inappropriate for
enlarged parathyroid gland is expected and in cats. Excision
their hypercalcemia. Consult the reference laboratory about
is considered successful when the plasma concentration of
validity of the assay for cats and reference intervals which
PTH decreases by >50%. However, if a second enlarged
are usually considerably lower than dogs. 0-4.6 pmol/L; PTH
gland was found while waiting for the results of PTH it
rp <l.5pmol/L. Assays for PTH and PTH rp have been vali-
should be removed even if PTH decreases. This latter situa-
dated for cats.
tion was found in 3 of 5 dogs with multiglandular parathy-
Primary HPTH is rare in horses, as is HCM. However, PTH
 ao n as a   
and PTH rp can be used to establish a diagnosis in horses.
exploration and not rely entirely on the change in PTH to
but only if hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are not
determine successful removal of all hyperactive tissue.
due to renal failure.
Whether these tissues would have caused subsequent
Ultrasonography of the neck region may clarify ambigu-
hyperparathyroidism is not known. If a third sample is
ous hormone data and localize the site of the tumor. If HCM
required, wait 5-l0 minutes from the last sample. This tech-
is ruled out in a dog with hypercalcemia and hypophospha-
temia then ultrasonographic identification of a mass in the
mately six times a year. Measurement of PTH is via the
neck region is equally as diagnostic as or better than serum
chemiluminescent rapid assay, Immulite.
assays for PTH. Based on positive imaging findings. treat-
 Calcium is monitored postoperatively. If serum calcium
ment can be started before results of hormone assays are
does not return to the reference interval following parathy-
returned. Furthermore this technique localizes the site for
roidectomy. then there was a second parathyroid tumor, or
  s   n  h  
excessive vitamin D was used preoperatively, or there is a
I  ei 'ad sm Auous yna ui H
different diagnosis than primary HPTH. Measurement of
had one or more masses detected in the parathyroid region.
PTH, PTH rp. calcium, and phosphorus should clarify these
possibilities. Recurrence of primary HPTH happens in 5-10 %
Hyperparathyroidism: summary
of dogs and takes months to a year.
● Hypercalcemia—100% Hypophosphatemia—90 %
Postoperative hypocalcemia occurs in about one-third of
● 100% if total serum calcium is measured; 90% if ionized
the dogs following parathyroidectomy, it is usually asymp-
calcium is used
tomatic and may happen immediately or take up to one
● Azotemia occurs in less then 5% of the canine cases.
week. Ionized calcium is the ideal fraction to monitor
The total serum calcium is increased in loo% of dogs
because it can be determined rapidly and is biologically
active, but total calcium can be used as well. The atrophic
increased in 90-95% of these dogs. If primary hyperpara-
parathyroid glands cannot produce and secrete sufficient 
thyroidism is a differential diagnosis then measure total
PTH rapidly enough in some patients to prevent hypocalce-
serum calcium.
mia after the parathyroid tumor is removed. Hypocalcemia
Laboratory tests are helpful during and following treat-
may be dependent on the severity and chronicity of the
ment. Measurement of PTH during surgery can now be
hypercalcemia and therefore the severity of parathyroid
performed via a rapid assay that helps determine when all
gland atrophy. If the remaining parathyroid glands are not 
au oi asuodsai ul Hid alaas oi leis ia Aaul oiudoe ool
The half-life of PTH in a nonazotemic animal is only 5-10
minutes. Therefore, serum or plasma PTH will decline
The higher the serum calcium prior to parathyroid surgery
within minutes of removal of a secreting parathyroid lesion.
the more likely there will be postoperative hypocalcemia;
555
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
duration of hypercalcemia, if known, would probably be
differentials is provided in Table 33.1. The list of differential
predictive as well.
diagnoses for hypocalcermia is much shorter if hyperphos-
Therapy for hypocalcemia postsurgery can induce hyper
phatemia is present. Most cases of hypocalcemia are easy to
calcemia and delay the return of the normal Ca-PTH axis.
diagnose. Some situations are diagnosed from signalment
Vitamin D requires several days before it exerts its effects on
and presentation without measurement of serum calcium or
calcium and if the dose of oral calcium is increased during
any other analytes: lactation in any species, endurance
this time or additional vitamin D is given then these will
horses, and grass tetany. If a pet had neck surgery and it was
         
not hypocalcemic prior to surgery and it is postsurgery, then
the hypercalcemic range. Overzealous treatment with
trauma to the parathyroid glands is the cause.
calcium and vitamin D is the correct interpretation for
If the signalment and history are not diagnostic and
hypercalcemia that occurs in the first week postsurgery
 a chemistry panel reveals hypocalcemia, then examine
rather than recurrence of tumor if normocalcemia was con-
albumin and urea nitrogen (or creatinine). If albumin is
firmed after surgery. Treating the symptoms of endocrine
decreased apply the correction formula. If the patient is
diseases may be more important than treating the absolute
azotemic that is the most likely explanation for hypocalce-
values of hormones or their end products. If clinical signs
mia. If serum calcium is <7 mg/dL and the patient has acute
renal failure, test for ethylene glycol toxicity. If these do not
should be avoided.
identify the cause of hypocalcemia then examine lipase to
There is a report of concurrent hyperparathyroidism in
rule in or rule out pancreatitis. The only hypocalcemic
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism. Individual data is not pro-
disease that serum PTH may be required to confirm is
vided, but observations from averaging values from these
primary hypoparathyroidism. Ruling out other causes of
dogs are the following. There is increased PTH in 92%, three
hypocalcemia usually rules in this diagnosis, but it can be
fold increase in PTH in 34%, no differences or consistent
confirmed by measuring PTH which should be undetectable
pattern in ionized and total calcium. Serum phosphorus is
or markedly low and therefore is inappropriate for the
higher than controls, but the actual incidence of hyperphos-
degree of hypocalcemia. The determination of ionized
phatemia was not reported. Dogs with renal failure were not
calcium is of value in critically ill patients no matter what
included in data sets. The authors concluded there is unex-
their primary disease or total calcium concentration is.
Artifactual hypocalcemia due to use of calcium binding
itary dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Measuring PTH in
anticoagulants such as EDTA or oxalate is often listed.
dogs with hyperadrenocorticism did not change clinical deci-
Although this is possible, the serum concentration of calcium
sions and that the status of adrenal function should be
is usually "zero." Nothing else will do this and therefore
considered when interpreting increased concentrations of
there is no confusion as to the diagnosis. If in doubt repeat
PTH in dogs.
the measurement and be sure to use a serum sample. The
purpose of anticoagulants such as EDTA (purple top tubes)
or oxalate (black top) is to chelate calcium as the means of
Disorders of calcium and phosphorus
anticoa gulation.
metabolism
Hypocalcemia disorders
There are a number of diseases that disturb calcium metabo-
The following is a more in-depth discussion of various causes
lism to a degree that cannot be managed by functional
of hypocalcemia.
parathyroid gland regulation (Tables 33.1 and 33.2). These
diseases result in either hypocalcemia or hypercalcemia that
Hypoalbuminemia
occasionally is recognized by clinical signs, but is more often
This is the most common cause of hypocalcemia by a large
detected by routine biochemical test results.
margin in all species. Because hypoalbuminemia is associ-
ated with a decrease in the protein-bound fraction of
Hypocalcemia
calcium, there are no clinical signs associated with this hypo-
Hypocalcemia—differential diagnoses, summary
calcemia. "Adjust" the total serum concentration of calcium
Causes of hypocalcemia that are more much common than
for the hypoalbuminemia and if the adjusted-calcium con-
primary hypoparathyroidism include: hypoalbuminemia.
centration is within reference interval, then other causes of
hypoproteinemia, renal disease, ethylene glycol toxicity.
pancreatitis, and eclampsia/"milk fever." Most of these dif-
this relationship and if serum calcium is <6.5mg/dL in a
ferential diagnoses are easy to establish without knowledge
hypoalbuminemic animal there may be a second cause of
of serum calcium. Serum calcium is rarely measured for a
hypocalcemia and measurement of ionized calcium is rec-
diagnosis of lactational tetany. and if measured is usually
ommended. If ionized calcium is desired it must be mea-
done after treatment, as confirmation. A complete list of
sured, the correction formulas do not predict ionized calcium
556
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
they simply provide an index of how much the decrease in
more metabolically active in the adult than the long bones.
total calcium is due to hypoalbuminemia. The real calcium
Cases of "rubber jaw" or fibrous osteodystrophy still occur
in the patient is the value that is measured, ionized, or total.
in all species, but only with chronic renal failure, not acute.
The adjusted calcium is not a real number it simply helps
The hypocalcemia of renal failure is due to: (l) decreased
the veterinarian determine that the decrease in total serum
reabsorption of calcium from tubules due to loss of tubular
calcium is due to hypoalbuminemia. Diagnostic efforts are
cells, (2) decreased concentration of vitamin D due to
now directed at the cause of hypoalbuminemia. The adjust-
destruction of renal cells that produce vitamin D, (3)
ment formula for total protein can also be used but is not
increased concentration of phosphorus that reciprocally
necessary. just use albumin. If serum albumin is normal or
decreases calcium, (4) soft tissue deposition of Ca x P (min-
increased do not use any correction and investigate the
eralization), (5) hypoalbuminemia, if present, and (6) if the
cause of hypocalcemia; it is not due to a protein abnormality.
cause of renal failure is ethylene glycol toxicity the calcium
If gastrointestinal disease is the cause of the hypocalcemia
will be "complexed" with oxalate. Renal failure induced
there may be multiple mechanisms involved such
las
hypocalcemia is accompanied by moderate (9mg/dL) to
hypoalbuminemia, malabsorption, hypomagnesemia, and/
marked (>l5mg/dL) hyperphosphatemia. When the Ca x P
or abnormalities of vitamin D absorption and metabolism.
product is greater than 70 the possibility of soft tissue min-
 Similarly if there is pancreatic atrophy or pancreatitis there
eralization is likely and when it is greater than l00 it is
may be multiple mechanisms working in concert to produce
hypocalcemia: maldigestion, malabsoprtion, hypomagne-
vitamin D are major precipitators of mineralization and are
sium, decreased vitamin D, and hypoalbuminemia.
more important for mineralization than calcium. Mineral-
ization is enhanced with renal failure due to uremic induced
Renaldisease
vasculitis and tissue damage (dystrophic mineralization).
The second most common cause of hypocalcemia. Renal
 The following are examples of TCa x P in dogs with renal
failure may be associated with hyper, normo, or hypocalce-
failure and azotemia:
mia. Most animals with renal failure are normocalcemic.
 e ln g d  an   no
Case
Total Ca 
P
Ca xP
calcium, but there are examples where total and ionized
concentrations disagree. The stage of renal failure is impor-
8
10
80
tant in predicting the serum calcium. In compensated renal
7
15
105
failure (early or mild) the serum concentrations of total or
3
9
18
162
ionized calcium are usually in the reference interval.
4
7.4
16.6
123
However, as renal failure advances into the uncompensated
Reference interval
9-1 1 mg/dL
 3-5 mg/dL
stages and finally end stage renal failure, hypocalcemia is
 expected except in some horses where hypercalcemia may
be seen.
Soft tissue mineralization is occurring in all of these exam-
The diagnosis of renal failure is obvious when there is
ples even though serum calcium is decreased or within the
concurrent hyperphosphatemia (often marked). azotemia.
reference interval. There are no studies that predict soft
and dilute urine. With chronic renal failure there will be
tissue
 mineralization
using
ionized
calcium times
marked parathyroid gland hyperplasia and hypertrophy.
phosphorus.
accompanied by marked increases in the serum concentra-
 Although it is easy to explain the hypocalcemia associated
tion PTH. This is a result of the parathyroid response to a
with renal failure, most cases of renal failure are normocal-
decreasing serum calcium that may still be in the reference
cemic and some are hypercalcemic. This is true if the calcium
interval as well as decreased renal excretion of PTH due to
status is determined via total or ionized calcium. Emphasis 
the renal failure. The decrease in calcium happens first and
is placed on examples of increased total serum calcium while
this induces parathyroid hypertrophy. hyperplasia. and
the ionized calcium is normal or decreased in dogs and cats
secretion of parathyroid hormone in attempt to compensate
with renal failure. Ionized calcium can also increase with
for the urinary loss of calcium and raise the serum calcium.
renal failure and if ionized calcium is used to classify hyper-
In end stage renal failure there are radiographic and micro-
calcemia in dogs then renal failure is the number two cause.
scopic bone lesions (osteoclastic osteolysis), but only a small
The diagnosis of renal failure is usually straightforward.
 percent of chronic renal failure animals have bone lesions 
What is clinically more important than the serum calcium
severe enough to produce clinically detectable disease
is determination of why the patient is in renal failure and
(fibrous osteodystrophy = "big head," rubber jaw). Bone
what the Ca x P product is. However, dogs in renal failure
lesions are more common in dogs than cats, horses, or rumi-
that have a total serum calcium <8.6 mg/dL have a poorer
nants. The most sensitive areas to detect these bony changes
prognosis for survival and discharge from a hospital than do
in radiographs are teeth, calvarium and "flat" bones that are
dogs with higher serum calcium concentrations. This prob-
557
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
ably reflects the severity of the renal failure and associated
 Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism is usually easy to
magnitude of hyperphosphatemia.
diagnose. It is associated with hypocalcemia, hyperphospha-
Hypocalcemia is also seen with prerenal and postrenal
temia, and severe chronic renal disease with marked azote-
azotemia, probably secondary to the increase in serum phos-
mia, inability to concentrate urine, and nonregenerative
phorus. Anytime serum phosphorus is increased there is
anemia. Measurement of ionized calcium and or repeat
potential for hypocalcemia due to the physiologic balance of
measurements of total and ionized calcium may detect a
calcium phosphorus homeostasis, soft tissue mineralization.
nadir of hypocalcemia, but there will be wide fluctuations if 
increased renal excretion of phosphorus anion and therefore
 a s   a  
calcium cation, and phosphorus inhibition of vitamin D
likely to develop bony abnormalities that are associated with
production.
soft flexible "rubber" bones that result in lameness, bowing
 Obstructed tom cats have hyperphosphatemia, hyperka-
of the limbs, and mild to marked facial swellings and distor-
lemia, and azotemia that is associated with hypocalcemia.
tions. The increase in size of bones is due to excessive fibrous
The decrease in ionized calcium may be disproportionately
tissue deposits in response to the bone resorption and prob-
greater than the decrease in total calcium. For example.
able cytokine driven fibroplasia. If radiographs are taken,
more obstructed cats have a decrease in ionized calcium as
especially of the head, severe loss of bone can be seen
compared to total calcium. Tetany is not typically observed
around the teeth and in the calvarium. Radiographically
even when ionized calcium is as low as 1.l0 mEq/L or total
detectable bony lesions are observed rarely with primary
calcium less than 5mg/dL. Fluid therapy that rapidly cor-
hyperparathyroidism   or  hypercalcemia  of  malignancy
rects acidosis, thereby decreasing the ionized fraction, may
although, osteolysis is present microscopically in both dis-
precipitate tetany.
eases. The most significant clinical problem is the renal
failure which is always chronic and usually severe.
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism is a disease of
This is a chronic parathyroid response secondary to one
carnivores, exotics (iguanas, etc.), and horses. Ruminants
of two disorders of calcium-phosphorus metabolism. In sec-
are more likely to have osteoporosis or rickets (vitamin D or
ondary hyperparathyroidism, either renal disease or a
phosphorus deficiency). In the majority of cases, the serum
calcium-phosphorus imbalance nutritional problem initiates
concentration of calcium is within the reference interval and
absolute or relative hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia.
there is mild to moderate hyperphosphatemia. It is associ-
Parathyroid hypertrophy and hyperplasia occurs in all the
ated with diets that either have insufficient calcium or to0
glands as a secondary response to the hypocalcemia caused
much phosphorus, or that have a calcium:phosphorus
by the underlying disease. Serum calcium does not need to
imbalance, such that the ratio of calcium : phosphorus in the
decrease below the reference interval to produce this syn-
diet is no longer 2:l. Diets associated with this disease include
drome. The decreasing serum calcium is recognized by
all meat diets for carnivores and excessive grain diets (high
    s 
phosphorus, low calcium) in horses and high grains/nuts
and cellular responses in an attempt to raise the serum
diets for reptiles (high phosphorus, low calcium). Horses and
calcium via usual actions in bone, intestines, and kidneys.
 sn  a  s s a sn
Until the primary renal or nutritional problem is corrected.
green leafy vegetables to balance dietary Ca :P. It can also be
these cyclic events continue and eventually produce clinical
disease. Both nutritional and renal secondary HPTH will
ing plants that chelate and lower serum calcium. The low
produce bone lesions that range from mild osteolysis only
dietary intake of calcium and/or the reciprocal lowering of
detected radiographically to fractured bones to enlarged
calcium by the high dietary phosphorus intake lower the
bones from excess fibrous tissue deposition.
serum calcium concentration resulting in parathyroid
 Examples of expected calcium and phosphorus values are
hormone production and release and parathyroid hypertro-
shown below.
n ae    o   
serum calcium need only change by 0.l mmol/L or the total
calcium by 0.25-0.5 mg/dL; it is not necessary for the serum
calcium concentration to be reduced below the reference
Serum
e3
P
PTH
interval to trigger parathyroid hormone production and
1° hyperparathyroidism
个
↓
↑ or N
release; e.g., serum calcium decreases from 9.7mg/dL to
 2° hyperparathyroidisrm
N↑
↑
个
9.2 mg/dL and the 0.5 mg/dL decrease in serum calcium will 
Renal
N↑
个个个
个个个
stimulate PTH production and secretion. Ionized calcium is
 Nutritional
↑N
个
个
 the biologically active trigger and it is decreasing as the total
serum calcium decreases. The release of parathyroid hormone
 N = norrnal value, within reference interval.
stimulates the mechanisms to normalize serum calcium by
increasing calcium absorption and resorption. In nutritional
558
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
HPTH this will continue until the dietary imbalance is cor-
atitis and not hypocalcemia. The mechanism of the low
       
serum calcium is unknown; investigations that evaluated
diagnostically it is usually "normal," but at the lower end of
ionized calcium, parathyroid hormone concentrations, and
reference interval. Phosphorus, on the other hand, is not
precipitation of calcium in the areas of fat necrosis, have not
regulated as well as calcium. It may be high in the diet and
established a definitive pathogenesis. Correction of the pan-
it is also being released from bone, therefore serum phospho-
creatitis results in normalization of the serum calcium con-
rus is usually increased and this is a key to the diagnosis. As
centration. The diagnosis is usually obvious because the
always examine serum Ca and P concurrently. The increased
hypocalcemia is associated with history, clinical signs, and
PTH will stimulate compensatory increased P excretion in
other laboratory abnormalities that are consistent with pan-
the urine. This compensatory mechanism is usually not
creatitis. If hyperphosphatemia is present it is due to concur-
rent prerenal azotemia. Ionized calcium is also decreased.
help establish the diagnosis by measuring the fractional
Ionized hypocalcemia is also present in about half of the
excretion of phosphorus, an indirect indicator of PTH
activity.
higher likelihood of death.
Fractional excretion of electrolytes, measurements of
parathyroid hormone, and dietary evaluation with measure-
Lactationtetany
ments of calcium and phosphorus in feed are usually the
This is the most common cause of hypocalcemia that has
best ways to screen and confirm the diagnosis of nutritional
associated clinical signs.
secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Eclampsia, or puerperal tetany, is most commonly recog-
Fractional excretion (Fx Exc) of electrolytes:
nized in the dog. The hypocalcemia associated with eclamp-
sia is not a diagnostic mystery: the patient is usually a bitch
Serum creatinine  Urine electrolyte
×100
that is approaching peak lactation, approximately 3 weeks
Urine creatinine Serum electrolyte
postparturient. It is more common in smaller breeds of dogs
and seen less frequently in large dogs, cats, ewes, and horses.
The hypocalcemia is often severe, <6.0 mg/dL, and is one of
thyroidism is an increased serum PTH that results in an
the few hypocalcemic disorders associated with tetany. If
increased Fx Exc of phosphorus.
the condition remains untreated the tetany will progress
Dietary analysis should demonstrate a calcium to phos-
to paresis. If examined the pupils are often dilated and
phorus imbalance, with increased phosphorus or decreased
respond slowly to light. Other signs include tachycardia,
calcium. Often the history of the diet is helpful to establish
fever, salivation, restlessness, and muscle spasms that may
the final diagnosis. As described above, the diagnosis of renal
 progress to seizures. Treatment is usually started before
results of serum calcium are known. An ionized calcium
azotemia. A Fx Exc Na of >l% indicates renal impairment.
measurement is ideal to rapidly confirm the diagnosis and
Fractional excretion studies of calcium or phosphorus are
monitor treatment. Symptomatic treatment of the hypocal-
not indicated when there is azotemia.
cemia coupled with reduced lactation and/or supplementa-
tion (calcium + vitamin D) to the bitch usually corrects the
Ethylene glycol toxicity
problem.
This can result in marked hypocalcemia, <7.0mg/dL, beca use
 Preparturient hypocalcemia has been reported in queens.
of the mechanisms associated with renal failure. Severe
The condition appears to be rare. The hypocalcemia can be
hypocalcemia is due to the chelation of calcium with oxalate.
severe, total calcium <5.0 mg/dL and similar to cows with
However, these dogs and cats rarely have tetany. probably
milk fever, the cats tend to be hypothermic. Ewes may also
because they are severely acidotic and sick (uremic). The
develop signs prior to parturition, usually in the last month
acidosis will preferentially shift calcium to the ionized com-
of gestation. This may be part of the pregnancy toxemia
partment and therefore make more "biologically active"
syndrome of sheep andis associated with stress and decreased
calcium available, thus preventing tetany. The possibility
food intake.
exists that if the acidosis was corrected rapidly the calcium
Milk fever is the common name for lactation hypocalcemia
would shift away from the ionized compartment and tetany
in cattle. The clinical diagnosis is easy. It is a cow, l-4 days
could be induced, especially if calcium was not added to the
 postparturient. A Channel Island breed is perfect (Jersey or
IV fluids. Diagnosis of ethylene glycol toxicity is described
Guernsey. but it can occur in any breed). It is much less
in the urinary chapter of this book.
frequent in beef cows. The affected cow is recumbent, head
and neck often folded toward flank, and has bradycardia
Pancreatitis
with possible arrhythmias. Fever is a misnomer as affected
This is associated with mild hypocalcemia, often in the 8 mg/
cows have a normal or subnormal temperature. Serum
dL range. All the clinical problems are referable to pancre-
calcium is rarely measured and treatment is started based on
559
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
classical presentation. If serum is sampled total and ionized
Cats and dogs with iatrogenic hypocalcemia usually only
calcium are markedly decreased, phosphorus is mildly
require treatment with intravenous or oral calcium and/or
decreased, and magnesium and glucose will be increased.
vitamin D if clinical signs occur or if the total calcium is
Total serum calcium can be <4.0 mg/dL and ionized calcium
<7 mg/dL, ionized <3mEq/L, <l mmol/L. In dogs the treat-
<2.0 mEq/L, <l mmol/L. The relatively high calcium in the
ment period is short, days to a week and even in cats oral
diet during the dry period (not lactating) has resulted in
treatment is usually only necessary for one to two months
suppression of the parathyroid gland which in turn has
post surgery. If cats are weaned off the calcium and vitamin
decreased the osteoclastic pool. At and shortly after parturi-
 D therapy. their serum calcium concentrations usually
tion there is a combination of events that result in the syn-
remain within the reference interval. The exact mechanism
drome. These include anorexia, estrogen surge, and increased
for normalization of the serum calcium is not known. Inves-
milk production and secretion. As a result serum calcium
tigations that tried to determine if there was ectopic para-
rapidly decreases. The parathyroid gland recognizes the
thyroid tissue that hypertrophied and produced parathyroid
 decreasing serum calcium and secretes an adequate amount
of PTH. However, the bone pool of osteoclasts is so sup
cated this is not the case. Even dogs with experimental
pressed that they cannot respond to the PTH rapidly enough
to mobilize sufficient calcium to prevent paresis. Calcium
lize their serum calcium and not require calcium or vitamin
o x      n la i s
D supplementation. Parathyroid hormone-related protein
Ca from bone, renal, and intestinal sources so hypocalcemia
(PTH rp) could have a role in the normalization of serum
progresses to the point the cow collapses with paresis. If
calcium in these patients as the hormone is produced by
serum total or ionized calcium is measured at this time they
many tissues in adults and fetuses.
will be markedly decreased. However, if measured several
  n     o so
hours after successful treatment the serum total and ionized
tumor often develop hypocalcemia postexcision of the
calcium has often returned to pretreatment levels, but there
tumor. One dilemma of treatment is to provide just enough
are no signs of paresis. There is more to this disease than
oral calcium and vitamin D to prevent symptoms, but not
simply the serum concentration of total or ionized calcium
enough to induce hypercalcemia and continued suppression
and acid-base status. Hyperglycemia is common and is due
of the atrophic glands. It is preferable to keep the serum
to stress and decreased insulin due to the hypocalcemia
calcium slightly below the reference interval to stimulate the
Ionized and complexed calcium, but not albumin bound
calcium passes freely into the glomerular filtrate, CsF, and
sible only treat with calcium as it is easier to monitor and
aqueous humor. Therefore the concentration of total calcium
change the dose of calcium than it is to regulate serum
in these fluids is normally approximately half of the serum
calcium with vitamin D. Vitamin D requires 3-7 days to
concentration, 4-5 mg/dL. If CSF or aqueous are used post
reach peak effect. Therefore it is more difficult to adjust the
mortem to confirm hypocalcemia, the concentration of total
dose of vitamin D since there is a delayed response before
calcium must be less than 4mg/dL to be compatible with
milk fever.
of calcium and vitamin D such that therapy induces postop-
erative hypercalcemia. Treatment related hypercalcemia
Iatrogenic—thyroidectomy or removal of a parathyroid
persists until the vitamin D is metabolized (up to l week).
adenoma
Enduranceracing—horses
cats often results in complete or partial parathyroidectomy.
Hypocalcemia is due to loss of calcium, along with other
Therefore, hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia may occur
electrolytes in sweat and insufficient replacement during
within 24-48 hours of the surgery. but can be delayed for up
50-lo0 mile races. Contributing to the hypocalcemia
to one week. This also happens in dogs when a parathyroid
may be an alkalosis induced by hypochloremia and rapid
tumor is excised. In dogs there is usually not damage to the
respirations. Equine sweat is hypertonic and rich in calcium.
 other parathyroid glands, but they are atrophic due to
potassium, sodium, and chloride. There is greater loss of
chronic hypercalcemia induced by the parathyroid adenoma.
electrolytes than water in the sweat of horses and therefore
After removal of the parathyroid secreting adenoma the
electrolytes must be supplemented during races especially in
remaining atrophic glands cannot resume synthesis of PTH
hot and humid weather conditions. Human sweat is isotonic
and electrolyte replacement is not as critical as is water
degree of atrophy is a combination of the severity and dura-
replacement. The hypocalcemia seen in endurance horses
tion of the hypercalcemia. Interestingly. this does not occur
can be symptomatic and cause tetany. "thumps" or dia-
following surgical or chemical removal of anal sac tumors or
phragmatic flutter (tetany in muscles of diaphragm), weak-
with chemotherapy of lymphomas and other tumors associ-
ness, cramping, and a variety of neuromuscular dysfunctions
ated with hypercalcemia of malignancy.
including ileus and colic. This can usually be prevented by
560
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
adequate supplementation with forced electrolytes during
      s 
the event. High calcium in the prerace diet such as alfalfa
cattle when they graze lush grass pastures. Animals are
hay (regular feed program) could precipitate this condition 
usually recumbent and generalized tetany is present or is
similar to milk fever in cattle. The most common electrolyte
especially obvious in cervical muscles. Tetany is preceded by
disturbance in endurance horses is hypochloremia.
an uncoordinated gait, "grass staggers." and an agitated
behavior. Lush grass predominant pastures tend to be defi-
cient in magnesium. Adequate serum concentrations of
Cantharidin toxicity
The hypocalcemia of cantharidin toxicity can be severe and
magnesium are dependent on adequate dietary intake.
Cattle, tend to be hypocalcemic and treatment includes
is an important clue to the diagnosis of blister beetle toxico-
 sis in the horse. The mechanism of the hypocalcemia is not
in cattle with hypocalcemia is most easily explained by
clear, but is possibly related to concurrent hypomagnesemia.
Hematuria, hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia in a colicky
examination of serum magnesium. If magnesium is decrea sed
as in grass tetany they will be tetanic and if increased as in
horse eating alfalfa is sufficient to diagnose this toxicity.
millk fever they will be paretic. If hypocalcemia goes
Toxicosis is confirmed via high pressure liquid chromatog-
raphy that quantifies cantharidin in the urine (20mL of
may become paretic. The serum glucose may be increased
urine), in gastric contents (one pint of stomach contents).
due to stress and hypocalcemia induced hypoinsulinemia.
liver, or kidneys of dead horses. Some horses will have
increased muscle enzymes and myoglobinuria. Tetany. dia-
Oxalate
phragmatic flutter, paresis, and facial muscle spasms can be
Plants rich in oxalates may lower serum calcium in
seen. The toxin causes acantholysis of esophageal and gas-
herbivores. In chronic cases this has been associated with
trointestinal mucosa, myocardial necrosis and renal tubular
nutritional  secondary  hyperparathyroidism  and  fibrous
necrosis.
osteodystrophy. Example plants with excess oxalates are
 The blister beetles are found in alfalfa hay near the time
halogeton, dock, rhubarb, greasewood, and soursob.
of bloom. If hay is cut before the bloom phase it reduces the
lilkelihood of the beetles being present and if crimping is not
Critically ill animals—measure ionized calcium,
done it gives the beetles a chance to leave the cut plants.
total and ionized hypocalcemia
The crimping process crushes the alfalfa stems and any
' i      
beetle present, leaving them in the hay to be ingested.
regardless of the primary disease may influence therapy and
Crimping is done to crush the stems, squeeze out water and
prognosis. A mild decrease may not be important, but mod-
speed drying of hay in eastern U.S. states. Alfalfa hay pro-
erate to marked decreases could influence treatments, espe-
duced in the arid West is not crimped and the beetles simply
cially those aimed at stabilizing cardiovascular deterioration.
 '  i  i   i  n i 
to the female during mating and the female covers her eggs
Serum ionized hypocalcemia in critically ill dogs is associated
with a longer duration in ICU and total days in the hospital.
with it as a defense against predators. Horses are highly
but is not associated with decreased survival. Critically ill
sensitive to cantharidin; the lethal dose-50 for horses is
dogs with renal failure, diabetic ketoacidosis, or pancreatitis 
were more likely to have ionized hypocalcemia, but diseases 
       
Hypomagnesium
in dogs did not look at total serum calcium to determine if
Hypomagnesemia results in impaired PTH release and cal-
it was associated with predictive outcomes. Previously it has
citriol resistance leading to secondary hypocalcemia. This is
been shown that dogs in acute renal failure with total serum
an uncommon or uncommonly recognized problem. Hypo-
calcium <8.6mg/dL have a poorer prognosis for survival and
magnesemia and hypocalcemia are associated with protein-
discharge from a hospital than do dogs with higher serum
losing enteropathy (PLE) in small animals, grass tetany in
total calcium concentrations.
cattle, and cantharidin toxicity in horses. If PLE is present
Critically ill adult horses with endotoxemia and gastroin-
then the most likely cause of hypocalcemia is hypoalbumin-
     
emia. Contributing factors may be intestinal loss, malabsorp-
and parathyroid gland dysfunction. Decreased total and
tion, and/or abnormalities of vitamin D and parathyroid
ionized calcium can cause or be associated with ileus and
hormone metabolism. If the concentration of ionized calcium
colic. Nearly 90 % of horses with colic had decreased ionized
is decreased there are other factors involved than just hypo-
calcium at the time of admission. Horses with very low
albuminemia, such as hypomagnesemia and decreased PTH.
ionized calcium were 12 times more likely to develop ileus.
Electrolyte replacement may be required to avoid neurologic
A fatal outcome was nine times more likely for horses in the
and metabolic problems. It is reported to be more common
very hypocalcemic group. Ionized calcium and response to
in Yorkshire terriers.
calcium replacement was used to predict prognosis. Endur-
561
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
help explain why postsurgical hypocalcemia is usually not
can have an ileus that is so severe that it is erroneously
permanent. Humans with hyperthyroidism tend to have the
diagnosed as a surgical colic. Septic foals were reported
opposite pattern: increased bone turnover, hypercalcemia,
to have ionized hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and
and decreased PTH. Hypercalcemia has been reported for
increased serum PTH, but no differences in magnesium, PTH
dogs with hyperthyroidism, it is mild, the mechanism is not
rp. or calcitonin. However, in this study it is impossible to
known, and it may not be related to hyperthyroidism.
determine if these changes were related to renal function
Although the phosphorus, ionized calcium, alkaline phos-
because creatinine (or urea nitrogen) and PTH concentra-
 phatase (ALP), and bone relationship is an interesting para-
tions were not reported for individual animals. Therefore
dox in hyperthyroid cats, it is clinically insignificant.
comparisons of Ca to PTH, or PTH to azotemia cannot be
made. Calves with severe neonatal diarrhea will have hypo-
latrogenic
calcemia, but due to concurrent acidosis the ionized hypo-
Various treatments such as anticonvulsants, intravenous
calcemia may not be as severe. With fluid therapy and
phosphate solutions, calcium free IV solutions, transfusions
correction of the acidosis both total and ionized calcium will
with citrate as anticoagulant, excess bicarbonate therapy.
decrease further. Tetany may develop during therapy as
tetracycline, and furosemide diuretics can be associated with
alkalinization shifts calcium from ionized to protein bound.
hypocalcemia. Furosemide inhibits sodium and chloride
reabsorption in the loop of Henle and secondarily inhibits
Sick patients
calcium reabsorption that can lead to hypocalcemia. Furo-
Hypocalcemia is seen in a variety of illnesses in small and
semide can be used to lower serum calcium in hypercalcemic
    sis an n  s 
patients with adequate hydration. Tetracycline will chelate
becomes difficult to know if there is cause and effect or
calcium and rapid intra venous boluses may decrease calcium.
simply an association. Pancreatitis, ketoacidosis, critical
Hypocalcemia induced by transfusions is only associated
illness, sepsis, colic, endotoxemia, inflammatory diseases.
with massive transfusions; e.g., open heart surgery, transfu-
protein abnormalities, cantharidin toxicity, and others could
sion equal to 50% of blood volume in a 3-hour period, or
fit in this category of associated problems. There may be a
transfusion equal to total blood volume over 24 hours can
mechanism that is reasonable, such as hypomagnesemia.
decrease ionized calcium by 1.2 mg/dL (0.3 mmol/L).
cytokines or it may represent overlap of common problems
Hypocalcemia is seen in sick cattle with a wide variety of
conditions including retained placenta, rumen overload,
Hypercalcemia
lymphoma, neonatal calf diarrhea, foot diseases, and aboma-
sal ulcers, to list a few. There may be specific diseases to be
Causes of hypercalcemia are outlined in Table 33.2. If ionized
aware of or it may be that the severity of the disease/illness
calcium is used to classify and rank the frequency of causes
in animal and human patients correlates better with the
 of hypercalcemia in dogs they are: HCM (58%), renal failure
degree of hypocalcemia than the specific disease.
xoi    '(t) saso oas (%
Feline hyperthyroidism
(3%). Cats and horses have the same differentials. Following
There is a calcium, phosphorus, and parathyroid imbalance
is discussion of various causes of hypercalcemia that are not
in some cats with hyperthyroidism that is not understood.
related to autonomous parathyroid hormone hypersecre-
Hyperphosphatemia without azotemia is seen in 25-40% of
tion. A general diagnostic approach for evaluation of the
hyperthyroid cats and total serum calcium is usually in the
hypercalcemic patient is outlined in Table 33.4.
reference interval. However, a mild decrease in ionized serum
Hypercalcemia of malignancy (HCM) is the term used to
calcium, without clinical signs is observed in approximately
describe a common syndrome in which a nonparathyroid
30% (4 of 15) but the mechanisms are not known and the
tumor produces a substance that acts like PTH and causes
numbers of cats studied is small. Increased concentration of
hypercalcemia and hypophophatemia. There are a variety
of substances produced by tumors and the one that is
roid cats studied (small numbers) and hyperparathyroidism
 and hyperthyroidism are listed as coexistent problems in cats.
parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTH rp). Total and
These abnormalities could be due to concurrent renal disease.
ionized calcium are increased but concurrent hypophospha-
which is common in geriatric cats. However, urea nitrogen
temia, when present, is the major diagnostic clue as the
and creatinine are usually in the reference interval. Another
only two diseases of dogs and cats that do this are HCM
and primary HPTH. Historically. HCM was called pseudo-
without an increase in PTH in a variety of concurrent ill-
hyperparathyroidism because the disease resembled primary
nesses. The parathyroid hyperplasia may help explain why
HPTH. The reason for this is that many tumors produce the
some cats do not develop postsurgical hypocalcemia and may
protein PTH rp which shares a nearly identical amino acid
562
Table 33.4 Evaluation of a hypercalcemic patient.
 1. Consider age of patient first and compare calcium and P, examine for azotemia.
2. If increased calcium is not due to young age then consider repeating serum calcium to confirm hypercalcemnia; consider ionized calcium if available; if
P is decreased there is no need to repeat serum calcium.
If hypercalcemic and hypophosphatemic: HCM vs. Primary hyperparathyroidism
 1. If a horse and they are azotemic, done, renal failure is the cause of hypercalcemia, pursue causes of renal failure; more likely to be chronic and have
a poor prognosi5
HIdH Aeuud Aq pamolloy isy WDH ansund jen jo bop H *Z
 3. Hypercalcemia of malignancy (number one cause of persistent hypercalcemia in dogs and cats); perform a cancer search, do not measure PTH or PTH
rp initially.
Lyrnphoma most likely; #1 tumor associated with HCM
Evaluation of lyrmph nodes, anterior mediastinum, bone marrow, FeLv; 50% of dogs have an anterior mediastinal mass; <10% leukemic;
subio lo pue sapou ydu pabieua jo Aao leuogeidse eawoualdsoeday jo uoeuuaia 
 Adenocarcinoma apocrine glands of anal sac, #2 tumor associated with HCM in dogs
Thorough rectal-perirectal examination; metastases in pelvic canal and or sublumbar present at time of initial diagnosis; 50% do not protrude
 caudally and therefore are not visible, but can be palpated 
Myeloma
 Markedly increased total protein, monoclonal garnmopathy: multiple lytic bone lesions; aspirational cytology; Bence Jones proteinuria
Other tumors
eas wyad 'algisod ong Aue euouie lian snoenas sisoosiy sueuaieu euond ewwen
Horse—squamous celcarcinoma of stomach; endoscopy: paracentesis; lyrphoma search 
If one of the tumors above is found that is the cause of hypercalcemia; if further confirmation desired then measure PTH and PTH rp concurrently
4. If a cancer cannot be found or only a benign skin cancer is found then consider primary hyperparathyroidism: ultrasound the thyroid-parathyroid
complex and or measure PTH and PTH rp concurrently. Smmall mass in thyroid region with hypercalcemmia and hypophosphatemia is usually sufficient
evidence for dliagnosis and localizes the tumor to left or right; if further confirmation desired measure PTH and PTH rp concurrently.
Hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia:
1. Rule in or out malignancy first as outlined above; HCM much more likely to be hyperphosphatemic than patients with primary HPTH; <5% of dogs
with primary hyperparathyroidism are hyperphosphatemic; it is "practical" to rule out hyperparathyroidism if hyperphosphatemic; exceptions always
exist
 2. Exarnine for azotermia which is very likely, and assess degree of azotemia; the higher the azotemia the greater likelihood of prirmary renal; attermpt to
rule in rule out acute vs. chronic renal failure: if a young dog. especially purebred then progressive familial renal nephropathy is most likely: if acute
renal failure consider grape toxicity.
If azotemia is mild to moderate then the order of DDx are Addison's, renal disease and vitamnin D toxicity: all are likely to have dilute urine: <1.025 
while azotemic
 90% of Addison's are azotemic, rule in with basal cortisol <2μg/dL and Na :K <23, decide if ACTH stirmulation needed; rule out with cortisol
 >2 μg/dL
Rule in/out renal failure: response to fluids; acute vs. chronic; imaging of kidneys; Fx Exc Na; etc.
Differentiation of renal causing vs caused by hypercalcemia: >P more likely primary renal and >calcium more likely hypercalcemia came first; if total 
calcium increased and ionized normal or decreased renal more likely; ionized can be increased in renal failure in dogs and cat5.
Consider vitammin D toxicity from history, possible exposure, softissue mineralization, assay for vitammin D: plants unlikely in carnivores, more likely in
herbivores.
 3. If all above ruled out pursue idiopathic in cats; granulomatous diseases: blastomycosis, other fungi, FlP, schistosomiasis, mycobacterium,
toxoplasmosis; iatrogenic.
Hypercalcemia and normophosphatemia—consider all of above
· Patients with HCM—cancer search more practical than PTH PTH rp determinations. Lymphoma first, followed by anal sac, lung. mammary, malignant
histiocytosis
● Hypoadrenocorticism: Na :K <23:1: basal cortisol; ACTH stirmulation test
 Renal disease—azotemia, very rare to have normophosphatemia if they are also hypercalcemic; evaluate renal size; acute vs. chronic
· Prirmary hyperparathyroidism: Serum PTH PTH rp: ultrasound, exploratory surgery of cervical region
● Idiopathic—cat; rule out others, calcium crystalluria; steroid responsive
● Bone lesion—-other rmechanisrns besides direct osteolyis are involved 
● Granulomatous—aspirational cytology is test of choice, find etiologic agent 
· lonized calcium—if desired measure; same list of differential diagnoses and diagnostic approaches; ionized calcium more important to measure in
hypocalcemnic than hypercalcemnic situations
· Do not use adjustment formulae for protein or albumin if hypercalcemia is present
563
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
sequence at the amino terminal end of the molecule to
no reported cases associated with hypercalcemia. Interstitial
native parathyroid hormone. Since the amino terminal end
cell tumors of the testes are associated with HCM in rats and
is the biologically active fragment, both molecules are rec-
an integumentary carcinoma will produce the disease in
ognized by and stimulate the same receptors (PTHlR) and
rabbits. There are multiple animal models in rabbits, rats and
therefore produce the same biological responses. Many cells
mice.
throughout the body produce PTH rp. but the only disease
 In most cases of HCM, the diagnosis is easy and is based
associated with this molecule in veterinary medicine is
on physical examination and/or laboratory findings of neo-
HCM. PTH rp is important for fetal calcium regulation, trans-
plasia in the categories described above. Essentially any
placental calcium transportation, calcium homeostasis of the
tumor could produce this syndrome, most are malignant but
fetus, important in milk, and no doubt will be linked to other
some are benign. Aspirational cytology of enlarged lymph
physiological functions and diseases. It can be identified via
nodes or the perineal mass or another tumor can easily
 du    no ia si a 
and in tumors from normocalcemic animals. In addition to
not needed if a tumor can be identified. Glucocorticoids are
PTH rp. a group of less commonly recognized substances
useful in lowering the serum concentration of calcium, but
can be produced by tumors and act individually or in concert
avoid their use until a diagnosis is established. Steroids will
to amplify this syndrome. These include interleukin-l.
cause lymphocytolysis which will greatly interfere with
interleukin-6. tumor necrosis factor prostaglandin E2
interpretation of any lymph node aspirates examined via
(PGEz). fibroblast stimulating factor, epidermal growth
cytology. If an injection of steroids corrected hypercalcemia
factor, transforming growth factor, PTH, and vitamin D
in a dog with enlarged lymph nodes, then the diagnosis was
derivatives. Some of these factors are important in the
very lilkely lymphoma. Aspiration of lymph nodes at this
hypercalcemia associated with lymphomas and may act syn-
time will probably be nondiagnostic, but when hypercalce-
ergistically. The only two substances on this list that are
mia returns cytologic confirmation of lymphoma is
diagnostically practical in veterinary medicine are PTH and
indicated.
 PTH rP. However, if a malignant tumor was present and both
 Most clinical signs are referable to the cancer, but some
PTH and PTH rp were decreased, then one of these other
are due to hypercalcemia. These include weakness and PU
humoral/local osteolytic substances may be causing the
PD. Animals with HCM have more dramatic clinical signs
hypercalcemia.
than animals with primary HPTH due to the malignancy
 HCM is the most common cause of hypercalcemia in dogs
 such as cachexia, mass lesions, pulmonary metastases, gen-
and it has been associated with numerous tumors. The two
eralized ill health, and azotemia. Hypercalcemia and hypo-
most common tumors are lymphoma (by a wide margin)
 phosphatemia are the key dia gnosticlabora tory abnormalities.
and apocrine gland adenocarcinoma of the anal sac. Lym-
Apocrine adenocarcinomas are one of the best examples to
phoma associated with hypercalcemia in dogs is usually a
demonstrate how the tumor induces these electrolyte abnor-
T-cell lymphoma, as it is in people. Approximately 50% of
malities. In the following example of an 8-year-old female
the dogs will have a mass in the anterior mediastinum. Only
spayed German shepherd dog there is hypercalcemia and
6% are leukemic and osteolytic bone lesions are seen rarely
hypophosphatemia at the time of diagnosis that is rapidly
in conventional radiographs. If neither of these tumors are
corrected following the first surgical removal of the malig-
present search for multiple myeloma, mammary carcinoma.
nant tumor. When the tumor recurred, so did hypercalcemia
pulmonary tumor, and histiocytic sarcomas in that order. If
and hypophosphatemia and this cycle repeated itself until
a tumor cannot be found then measuring PTH and PTH rp
the dog's death.
are helpful diagnostic tests as is ultrasonography of the
thyroid region and possibly the abdominal cavity to search
for less physically obvious neoplasia.
Serum
 Total calcium
Phosphorus
HCM is not as common in cats when compared with dogs.
but HCM is the number one or two cause of hypercalcemia
Initial diagnosis
21.2
2.4
in cats. It is associated with carcinomas, especially squamous
 24 hr post surgical removal
10.4
3.9
 cell carcinoma (SCC), lymphoma, feline leukemia virus with
Recurrence 13 months later
16.8
1.8
 24hr post surgical removal
9.6
4.2
or without lymphoma, myeloma, and rarely with a variety
Recurrence 13 months later
18.1
3.4
of other malignant tumors. Anal sac tumors are rare in cats 
Reference interval
9-11 mg/dL
3 -5 mng/dL
and only a few are associated with hypercalcemia. Most cats
with this tumor are normocalcemic. Ferrets also have this
anal sac tumor, but hypercalcemia is not seen. HCM is rare
in horses and has been associated with lymphoma, myeloma.
Hypercalcemia can be used as a marker of tumor recur-
ameloblastoma, and gastric squamous cell carcinoma.
rence and/or metastases. These sequential changes in serum
Although lymphoma is common in cattle, there have been
calcium and phosphorus associated with surgical removal of
564
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
tumors and their recurrence was part of the initial evidence
tory methods for confirmation. Use these if an obvious
that tumors were producing humoral factors that acted like
cancer cannot be found. Request PTH, PTH rp. and calcium
PTH. In the example above, the serum concentration of PTH
on the same sample or samples drawn concurrently in a
was appropriately undetectable prior to surgical removal of
nonazotemic patient. Ideally PTH will be decreased or unde-
the tumor and increased rapidly after surgery. preventing
tectable and PTH rp will be increased in patients with HCM.
 postoperative hypocalcemia. Despite the malignant behavior 
The increase in PTH rp is usually diagnostic, but other sub-
of anal sac tumors, they spread slowly and surgical resection
Stances may cause HCM. Therefore a decreased value of PTH
or chemotherapy often gives affected patients months or
rp does not rule out HCM. The PTH concentration could be
even years of life postdiagnosis. Only about half of the
within the reference interval making interpretation difficult 
tumors protrude caudally to be visible in the perineum, but
because PTH is often in the reference interval in primary
all can be detected on rectal palpation. They tend to enter
hyperparathyroidism. However, PTH rp will be decreased or
 aq so  rn  a d a
undetectable in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism
ing to liver and or lungs. This tumor is distinct from benign
while PTH is normal or increased. There is overlap of the
circumanal or perianal gland adenomas that are common in
absolute values for each disease and that is why both hor-
male dogs and are visible in the perineum.
mones should be measured concurrently and the results
 The hypophosphatemia in dogs, cats, horses, lab animals.
compared to each other and the serum calcium concentra-
and people with HCM is due to the phosphaturic effect of
tion. If just one hormone is measured, interpretation is dif-
PTH rp on the renal tubules. Causes of hypercalcemia other
 ficult and may necessitate repeat sampling.
than HCM and primary HPTH do not stimulate renal phos-
The easiest and more practical way to differentiate primary
phorus excretion; hence the serum P is normal or increased
HPTH from HCM, however, is simply to find the cancer
in other diseases. Given time, dogs with HCM often develop
associated with HCM and then perform aspirational cytol-
normophosphatemia or hyperphosphatemia. This is likely
ogy. If a cancer cannot be located then consider performing
due to concurrent dehydration and prerenal azotemia. Other
ultrasonography of the thyroid region to search for a para-
contributing factors include lymphoma involvement of
thyroid adenoma. The measurement of serum/plasma PTH
the kidneys or renal mineralizaton after the phosphorus
and PTH rp may be useful adjuncts when physical examina-
increases. Animals with HCM are much more likely to be
tion and ultrasonography are not conclusive. Identification
hyperphosphatemic or normophosphatemic and azotemic
of the other humoral factors associated with HCM is difficult
than are animals with primary HPTH. This is probably due
and is a research and or investigative situation.
to the more frequent development of renal complications
Examples of interpretation of PTH and PTH rp results for
and subsequent phosphorus retention. Once the Ca X P
hypercalcemia include:
product is over 90 soft tissue mineralization is likely and one
of the common tissues that is predisposed to this is the
kidney. Hence, nephrocalcinosis is a frequent complication,
PTH
PTH rp
Diagnosis
which further contributes to renal problems.
Urine specific gravity is dilute due to hypercalcemia inhib-
Inc
Dec
 Prirmary HPTH
iting the action of ADH. The triad of azotemia, dilute urine.
RI
Dec
 Prirnary HPTH
RI
LI
HCM
and hypercalcemia produces the diagnostic challenge of
Dec
Inc
HCM
what came first, renal failure or hypercalcemia and what is
Inc
Inc
 Primary HPTH and HCM
causing the hypercalcemia? There are multiple ways to solve
Inc
Renal
this. First, it is much more lilkely that the hypercalcemia is
Dec
Dec
Other causes of hypercalcemia
due to a tumor than renal failure. Second, the physical
Dec
Dec
 An ectopic substance other than PTH rp
examination finding of a malignant tumor ( particularly lym-
Dec
Dec
In vitro decay
phoma or anal sac adenocarcinoma) establishes a cause for
the hypercalcemia. Next, the greater the serum calcium
 Rl = reference interval
the more likely it is HCM and not primary renal failure. The
lower the serum P, the more likely it is HCM, while the
higher the phosphorus, the more it favors primary renal
If both PTH and PTH rp are increased check the serum UN.
disease. Lastly, if a primary renal disease can be diagnosed
creatinine, and phosphorus as a likely explanation is
then that it is the cause. Since both diseases tend to be in
decreased clearance due to renal failure.
 geriatric patients, they may have both HCM and chronic
 Interestingly, hypocalcemia does not happen after surgical
renal failure.
resection of a tumor associated with HCM or after chemo-
Following the use of screening tests such as physical find-
therapy for tumors causing HCM, which has significant
ings, calcium, and phosphorus, confirmatory tests may be
 clinical application. Parathyroid hormone secretion is sup-
used. Measurement of PTH and PTH rp are the best labora-
pressed for several days following the removal of a parathy-
565
SEcTloN Iv Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
roid adenoma in dogs with primary HPTH and hypocalcemia
are increased in patients with renal failure due to hypocalce-
develops in some of these dogs. However, parathyroid
mia (relative or absolute). hyperphosphatemia, parathyroid
hormone is secreted rapidly following surgical removal of
hyperplasia, and decreased clearance and degradation of PTH
anal sac gland adenocarcinomas, preventing postsurgical
as kidneys excrete PTH. Parathyroid hormone is considered
hypocalcemia. Following removal of anal sac tumors the
one of the "uremic toxins."
concentration of serum calcium returns to normocalcemic
When hypercalcemia is present in dogs with renal disease,
ranges in less than 24 hours as serum PTH, which was
it is usually seen in younger dogs that have progressive famil-
decreased or undetectable before surgery, now increases.
ial renal dysplasia (breeds such as Lhasa Apso, Elkhound,
Apparently the suppression and atrophy of parathyroid
 Doberman, Wheaton terrier). Nearly all of these patients will
 n na d   s s
also have hyperphosphatemia and be azotemic. Patients with
HCM. An explanation for this observation is not clear.
formation of soft tissue mineralization. Attempts to lower the
Renal disease with hypercalcemia
serum phosphorus and azotemia should be vigorous because
In cats this is the number one or number two cause of
renal mineralization will compound the renal failure and
hypercalcemia, in horses it is the number one cause, and it
may make it irreversible. The differentiation of hypercalce-
is a relatively common cause in dogs. If ionized calcium is
mia due to renal failure from azotemia caused by another
used to classify causes of hypercalcemia in dogs. renal failure
hypercalcemic disease is problematic. A generalization is the
is the number two cause. Dogs with renal failure are usually
higher the serum phosphorus, the more likely the cause is
normocalcemic, but hypocalcemia is common and hypercal-
renal disease, and the higher the serum calcium, the more
cemia may be present in about lo%. Chronic renal failure
likely the cause is not renal. If renal failure is causing the
hypercalcemia. the serum phosphorus concentration is
renal failure, although grape and currant toxicities are
usually in double figures in dogs and cats, e.g., 10-25 mg/dL.
examples of acute renal failure that may be associated with
The lower the concentration of serum phosphorus, the more
hypercalcemia. The cause of hypercalcemia with renal
likely the cause of the hypercalcemia is something other than
failure is not known, it is referred to as tertiary hyperpara-
renal failure. For example, there is a substance in circulation
thyroidism. Increases in total and ionized calcium are usually
 that is both increasing calcium and decreasing phosphorus.
mild compared to the hypercalcemia seen in HCM or primary
such as PTH or PTH rp. These substances have a phosphaturic
HPTH, e.g., total calcium 1l.5-13mg/dL for renal failure
effect and if phosphorus is decreased or even if in reference
versus >l6mg/dL for HCM or primary HPTH. Examine the
intervals while a patient is azotemic that is strong evidence
phosphorus and determine the Ca x P product. The product
is often increased with renal failure.
serum calcium is increased, but ionized calcium is in refer-
The cause of hypercalcemia with renal failure is not
ence interval or decreased this pattern is more characteristic
known; it is referred to as tertiary hyperparathyroidism. The
 of primary renal failure.
pathogenesis probably involves an abnormality with the
Patients with hypercalcemia and renal failure are expected
calcium receptor for PTH located on the parathyroid chief
to be hyposthenuric—from the renal disease or the action
cells and other cells. Calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) con-
of calcium blocking the function of ADH on the collecting
trols PTH secretion and arms parathyroid chief cells and other
ducts. Approximately one-third of horses in chronic renal
CaSR-expressing cells to detect changes in the concentration
failure develop the unusual combination of hypercalcemia
of calcium and to make adjustments that normalize serum
and hypophosphatemia. This is unique to the horse. Other
calcium. Several disorders in humans are due to inherited or
horses have the traditional hyperphosphatemia expected
acquired abnormalities of these CaSR pathways such that the
with azotemia and either hypocalcemia or normocalcemia.
receptor is reset at a serum calcium concentration that dis-
The mechanism for hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia
rupts normal regulation and there is resulting hypercalcemia
in these horses is unknown, but there are several ideas.
 or hypocalcemia. These pathways may play a pivotal role in
 the development of hypercalcemia seen in some animals
Addison's disease
 with renal failure. Acquired abnormalities in this receptor
Approximately one-third of dogs with hypoadrenocorticism
may result in a failure of an increasing concentration of
will have hypercalcemia. The mechanism is not entirely
calcium to decrease the production and release of parathy-
known, but postulated components are increased complexed
roid hormone. It is as if the thermostat was turned up and it
calcium to citrate, an absence of glucocorticoids and there-
fore absence of corticoid calciureic effects. Steroids promote
of calcium. Therefore, parathyroid hormone continues to be
calciuria and block osteoclastic osteolysis. In the absence of
produced and secreted even though the present concentra-
steroids, these two physiologic events may contribute to
tion of calcium (high) would normally inhibit the release of
hypercalcemia. Ionized calcium was increased in five of
parathyroid hormone. Parathyroid hormone concentrations
seven Addisonian dogs that all had increased total serum
566
CHAPTER 33 Parathyroid Glands and Calcium and Phosphorus Metabolic Pathology
calcium, but there were no consistent increases in PTH, PTH
lomas in bone. Macrophages and some cancer cells can
rp. or 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D concentrations to explain
convert vitamin D precursors into calcitrol. Eleven of 22 dogs
the hypercalcemia. Almost all dogs with hypoadrenocorti-
infected with the flatworm Heterobilharzia americana that
cism are azotemic, many do not concentrate their urine
causes canine schistosomiasis were hypercalcemic. Resolu-
beyond 1.020, and most are hyperphosphatemic. Because
tion of hypercalcemia required treatment with praziquantel.
renal failure and Addison's disease can have similar electro-
Increased serum PTH rp was demonstrated in two dogs with
lyte abnormalities, these diseases can appear similar. If
schistosomiasis. Feline infectious peritonitis, tuberculosis.
hypercalcemia is present with the above laboratory abnor-
toxoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, and actinomyces are other
malities it favors hypoadrenocorticism. If the Na :K ratio is
granulomatous diseases associated with hypercalcemia infre-
<23 in an azotemic patient it favors hypoadrenocorticism.
although this lowered ratio may be seen in renal failure and
ated with" until studies confirm a mechanism.
uroabdomen.
Diagnosis is established by ruling out other causes of
hypercalcemia, by confirming the etiologic agent by serology
Vitamin D toxicity
and or cytology, and by response to treatment.
This usually produces hypercalcemia and normo- or hyper-
phosphatemia since vitamin D stimulates both calcium and
Young animals
phosphorus absorption from the GI tract and resorption
penduase p aay Ae shop unoa Apiden 'uno
from bone, without a direct phosphorus lowering effect on
hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. The increase is seen
the kidneys. The combination of hypercalcemia and hyper-
more frequently in giant breeds, but may occur in any breed.
phosphatemia can produce lethal soft tissue mineralization.
 The total serum calcium is seldom over 12mg/dL in young
Mineralization of muscles, tendons, heart, lungs, gastroin-
dogs and by 6 months of age the total serum calcium should
testinal tract, and blood vessels is expected and is the cause
be in the reference intervals for adult dogs. Serum concen-
 of death. Sources of vitamin D include dietary supplements.
trations of calcium and phosphorus that are slightly greater
rat poisons, and plants (Cestrum diurnum or day blooming
than reference intervals in young growing animals should
jasmine, Solanum malacoxylon, Trisetum flavescens). Plant tox-
be interpreted as normal for their age. This pattern is not 
icities are more common in herbivores. Rodenticides are
seen in kittens or foals.
more common in dogs and cats. Day blooming jasmine is a
house plant and has been reported to cause hypercalcemia
Idiopathic
in pets that eat it. Overzealous treatment of hypocalcemia
Idiopathic hypercalcemia is one of the more common causes 
with vitamin D and calcium products can cause hypercalce-
of hypercalcemia in cats and it may be on the rise. This
mia. This happens with some regularity in the postoperative
disorder is unique to cats. It has been suggested that the
treatment of hypocalcemia following removal of a parathy-
increased use of acidifying diets for the control of struvite
roid tumor. Production of one or more metabolites of vitamin
urolithiasis, since the early l990s, is a contributing factor.
D is involved in the pathogenesis of some cases of HCM and
Fractional excretion of calcium is increased and urolithiasis
granulomatous diseases (fungi. parasitic). Ingestion of a
(calcium oxalate or struvite) is expected in 50-75% of these
topical cream used to treat psoriasis in people, calcipotriene.
cats. Taken together, the data suggests that some susceptible
tacalcitol, or Dovonex is another source of vitamin D that
cats develop hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and calcium
has caused hypervitaminosis D in dogs. Calcipotriene is a
oxalate urolithiasis while on acidifying diets. However.
synthetic derivative of calcitrol that was used to treat osteo-
many cats on acidifying diets do not develop this syndrome.
porosis in people and it is not detected by assays for
or at least it is not recognized. Presence of calcium crystals
25-hydroxyvitamin D. Assays for vitamin D are available
in the urine should prompt consideration to measure serum
and include precursors or 1,25 di-hydroxycholecalciferol.
calcium. Diagnosis is established by ruling out other causes 
Most assays detect 25-hydroxylated forms of vitamin D2 or
of hypercalcemia and a test trial of steroids.
D3: consult the reference lab for sample handling. reference
Cats with this syndrome are normophosphatemic and
intervals, and interpretation guidelines.
hypercalcemic (total and ionized). Treatment with predni-
sone (5-12 mg/cat/day) seems to reverse the hypercalcemia.
Granulomatous diseases
Hypercalcemia may be increased for years in some cats with
Hypercalcemia has been associated with granulomatous dis-
or without clinical signs. FeLV and FIV are not causative.
eases caused by a variety of organisrms in dogs and cats.
Individuals do not believe it is caused by hyperparathyroid-
Blastomycosis is a fairly well known cause of hypercalcemia.
ism, because the concentrations of PTH are not increased
but very few dogs with blastomycosis are hypercalcemic.
Blastomycosis may involve bones. However, increased pro-
hypercalcemia temporarily. However, others could interpret
duction of vitamin D by macrophages in the granulomas is
the normal concentration of PTH as inappropriately high for
a more lilkely mechanism than direct osteolysis from granul-
the degree of hypercalcemia. Increased and decreased con-
567
SEcTloN IV Clinical Chemistry of Common Domestic Species
centrations of PTH rp are reported, but neither PTH rp nor
Delesalle C er al. (2005) Use of plasma ionized Ca levels and Ca
vitamin D is believed to be causative.Another possible
sa io sanaueied osouoid se saned asodan uonsqns
undocumented cause could be a congenital or acquired
and survival in colic horses. Ver Quarrerly 27: 158-72.
defect in the calcium-regulating receptor.
Doze JG er al. (2o08) Effects of intravenous administration of two
volumes of calcium solution on plasma ionized calcium concen-
tration and recovery from naturally occurring hypocalcemia in
Xylitoltoxicity
Jactating dairy cows. A.rVR 69: 1346-50.
This is reported naturally and experimentally in dogs, most
 of these describe severe hypoglycemia and or liver failure.
Eubig PA er al. (2005) Acute renal failure in dogs after the ingestion
-7661) saop 1t 1o uoen[eaa aaoads0nal e susei io sadea 1o
 a n s ae e d  
2002). J Ver Intern Med 19: 663-74.
hypokalemia, and hyper- and hypophosphatemia. Xylitol is
 Fabrick C er al. (20l0) Clinical features and outcome of Hererobilhar.
a sugar substitute found naturally in trees, vegetables, and
zia americana infection in dogs. J Ver Intern Med 24: 140-4.
fruits and is used as a sweetener in sugar free gum, candy.
 1g        
baked goods, desserts, oral care products, and in granulated
JAVMA 1127-9.
forms for baking. It is lower in calories than sugar and has
Feldman EC er al. (2005) Pretreatment clinical and laboratory fnd-
low impact on serum glucose, but it stimulates rapid insulin
War sses oiz usouayenedaday Areud ya shop u sau
release and causes severe hypoglycemia in dogs. Xylitol's
227: 756-61.
effects on glucose are clinically more important than
Fradkin JM et al. (2o0l) Elevated parathyroid hormone-related
u sss a sp oi u easea pue und
hypercalcemia.
Anim Hosp Assoc. 37: 349-55.
Goldstein RE et al. (2007) Inheritance, mode of inheritance and
Bone lesions
 Osteolytic bone lesions caused by bone metastases, hyper-
J Ver Interm Med 2l: 199-203.
trophic osteodystrophy, or osteomyelitis have been associ-
Gow AG er al. (2009) Calcium metabolism in eight dogs with hypo-
ated with hypercalcemia, but it is unlikely these are a true
adrenocorticism. J Small Anim Pracr 50: 426-30.
cause of hypercalcemia. Or at least the mechanism is more
Ham K et al. (2009) Validation of arapid parathyroid hormone assay
complicated then direct osteolysis by a focal lesion and
saop u auouou poueied jo iuauansau aaeadoeu pue
instead involves one or more humoral components. Any
increased release of calcium into the blood from bone
Ver Surg 38: 122-32
resorption around a localized lesion will be normalized by
Helman RG, Edwards WC (1997) Clinical features of blister beetle
renal excretion. Bone metastases associated with hypercal-
poisoning in equids: 70 cases (1983-1996). JAVMA 21l: 1018-21.
cemia are more likely due to production of tumor factors
that act locally to resorb bone and also stimulate renal
dogs. J Ver Inrern Med 23: 509-13.
Hurcombe SDA er al. (2o09) Calcium regulating hormones and
calcium reabsorption and phosphorus excretion. Dogs with
serum calcium and magnesium concentrations in septic and criti-
hypertrophic osteodystrophy may have increased serum
cally ill foals and their association with survival. J Ver Inrerm Med
calcium. It is likely due to their young age and not the infec-
23: 335-43.
tion in the bones, unless cytokines work locally and in the
Kimmel SE, Waddel LS, Michel KE (2000) Hypomagnesemia and
kidneys. These "causes" of hypercalcemia should be viewed
as "associated with" until additional studies confirm a
shire terriers:five cases {1992-1998). J Am Ver Med Assoc 217:
mechanism.
703-6.
Mazzaferro EM er al. (2004) Acute renal failure associated with
raisin or grape ingestion in 4 dogs. J Ver Emerg Crit Care 14:
Suggested reading
203-12.
 Messinger JS et al. (2009) Yonized hypercalcemia in dogs:retrospec-
Adler JA et al. (2007) Abnormalities of serum electrolyte concentra-
tive study of 109 cases (1998-2003). J Ver Inrermn Med 23:
tions in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. J Ver Interm Med 2l:
514-19.
1168-1173.
 Pesillo SA er al. (2002) Calcipotriene toxicosis in a dog successfully
Barber PJ, Elliot J (1996) Study of calcium homeostasis in feline
treated with pamidronate disodium. J Ver Emerg Crit Care 12:
hyperthyroidism. J Sm Anim Pracr 37: 575-82.
177-81.
Bush WW, Kimmel Se, Wosar MA et al. (200l) Secondary hypo-
Sharp CR er al. (2009) A comparison of total calcium, corrected
parathyroidism attributed to hypomagnesemia in a dog with
calcium, and ionized calcium concentrations as indicators of
protein-losing enteropathy. J Am Ver Med Assor 219: 1732-4.
Bolliger AP et al. (2002) Detection of parathyroid hormone-related
intensive care. J Ver Emerg Crit Care 19(6): 571-8.
protein in cats with humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy. Vér
 Toribio RE er al. (2003) Hysteresis and calcium set-point for the
Clin Patho! 3l: 3-8.
Crews LJ er al. (2007) Evaluation of total and ionized calcium status
and Comp Endocrinol 130(3): 279-88.
in dogs with blastomycosis: 38 cases (1997-2006). J Am Ver Med
Xia Z er al. (2009) Experimental acute toxicity of xylitol in dogs.
Assoc 231: 1545-9.
J Ver Pharmarol Ther 32: 465-9.
568
Clinical Chemistry of
Common Nondomestic
Mammals, Birds, Reptiles
Fish, and Amphibians
34
Chemical Chemistry of Mammals:
Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous
Species
Terry W. Campbell
Colorado State University
Blood biochemistry profiles are commonly used to assess the
health of nondomestic, mammalian patients. Biomedical
Sample collection and handling
research involves use of laboratory animals such as mice.
rats, and rabbits, resulting in a large amount of information
Blood samples for biochemical studies can be collected
concerning the interpretation of biochemical profiles in
using the same techniques as those described for hemato-
these species. Fewer clinical chemistry studies, however.
logic studies (see Chapter 18. Mammalian Hematology:
have been performed on other nondomestic mammals, such
Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species). Many
as ferrets, sugar gliders, and hedgehogs. In general, interpre.
 n o    d  s 
tation of clinical chemistry results in non domestic mammals
as little as 50μL of serum or plasma. Heparinized plasma
is the same as that described for domestic species.
is routinely used for clinical chemistry evaluations in
 Many variables, such as age. gender, hydration, and nutri-
small rodents such as mice, hamsters, and gerbils; because
tional status, affect biochemical test results. Environmental
collection of serum commonly results in hemolysis and
conditions such as photoperiod, temperature, and hus-
a larger sample volume can be obtained with plasma
bandry as well as the sampling and analytic methods and
than with serum. The aqueous form of lithium heparin
the instrumentation used are other sources of variation.
is the preferred anticoagulant for plasma biochemical
Sampling variables include restraint methods, type of anes-
analysis. As a general guideline, a blood sample volume
thetic used, time of day when sampled, anticoagulant used.
comprising 10% or less of the total-body blood volume (or
 site of sample collection, and sample processing and storage.
1 % of the body weight) can be safely taken from a healthy
A l6-l8-hour fast is required in rats to obtain nonlipemic
mammal.
plasma samples, whereas a l6-hour fast in rabbits results in
Hemolysis or prolonged contact between serum and
decreased plasma glucose and insulin concentrations but
blood cells produces changes in the analyte concentra-
increased glucagon and fatty acid concentrations.6.2 Release
tions. Increases in the potassium, phosphorus, LD, and
of epinephrine related to excitement of transportation and
bilirubin concentrations as well as decreases in the
 blood collection in rabbits results in increased plasma glucose
glucose concentration may be observed. Serum samples
and free fatty acid concentrations. Blood collected by cardio-
from guinea pigs have greater LD and g-glutamyltransferase
centesis may be contaminated with muscle enzymes such as
(GGT) activity compared with that in plasma samples
creatine kinase (CK), aspartate aminotransferase (AST).
produced by leakage of these enzymes from erythrocytes
lactate dehydrogenase (LD). and alanine aminotransferase
during the clotting process.224 In mice, serum CK
(ALT), which are found at high concentrations in cardiac
activity decreases with freezing. Because of the cryopre-
muscle. In rodents. plasma biochemistry results tend to vary
cipitation of some proteins in serum or plasma samples
in samples obtained from the orbital sinus compared with
from rats, protein concentrations may decrease during
freezing."
chemistry analyses performed on identical serum or plasma
 Plasma biochemical analyte reference intervals for common
samples often vary significantly among laboratories: thus.
small mammals are provided in Tables 34.1, 34.3, 34.5. and
published reference values exhibit considerable variation for
34.6. Tables 34.2 and 34.4 compare serum or plasma hormone
many analytes (Tables 34.1, 34.3, 34.5, and 34.6).
concentrations of rodents and rabbits, respectively.
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
571
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Table 34.1 Plasma biochemical values in rodents.
Mice
Rat
Hamster
 Gerbil
Guinea pig
Chin chilla
Glucose [ng/dL] 
196-278
114-143
65-144
89-95
73-183
74-163
60-160
47-137
60-125
60-120
 Urea nitrogen [mg/dL] 
21-26
16-19
14-30
22-25
18-31
12-22
14-27
17-30
9.0-31.5
10-25
Creatinine [mg/dL]
0.5
0.5-1.4
0.5-0.6
1.4
0.48-1.1
0.38-0.8
0.4-1.0
0.6-2.2
Uric acid [mg/dL]
1.3-2.8
1.3-5.1
Total protein [g/dL]
5.0-7.0
6.4-8.5
1.3-5.1
4.8-5.6
5.9-10.3
5.9-7.8
5.5-7.2
4.6-14.7
4.2-6.8
5-6
Albumin [g/dL]
3.0-4.0
4.1-5.4
3.2-4.3
2.4-2.7
2.5-4.8
3.3-4.6
2.0-4.2
1.8-5.8
2.1-3.9
2.5-4.2
Calcium [mg/dL] 
7.9-10.5
10.5-13.0
10.4-12.4
9.6-10.7
4.6-9.6
7.6-12.6
8.4-12.3
3.7-6.1
8.2-12.0
10-15
 Phosphorus [ng/dL]
5.6-9.2
5.0-13.0
5.0-8.0
一
5.0
5.2-9.4
5.3-8.4
4.0-8.2
3.7-11.2
3.0-7.6
4-8
Sodium [Eq/L]
138-186
143-150
128-145
122-125
143-164
142-150
124-147
143-147
120-152
130-155
Potassiumm [mmEq/L]
5.3-6.3
5.3-7.5
4.7-5.3
4.9-5.1
6.3-8.0
4.3-6.3
8'9-6'6
65-96
3.8-7.9
5.0-6.5
Chloride [mEq/L]
99-108
85-102
94-99
92-97
105-118
100-109
92-103
93-118
90-115
105-115
Cholesterol [mg/dL] 
36-100
94-237
59-103
44-138
65-148
90-141
16-43
40-100
Total bilirubin [mg/dL]
9:0-0
0.2-0.5
6'0-0
0.3-0.8
0.2-0.5
0.2-0.7
0.8-1.6
60-0
Alkaline phosphatase [U/L] 
66-262
70-132
8-202
一
66-74
43-71
40-191
6-14.2
55-108
3-12
Alanine amminotransferase [IU/L] 
40-189
26-37
28-107
39-45
44-87
 52-144
22-63
25-59
10-35
Aspartate amminotransferase [U/L]
77-383
40-53
53-202
46-48
101-214
54-192
43-134
一
26-68
15-45
Lactate dehydrogenase [U/L]
63-573
94-237
一
99E
225-275
134-360
一
Creatine kinase [IU/L] 
155
60E-9
469-1553
155
111-334
366-776
/
Top row of data in each column is compiled from the ranges of mean values without consideration of stain, age, gender, and method of blood 
collection as published in Loeb WF, Quirmby FW (eds.) (1989) The Clinical Chemistry of Laboratory Animais. New York, Pergamon Press, pp. 417-509.
Second row of data in each column is obtained from Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JW (eds.) (2003) Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents Clinical Medicine and
Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders. pp. 243 and 290.
hydration. Increases in plasma urea nitrogen and creatinine
Rodents
concentrations only occur when more than 75% of renal
function is compromised; therefore, these tests lack sensitiv-
Laboratory evaluation of the kidneys
ity for renal disease. Common causes of renal azotemia in
Laboratory evaluation of rodent kidneys is the same as that
rodents, especially mice, include amyloidosis, immune
for domestic mammals, and it involves evaluation of blood
complex diseases, and polycystic disease. Serum or plasma
parameters, such as urea nitrogen, creatinine, and electro-
d    s  
lytes, and urinalysis. The plasma urea nitrogen is influenced
diets because of increased nitrogen metabolism rather than
by diet, liver function, gastrointestinal absorption, and
renal disease. Age should be considered when evaluating
572
CHAPTER 34 Chemical Chemistry of Mammals: Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species
sapon ui sauooy ole aul jo suoeuasuon euseld z'te aa 
Rats
Mice
Hamsters
Guinea pigs
Triodothyronine [ng/dL] 
30-100
30-100
08-0E
20-60
Free triodothyronine [ng/dL]
一
一
0.20-0.32
[p,5n] auixouAul
3-7
3-7
3-7
2-4
Free thyroxine [μg/dL]
一
0.9-2.0
Thyroid-stimulating hormone [ng/rmL] 
400-600
300
300
40-100
Adrenocorticotropic hormone [pg/dL]
30-100
2.6-5.5
40a
23
Corticosterone [μg/dL] 
15-23d1-6e
gab [males] 40ab[fermales]
2.75[males]
5a[males] 13.5a[fermales] 
0.33§[females]
[np/6n] los!1o 
5-30
 Free cortisol [μg/dL]
0.6-5.8
Parathormone [pg/mL]
70-700[males] 0-400[fermales]
Calcitonin [pg/mL] 
200-500 [6-8 mo-old males] 
 450-1100[6-8 mo-old fermales]
400-900 [12-14 mo-old mmales]
 700-1800[12-14 mmo-old femmales]
1,25-dihydroxy-vitarnine D [pg/rmL]
72-86[males] 79-1 13[femmales]
a Average concentration.
bStart of dark period.
"End of dark period.
dMean maximmum value.
eMean minimum value.
plasma urea nitrogen in rodents; aged hamsters demonstrate
thereby providing a clean sample for those who are
increased plasma urea nitrogen concentrations. Other labo-
prepared to collect this urine. Cystocentesis eliminates
ratory abnormalities that may be associated with renal
much of the artifact associated with voided urine but may
disease are hyperphosphatemia, resulting from decreased
result in blood contamination. Urinalysis should be per-
glomerular filtration, and hypoproteinemia, resulting from
formed within 2 hours of collection; otherwise, urine may
glomerular disease and urinary protein loss.
be refrigerated at 4°℃ for as long as 48 hours. Refrigerated
y-Glutamyltransferase.
N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase,
urine should be warmed to room temperature before
and alkaline phosphatase (AP) have high tissue activity in
testing.
the kidney, and measurement of these enzymes in urine
The urine of normal rodents usually is yellow, but it may
may improve the sensitivity of clinical chemical testing for 
vary in both shade and transparency depending on the
renal disease in rodents. Testing of endogenous creatinine
 hydration status of the animal. Urinary pH is influenced by
clearance may provide a specific and sensitive test for
diet. Diets that are high in animal proteins contain high
decreased glomerular filtration before plasma urea nitrogen
concentrations of sulfates and phosphate precursors, which
and creatinine concentrations are increased.
produce more acid urine; cereal protein-based diets tend to
Urine may contain artifacts if proper attention is not
paid to the collection technique. The urine should be
have alkaline urine because of the bacterial conversion of
collected on a clean, dry surface. Without use of commer-
urea to ammonia. The urine pH is helpful in determining
cially available metabolism cages, urine commonly is con-
the acid-base status of the animal. Rodents suffering from
taminated with feces, food, hair, bedding, or drinking
catabolic conditions such as starvation, ketosis, or fever com-
water. Rodents often spontaneously urinate when handled,
monly have acidic urine.
573
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Table 34.3 Plasma biochemical values in rabbits.
Table 34.4 Plasma concentrations of the major hormones in rabbits.
a
b
 Triodothyronine [ng/dL]
130-143
Thyroxine [μg/dL]
1.7-2.4
Glucose [ng/dL]
89-144
75-155
Urea nitrogen [mg/dL]
14-23
13-29
 Thyroid-stimulating horrnone [μU/mL]
40-100
Creatinine [mg/dL] 
0.8-2.9
0.5-2.5
1.1-1.2
 Protein-bound iodine [nmol/L] 
400 [Adults] 
Uric acid [mg/dL] 
Total protein [g/dL] 
5.0-8.5
5.4-8.3
 Adrenocorticotropic hormone [pg/dL]
25a
Albumin [g/dL] 
t5-0'0
2.4-4.6
 Calcium [mg/dL]
13.0-15.0
5.6-12.5
Cortisol [μg/dL]
2.6-3.8[early morning]
Phosphorus [mg/dl]
5.6-9.2
4.0-6.9
 Aldosterone [ng/dL]
 20 [early morning] 503
Sodium [mEq/L] 
114-156
131-155
[late aftermoon]
 Potassium [mEq/L]
4.4-7.4
6'9-96
 Chloride [mEq/L]
89-120
92-112
Calcitonin [pg/mL] 
1125-1200
Cholesterol [mg/dL] 
22-69
10-80
1,25-dlihydroxy-vitarmine D [pg/mL]
27-47
Total bilirubin [mg/dL]
0-0.7
0-0.7
 Alkaline phosphatase [IU/L]
<120
4-16
 Average concentration.
Alanine amninotransferase [U/L] 
<100
48-80
Aspartate aminotransferase [U/L]
<100
14-113
Lactate dehydrogenase [IU/L]
<200
34-129
 Creatine kinase [IU/L]
<275
Data compiled from the ranges of mean values without
consideration of stain, age, gender, and mmethod of blood collction 
Table 34.5 Plasmma biochermical values in ferrets.
 as published in Loeb WF, Quimmby FW (eds.) (1989) 7he Clinical
Chemistry of Laboratory Animals. New York, Pergarmon Press, pp.
All ferretsa
Albino
Fitchb
417-509.
bData frorm Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JV (eds.) (2003) Ferrets,
Glucose [mg/dL] 
67-124
94-207
63-134
Rabbits, and Rodents Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis.
Urea nitrogen [mg/dL]
17-32
10-45
12-43
Saunders. p. 151.
 Creatinine [mg/dL] 
0.2-0.6
0.4-0.9
0.2-0.6
Total protein [g/dl] 
5.3-7.2
5.1-7.4
5.3-7.2
Albumin [g/dL] 
3.3-4.1
2.6-3.8
3.3-4.1
Calcium [mg/dL] 
8.5-11
8.0-11.8
8.6-10.5
 Phosphorus [mg/dL] 
3.3-7.8
4.0-9.1
5.6-8.7
Urine specific gravity and osmolality are used to evaluate
Sodiur [mmEq/L]
146-160
137-162
146-160
the ability of the kidneys to concentrate or dilute urine. A
 Potassium [mEq/L] 
3.7-5.4
4.5-7.7
4.3-5.3
water-deprivation test for detecting renal disease in rodents
Chloride [mEq/L]
112-129
106-125
102-121
Cholesterol [mg/dL] 
can be conducted by withholding water for 24 hours, after
60-220
64-296
119-209
which the urinary specific gravity is determined. Those
Total bilirubin [ng/dL]
E'0-0'0
<1.0
0-0.1
Total Coz [rnmol/L] 
17-23
16.5-28
16-28
animals that are unable to concentrate their urine to a spe-
Alkaline phosphatase [IU/L] 
30-120
9184
30-120
cifc gravity greater than l.030 either have significant renal
 Alanine arninotransferase [IU/L] 
30-100
82-287
78-149
disease with the inability to concentrate their urine or suffer
 Aspartate aminotransferase [IU/L]
15-40
28-120
57-248
from diabetes insipidus. The urine specific gravity value
 Creatine kinase [U/L] 
00E-09
一
obtained from a refractometer will be erroneous if the urine
contains significant quantities of glucose, protein, or other
pue Aoran Meyaa (tooz) (spa) 1e 1a v lesi woy eiee
metabolites that normally are not found in urine. Urine
Clinical Chemistry. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, p. 471.
osmolality is the definitive method for measuring the con-
bData from Quesenberry KE. Carpenter JW (eds.) (2003) Ferrets.
centrating ability of the kidneys: it depends on the number
Rabbits, and Rodents Clinical Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis.
of particles in solution and is not affected by the degree of
Saunders. p. 20
ionization or the mass of molecules and ions that are present.
The normal urine osmolality of rats and hamsters ranges
The urine of normal rodents may contain a trace amount
of glucose. Large amounts of ascorbic acid normally are
found in mouse urine and may interfere with urine chemical
574
CHAPTER 34 Chemical Chemistry of Mammals: Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species
mammals. Normal serum and plasma sodium concentrations
Table 34.6 Plasma biochemical values in sugar gliders and
in mice (174 ± 23mEq/L or mmol/L) tend to be slightly
hedgehogs.
greater than those reported for other mammals. Hyperna-
Hedgehogs
tremia resulting from neurogenic diabetes insipidus occurs 
Sugar gliders
as a hereditary disorder in some strains of rat. Nephrogenic
Glucose [mg/dL]
130-183
0E -/+68
diabetes insipidus, which usually is associated with renal
 Urea nitrogen [mg/dL] 
18-24
13-54
amyloidosis, frequently occurs in certain strains of mice
Creatinine [mg/dL] 
0.3-0.5
8:0-0
Total protein [g/dL] 
5.1-6.1
4.0-7.7
 abnormal retention of sodium in rats may cause hyperna-
Albunin [g/dL] 
3.5-4.3
1.8-4.2
tremia, which in turn results in myocarditis. Renal amyloi-
Calcium [mg/dL] 
6.9-8.4
5.2-11.3
dosis alters the renal tubular permeability to water, thereby
 Phosphorus [mg/dL]
3.8-4.4
2.4-12.0
resulting in hyperchloremia. Increased serum and plasma
Sodium [mEq/L]
135-145
120-165
phosphorus concentrations occur in younger rodents
Potassium [mEq/L] 
3.3-5.9
3.2-7.2
compared with concentrations in adults. Serum or plasma
Chloride [mEq/L]
92-128
magnesium concentrations increase in hamsters during
Cholesterol [rng/dL] 
86-189
hibernation.
Total biliubin [mg/dL] 
0.4-0.8
E'L-0
Alkaline phosphatase [IU/L]
8-92
 Alanine aminotransferase [IU/L]
50-106
16-134 
Laboratory evaluation of the liver
Aspartate amninotransferase [U/L]
46-179
8-137
Serum or plasma enzymes commonly used to detect liver
Lactate dehydrogenase [U/L]
57-820
disease in rodents include AP, GGT, AST, ALT, LD, and sor-
Creatine kinase [IU/L] 
210-589
333-1964
bitol dehydrogenase. Serum or plasma concentrations of
-Glutarmyl transferase [IU/L]
0-12
these enzymes increase with increased production, increased
release, or decreased clearance. Other biochemical tests to
Data from Quesenberry KE, Carpenter JV (eds.) (2003) Ferrets.
 detect liver disease in rodents include serum or plasma total
Rabbits, and Rodents Clinical Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis.
bilirubin, bile acid, and cholesterol concentrations.
Saunders, pp. 335 and 345.
Allkaline phosphatase is a membrane-bound enzyme with
highest activity in osteoblasts, biliary epithelium, and epi-
thelial cells of the kidneys and intestines. Young rodents
have higher plasma AP activity than adults because of osteo-
strips that use glucose oxidase, thus resulting in a false-
blastic activity, and male rats tend to have higher plasma AP
negative glucose determination.
activities than female rats. Hepatic AP of rodents is heat
Proteinuria is common in normal mice and rats. The semi
labile at 56°C and sensitive to levamisole inhibition.′ Signifi-
quantitative urine chemical strips detect large-molecular-
cant increases in serum or plasma AP activity occur in
weight proteins such as albumin, but not the low-molecular-
rodents with hepatic cholestasis. Ligation of the bile duct in
weight glycoproteins of renal origin that are found in the
rats produces elevation of both hepatic and intestinal AP
urine of rodents. The normal proteinuria of rodents is associ-
isoenzymes. Plasma or serum AP activity is a more sensitive
ated with a variety of urinary proteins, which include a- and
test than bilirubin or ALT for detection of hepatic disease in
b-globulins, uromucoid protein, and prealbumin. The degree
hamsters.1i2 Drugs that increase AP synthesis and plasma
of proteinuria increases with age, and male mice tend to be
activity in rats include cortisol, phenobarbital, and theophyl-
 more proteinuric than female mice.
line." Increased plasma AP activity occurs in zinc- and
 Rodent urine sediment normally contains fewer than five
 manganese-deficient guinea pigs.24
erythrocytes and leukocytes per high-power field. Increases
 Plasma GGT activity is significantly increased in hamsters
in the concentration of these cells are suggestive of urinary
and rats with experimentally induced hepatic injury result-
tract inflammation, calculi, or neoplasia. If urinary casts
ing in cholestasis. Guinea pigs have higher hepatic GGT
     
activity than rats and demonstrate higher plasma GGT activi-
present, cells are likely of renal origin, whereas increased
ties with cholestasis. Serum GGT activity is increased in
numbers of cells without casts are suggestive of lower
guinea pigs after in vitro blood clot formation, which can be
urinary tract inflammation, such as cystitis and urethritis.
avoided with use of plasma for enzyme testing. The kidneys
Interpretation of rodent urine sediment findings is the same
of rodents have the highest GGT activity. but the enzyme is
as that described for domestic mammals.
nondetectable in the plasma or serum of most rodents. The
kidneys of rats have 200-300-fold the GGT activity of the
Electrolytes and acid-base
liver.
Interpretation of serum or plasma electrolyte and acid-base
Aspartate aminotransferase is a mitochondrial and cyto-
changes in rodents is the same as that described in domestic
solic enzyme with high activity in the liver, heart, skeletal
575
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
muscle, and kidney and low activity in the intestines, brain,
than the liver is the primary site of cholesterol production.22
lung. and testes. Increases in plasma or serum AST activity
Normal plasma cholesterol concentration (1l2-2l0mg/dL
usually are associated with hepatic, cardiac muscle, or skel-
or 2.90-5.43mmol/L) of hamsters is higher than that of
etal muscle injury.
other rodents and decreases during short photoperiods but
 In rats and mice, the activity of ALT, which is a cytosolic
 increases with cold temperatures.6.11
and mitochondrial isoenzyme, is highest in the liver. The
ratio of the cytosolic to mitochondrial ALT isoenzymes in the
Laboratory evaluation of proteins
liver and heart muscle of rats is 5:l and 50:l, respectively.
The normal plasma protein concentration in mice varies
In rodents, the intestines, kidneys, heart, skeletal muscle,
among strains. In mice, hyperproteinemia often is associated
brain, skin, and pancreas also have ALT activiry. In guinea
with severe dehydration and often occurs with loss of
pigs. ALT activity in the heart is almost equal to that in the
urinary protein from renal disease. The major classes of
liver. Plasma and serum ALT activity increases with hepato-
  a sn  n d ro 
cellular damage in most rodents, and the enzyme appears to
electrophoresis. The major globulins of rats are c,- and β-
be liver specific in rats and mice. Plasma ALT, however, does
globulins, with lower concentrations of c- and Y-globulins.
not appear to have diagnostic value for hepatic disease in
In hamsters, albumin concentrations decrease during the
guinea pigs. which have only half the hepatic ALT activity
first year of life, Cz-globulins increase during the frst 6
of rats and mice. Increases in serum ALT activity correlate
months of age. and β-globulins decrease at 8 weeks of
with the degree of hepatic necrosis in rats. A threefold
age.3611l Fibrinogen migrates into the Y-globulin peaks in
increase in plasma ALT activity occurs in mice that are
hamster protein electrophoretic scans. Amyloidosis is a
restrained by holding the body compared with those that are
 s h n o s no  
restrained by the tail.
results in hypoalbuminemia and hyperglobulinemia.
Lactate dehydrogenase is a cytosolic enzyme with the
highest activity in skeletal muscle, followed by cardiac
Laboratory evaluation of glucose metabolism
muscle, liver, kidney, and intestines, respectively. In the
Cells must be quickly separated from the serum or plasma
mouse, LD is characterized by five isoenzymes: LD-l and
of rodents, or fluoride added to the collection tube, to
LD-2 are found in cardiac muscle, LD-5 in the liver and
prevent decreased glucose concentration because of in vitro
skeletal muscle, and LD-3 in most other tissues. Serum or
glycolysis. The plasma glucose concentration in rats and
plasma LD activity elevates with hepatocellular disease in
mice decreases with age, with an average decrease of 2 mg/
rodents; however, normal values are highly variable and
dL per month in the latter.
depend on the analytic method used.
Many strains of mice are used as animal models for dia-
 Sorbitol dehydrogenase is a cytosolic enzyme that is found
 betes mellitus; therefore, glucose tolerance tests have been
in the liver, kidney, and seminal vesicles of mice but is liver
developed for mice.? A l-hour glucose tolerance test com-
specific in rats. Increases in serum or plasma sorbitol dehy-
pares the preinjection plasma glucose concentration to the
drogenase activity occurs with hepatic disease in rodents and
 glucose concentration obtained 1 hour after an intra perito-
is a more sensitive test than ALT for detection of hepatocel-
neal injection of glucose at a dose of 2 mg/g body weight. A
lular disease in rats. Sorbitol dehydrogenase assays usually
4-hour oral glucose tolerance test compares the baseline
are not performed by veterinary laboratories.
plasma glucose concentration with a plasma glucose concen-
Serum and plasma total bilirubin concentration increases
tration obtained 4 hours after the oral administration of a
in rodents with primary hepatobiliary disease, extra hepatic
10% glucose solution at a dose of l0 mL/kg. Certain strains
biliary obstruction, or hemolysis. Increases in plasma or
of rodents, such as ob/ob obese mice, Zucker fatty rat (fa/
serum total bilirubin concentration should be evaluated by
fa). and the LA/N corpulent rat, are used as animal models
determining the erythrocyte mass and performing other
for noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. The Chinese
tests that evaluate the liver or biliary system.
hamster and Wistar BB rat are animal models for insulin-
The total serum and plasma bile acid concentration is a
dependent diabetes mellitus. Insulin-dependent diabetes
sensitive and specific test for hepatobiliary disease and dis-
may result in guinea pigs from an infectious agent that
orders of the enterohepatic circulation. Plasma bile acid
causes fatty degeneration of the pancreas and affects both
concentration has an excellent potential for detecting hepa-
exocrine and endocrine pancreatic functions; affected guinea
tobiliary disease in rodents, especially rats with a high con-
pigs have hyperglycemia, glucosuria, ketonuria, and beta-
centration of circulating bile acids.
cell hypoplasia. Immunoassays for the determination of
The plasma cholesterol concentration may increase in
insulin in rats can be calibrated to measure plasma insulin
rodents with extrahepatic biliary obstruction. Normal plasma
in mice, but guinea pig insulin is immunologically different
cholesterol concentration varies between strains of mice.
and cannot be determined using rat antibodies. Rat glucagon
Hypercholesterolemia often is associated with fatty infiltra-
is measured using human immunoassay techniques:
tion of many tissues. In guinea pigs. the intestine, rather
however, guinea pig glucagon, like insulin, is immunologi-
576
CHAPTER 34 Chemical Chemistry of Mammals: Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species
cally different and cannot be determined with human
Corticosterone, which is the primary glucocorticoid in the
antibodies.
plasma of mice and rats, exhibits a marked diurnal variation
that is affected by the light cycle. In mice, maximum plasma
Laboratory detection of muscle injury
corticosterone concentrations occur at the start of the dark
period and minimum concentrations at the end of the dark
Creatine kinase is a dimeric cytosolic enzyme that is com-
period. Male mice have lower plasma corticosterone concen-
posed of M and B subunits. Skeletal muscle contains MM
trations compared with female mice. Maximum plasma cor-
subunits, and cardiac muscle contains MM, MB, and BB
ticosterone concentrations occur late during the light period
subunits. Brain contains BB subunits. As in domestic
in rats, and minimum concentrations occur during the end
mammals. plasma CK activity is a useful marker for muscle
of the dark period. In rats, approximately 80% of plasma
injury in rodents. Nutritional myopathies, such as those
corticosterone is bound to transcortin and 1o% to albumin.
resulting from hypovitaminosis E and selenium deficiency.
thereby leaving l0% or less in the free, unbound state. Both
cause increased plasma CK activity in rats and mice.
corticosterone and cortisol are found in the plasma of normal
hamsters. The total plasma glucocorticoid concentration 5.5
Laboratory evaluation of endocrine disorders
a    r a n   s
The major hormones of rodents are secreted into the periph-
1.8 μg/dL, with an average corticosterone:cortisol ratio of
eral blood in a circadian rhythm that may vary among
3.5. The plasma corticosterone concentration is greater
species. Hormonal secretion also is influenced by environ-
in male hamsters than in female hamsters. Cortisol is the
mental factors, such as light-dark cycle. An ultradian rhythm.
primary glucocorticoid in the plasma of normal guinea pigs.
in which hormones are secreted in an episodic or pulsatile
Guinea pigs demonstrate maximum plasma cortisol concen-
manner with a periodicity of less than 24 hours, can be
trations late in the light period and, again, late in the dark
superimposed on the normal circadian secretion of a
hormone. Suggested ranges for the major plasma hormones
light period and, again, during the middle of the dark period.
in rodents are provided in Table 34.2.
The stress of restraint or removal of a cagemate significantly
 Normal male rats have higher plasma thyroid-stimulating
increases plasma glucocorticoid concentrations. A twofold
hormone (TSH) concentrations with use of reference
increase in plasma corticosterone concentration occurs in
preparation-l standard from the National Hormone and
rats with 2 minutes of restraint, and a l2-fold increase
Pituitary Program compared with normal female rats. Plasma
results after 20 minutes of restraint.
TSH concentrations of normal female rats peak at the onset
In rodents. plasma concentrations of the calcium-
of the light cycle. Mice and hamsters have lower normal
regulating hormones parathormone, calcitonin, and 1,25-
plasma TsH concentrations compared with rats (according
dihydroxyvitamin D, are influenced by dietary calcium, age.
to the same assay method used for rats). A bioassay method
gender, photoperiod, and strain. Using radio immunoassay
using radio-labeled iodine also can be used to obtain plasma
techniques, the normal plasma parathormone concentration
TSH concentrations in rodents.
in male rats tends to be greater than that in female rats.
Plasma or serum thyroxine (T4) and triodothyronine (T,)
Normal plasma calcitonin concentrations of rats are
concentrations in rodents can be measured by radio immu-
extremely variable because of age, stage of light cycle, strain,
noassay. Transport proteins and binding affinity for Ta and
and gender. Plasma calcitonin concentrations also are
T, vary among species. In rats and mice, approximately 80%
influenced by the stage of estrus in females, in which
of the bound T, and Tq are bound to albumin and 20% to
maximum concentrations occur during proestrus. Six- to
T-binding prealbumin. Approximately 0.05% of plasma T4
eight-month-old male Wistar rats have lower plasma calci-
and 0.25% of T, in rats is the free, physiologically active
tonin concentrations compared with 12-14-month-old
form. Normal plasma total Tq and T, concentrations in rats
Wistar rats. Male Wistar rats also have lower plasma calci-
and mice vary between different strains but generally range
tonin concentrations than female rats. Plasma concentra-
between 3 and 7μg/dL and 30 and 100 ng/dL, respectively.
tions of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D vary in rats with strain.
Plasma T and T, concentrations exhibit a diurnal rhythm,
gender, and dietary calcium intake. Normal male Wistar rats
in which peak concentrations occur during the light phase
have lower plasma 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D concentrations
and minimum concentrations during the dark phase.
than females.
Normal plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH}
concentrations in rodents have been determined using
either radioimmunoassay or bioassay techniques. The
Rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus)
plasma ACTH concentration in normal mice exhibits a
normal circadian rhythm, in which minimal concentrations
Laboratory evaluation of the kidneys
occur during the morning and peak concentrations during
Laboratory evaluation of the kidneys in rabbits is the same
the afternoon.
as that for rodents and domestic mammals. Plasma urea
577
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
nitrogen and creatinine commonly are used as markers for
have high LD activity, hemolysis may result in high plasma
renal function in rabbits. The normal plasma urea nitrogen
LD activity. The plasma LD activity can be used to detect
of rabbits is influenced by breed, strain, and gender. Protein
liver disease in rabbits, but because of its wide tissue distri-
catabolism associated with high dietary protein intake, vig-
bution and the effect of handling and hemolysis on plasma
orous exercise, or disease increases plasma urea nitrogen
activity, it is not commonly used. Plasma glutamate dehy-
concentration. The time of day when the blood sample is
drogenase activity (range, 5.5-7.0 IU/L, mmol/L), although
talken also influences the plasma urea nitrogen concentra-
tion in rabbits, in which peak concentrations occur between
useful in the evaluation of hepatocellular injury in rabbits.
4.00 and 8.00 pm. Plasma urea nitrogen and creatinine are
Normal plasma AP activity of rabbits varies with age, breed.
insensitive tests for renal disease in rabbits, however, requir-
and strain.
ing a 50-75% loss of function before plasma concentrations
Rabbits are unique in having three AP isoenzymes. Rabbits
increase. Renal failure in rabbits is often associated with
have an intestinal and two liver/kidney forms, compared
increased plasma BUN, creatinine, calcium, phosphorus, and
with the intestinal and liver/kidney/bone forms found in
potassium concentrations. Renal failure rabbits may also
mammals other than primates. The predominant liver/
exhibit isosthenuria and depending upon the cause (i.e.
kidney isoenzyme of rabbits is similar to the intestinal form
nephritis) may exhibit proteinuria, ketonuria, pyuria, and
and the minor liver/kidney isoenzyme to the liver/kidney/
urinary cast formation.
 bone isoenzyme of other mammals. The predominant liver
AP isoenzyme is not inhibited by levamisole or heating to
56°F, as the hepatic AP isoenzyme of other mammals is. The
Electrolytes and acid-base
The normal plasma calcium concentration of 13-l5mg/dL
plasma GGT activity of normal rabbits is less than 8IU/L
(mmol/ L), is derived primarily from bile duct epithelial cells.
(3.24-3.74mmol/L) of rabbits is higher than that of most
     s 
other mammals. The mean urinary fractional calcium excre-
obstru ction.
tion of rabbits is approximately 45%, compared with less
 Rabbit bile contains approximately 7o% biliverdin and
than 2% in other mammals. Normal plasma electrolyte con-
30% bilirubin, of which 90% is conjugated as a mono con-
centrations of rabbits vary with the breed and strain. Normal
jugate. Normal rabbit plasma lacks biliverdin, however, and
plasma magnesium concentrations of most rabbits are
the normal bilirubin concentra tion is low. A marked increase
between 2.0 and 4.5mg/dL. The serum iron- and total iron-
binding capacity of normal rabbits vary with the time of day
in plasma bilirubin concentration is expected in rabbits with
biliary obstruction.
when the blood was collected, with the lowest concentra-
The normal plasma cholesterol concentration of rabbits
tions occurring at 8:00 AM and the highest at 8:00 PM.
Serum iron concentrations of normal rabbits range between
varies with age, breed, strain, and gender. At birth, the
165 and 250 μg/dL (29.6-44.8 μmol/L).16
adults, increases by 25 days of age, and then returns to the
adult concentrations by 60-80 days of age. Normal adult
Laboratory evaluation of the liver
male rabbits have twice the plasma cholesterol concentra-
 Plasma enzymes used to detect liver disease in rabbits include
tion of adult female rabbits. A diurnal variation in plasma
ALT, AST, LD, glutamate dehydrogenase, AP, and GGT. In
cholesterol occurs as well, with peak concentrations being
rabbits, ALT activity is equal in the liver and cardiac muscle;
seen between 4:00 and 8:00 PM. The plasma cholesterol
however, increased plasma ALT activity is considered to be
P      
a specific indicator of liver disease in rabbits. The degree of
biliary obstruction. Rabbits are used extensively as animal
hepatic necrosis correlates positively with the increase in
models for cholesterol metabolism studies because of their
plasma ALT activity. Interestingly. the rabbit liver ALT activ-
ability to rapidly develop cholesterolemia with high-
ity is less than half that of the dog. Significant AST activity
cholesterol diets. Daily feeding of l g of cholesterol increases
occurs in the liver, heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pan-
the serum cholesterol concentration to greater than 10o0 mg/
 creas of rabbits. Therefore, increases in plasma AST activity
dL. The Watanabe heritable hyperlipemic rabbit, which pri-
are suggestive of injury to one or more of these tissues.
marily exhibits low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, is
Increases in plasma AST activity may be associated with
an animal model for familial hypercholesterolemia in
cardiac or skeletal muscle injury during blood collection by
humans. The normal serum lipoprotein distributions of
cardiocentesis or use of restraint methods that cause exer-
 s- t  s ae ie
tion. Lactate dehydrogenase activity is present in a wide
variety of tissues, with each demonstrating a different iso-
lesterol; 9-15% pre- or intermediate-density lipoprotein or
enzyme composition that corresponds with isoenzymes 1
very LDL (VLDL): and 30-42% LDL. High-cholesterol diets
through 5 in humans. Isoenzyme LD-1 and LD-2 predomi
fed to rabbits lead to a 20-40-fold increase in VLDL and a
nate in the liver and skeletal muscle. Because erythrocytes
4-5-fold increase in LDL.
578
CHAPTER 34 Chemical Chemistry of Mammals: Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species
Liver function tests that evaluate plasma disappearance
puncture also contains CK-MB activity. Plasma CK activity.
and biliary excretion of dyes, such as sulfobromophthalein
primarily the CK-MM isoenzyme, is a rapid, sensitive, and
(BSP) and indocyanine green (ICG), have been character-
specific indicator of muscle disease in rabbits, and it increases
ized for rabbits. The overall rate of BSP clearance for rabbits
i a   i    i 
 %  a u x d ug'I e  aq 
Nutritional-related myopathies, such as those caused by
the BSP is excreted in the conjugated form. Intravenous
hypovitaminosis  E and selenium deficiency. result in
BSP dosages of 30, 60, and 120 mg/kg result in 32-minute
increased plasma CK activity.
 plasma concentrations of 1, 2, and 20 mg/dL, respectively.14 
Indocyanine green is excreted in the bile in the unconju-
Laboratory evaluation of endocrine disorders
gated form. Rabbits have a curvilinear plasma ICG clearance
Laboratory evaluation of endocrine disorders in rabbits
curve, with a greater capacity to remove ICG from the cir-
follows the same methods as that in rodents and domestic
culation than either dogs or rats. Rabbits that are given
mammals. The TsH concentration in rabbit serum can be
intravenous ICG dosages of 8, 16, and 32 mg/kg demonstrate
obtained using a bioassay method that measures the per-
disappearance rates of 46%, 20%. and 10% per minute.
centage increase in blood levels of radiolabeled iodine.
respectively.'6
Serum Ta and T, concentrations from normal rabbits are
listed in Table 34.4. The serum protein-bound iodine con-
Laboratory evaluation of proteins
centration, as an indicator of thyroid function in rabbits.
The normal plasma total protein concentration in rabbits
increases by 20 days of age before decreasing to adult con-
centrations by 60 days of age. The serum protein-bound
40-60% of the total plasma protein is albumin. The normal
iodine concentration varies with strain, gender, and time of
protein electrophoretic components of rabbit serum also
day. The plasma ACTH concentration of rabbits as deter-
include 5-10% ℃,-globulin, 5-10% C-globulin, 5-15% β-
mined by bioassay is subject to circadian variation. The
globulin, and 5-15% Yglobulin. The normal albumin to
major plasma glucocorticoid of rabbits is cortisol. Evidence
globulin ratio ranges between 0.5 and 1.2. Female rabbits
is suggestive that genetics and circadian rhythms influence
tend to have higher plasma albumin concentrations than
the plasma aldosterone concentration of rabbits, but little
male rabbits. Severe renal and hepatic diseases are respon-
information is available regarding the plasma concentration
sible for most disorders that result in hypoproteinemia and
of parathyroid hormone in rabbits.
hypoalbuminemia in rabbits. Hyperproteinemia commonly
occurs with dehydration, shock, and hyperthermia.
Ferrets (Mustelus putorius furo)
Laboratory evaluation of glucose metabolism
The normal plasma glucose concentration of rabbits is influ-
Laboratory evaluation of the kidneys
enced by genetics, age. and diet. Pre- and postprandial
Laboratory evaluation of renal function in ferrets involves
plasma glucose variation occurs, in which the lowest plasma
blood biochemical tests, such as plasma urea nitrogen, cre-
glucose concentrations are found 1 hour before feeding and
atinine, protein, bicarbonate, and electrolyte concentrations.
the highest 3 hours after a meal. Healthy rabbits can main-
and urinalysis. Interpretive considerations for the biochemi-
cal tests used to evaluate the kidneys are the same as those
periods of fasting (e.g., <l6 hours). Extreme hyperglycemia
in domestic carnivorous mammals such as cats and dogs.
occurs with diabetes mellitus. Hyperglycemia and increased
In normal and azotemic ferrets, the plasma creatinine con-
plasma urea nitrogen concentration occur with the increased
centration is lower than that in dogs and cats. The mean
protein catabolism associated with hyperthermia. Hypergly-
plasma creatine concentration of healthy ferrets is 0.4-
cemia resulting from glycogenolysis because of stress occurs
0.6 mg/dL (35.4-53.0 μmol/L) with a range of 0.2-0.9mg/dL
      n  
(17.7-79.6μmol/L) . As a result, a moderate increase in the
digestive tract disorder of the rabbit causes anorexia, and
plasma creatinine concentration (i.e. 1-2mg/dL or 88.4
when glycogen stores become depleted, the rabbit develops
176.8 μmol/L) in a ferret is significant and suggestive of renal
hypoglycemia.
disease.'3 Insulin and exogenous creatinine clearance are
sensitive tests for measuring glomerular filtration in ferrets;
Laboratory detection of muscle injury
however, delayed clearance may occur before significant
Laboratory detection of muscle injury in rabbits follows the
increases in plasma urea nitrogen or
creatinine
same methods as that in rodents and domestic mammals, in
con centra tions.
which plasma CK, AST, and LD activities are sensitive to
muscle injury. Blood collected by cardiocentesis contains
Electrolytes and acid-base
CK-MB isoenzyme activity that is not found in serum col-
Interpretations of plasma electrolyte and acid-base distur-
lected from the ear vein. Blood collected by jugular veni-
bances in ferrets are the same as those in dogs and cats.
579
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Disorders that commonly result in electrolyte disturbances
in which AIGR values greater than 30 are suggestive of
mia in ferrets include delayed separation of plasma from
thyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, and hypercalcitonism,
erythrocytes, starvation, chronic hepatic disease, septicemia.
have been poorly documented in ferrets.
and endotoxemia.
Other than a postprandial increase in plasma glucose con-
Laboratory evaluation of the liver
centration, hyperglycemia in ferrets may result from gluco
Evaluation of the livers in ferrets by laboratory testing is the
corticoid excess (e.g., stress induced, exogenous corticoids.
same as that for those in dogs and cats. The ferret liver has
and hyperadrenocorticism), epinephrine release related to
3-10-fold more ALT activity than any other tissue, and the
exertion, and diabetes mellitus. Diabetes mellitus in ferrets
plasma ALT activity is a sensitive and specific test for hepa-
usually is iatrogenic and associated with surgical removal of
tocellular disease in ferrets. Ferrets with hepatocellular
 pancreatic insulin-secreting neoplasms or with drugs. such
disease commonly have increased AST and LD activities as
as megestrol acetate, that affect insulin production and
well. Those with cholestasis likely have increased plasma AP
secretion.
and GGT activities. Ferrets rarely become icteric or have
plasma bilirubin concentrations greater than 2.0mg/dL,
Laboratory detection of muscle injury
even when hepatobiliary disease is severe.$.13
Detection of muscle injury in ferrets follows the same
methods as those described in dogs and cats. Increases in the
Laboratory evaluation of proteins
nonspecific plasma enzymes AST and LD and in the specific
      
muscle enzyme CK are to be expected with muscle injury.
ferrets are the same as those in dogs and cats. Ferrets with
Aleutian disease typically demonstrate hypoalbuminemia
Laboratory evaluation of endocrine disorders
and hyperglobulinemia, in which more than 20% of the
The mean basal plasma Ta concentration as reported for
total protein is Y-globulins.13
ferrets ranges between 0.99 and 2.63μg/dL (12.7-
33.8nmol/L)." A thyroid function test using 1IU of TSH
Laboratory evaluation of glucose metabolism
given intravenously to a ferret and measuring changes
A high incidence of insulin-secreting pancreatic neoplasms
in the plasma Ta concentration is preferable to use of
(i.e., insulinomas) resulting in hypoglycemia occurs among
thyrotropin-releasing hormone and measuring changes in
domestic ferrets in North America. The normal plasma
the plasma T, concentration. The plasma Tq concentration
glucose concentration of ferrets varies with the genetic type.
increases significantly as early as 2 hours after TSH stimula-
A 4-5-hour fasting plasma glucose level often is used to
tion in normal ferrets, whereas no increase in the plasma T;
screen ferrets for insulinomas. Fasting plasma glucose con-
concentration is observed. Plasma T concentration should
centrations less than 60 mg/dL (3.33mmol/L) are supportive
 at least double after TSH stimulation; failure to do so is sug-
of a presumptive diagnosis of insulinoma, whereas concen-
gestive of hypothyroidism.
trations between 60 and 90mg/dL (3.33-5.0 mmol/L) merely
Cortisol is the predominant circulating glucocorticoid in
are suggestive of an insulinoma. Concentrations greater
ferrets. The mean basal plasma cortisol concentration as
than 90 mg/dL (5.0 mmol/L) usually are considered to be
reported for ferrets ranges between 0.45 and 2.13μg/dL
noreactive insulin and the insulin:glucose ratio have been
tion of ACTH at a dose of 0.5-1.0mg/kg to a normal ferret
reported as being 4.6-43.3 μU/mL (SI units, 33-311 pmol/L)
results in a 3-4-fold increase in plasma cortisol by 30 minutes
and 3.6-34.1 μUmg (SI units, 4.6-44.2 pmol/mmol), respec-
that persists for as long as l hour. A threefold decrease in
tively.'" To compare immunoreactive insulin and the
plasma cortisol concentration occurs in normal ferrets after
insulin:glucose ratio results from other laboratories using
intravenous injection of 0.2mg of dexamethasone. This
different radioimmunoassay kits to these reference intervals.
dexamethasone suppression continues even after 5 hours.
however, one must validate the results by demonstrating a
when plasma cortisol concentrations demonstrate a 4-5-fold
high correlation between the two assay methods. Although
decrease.
       
 Domestic ferrets in North America experience a high inci-
 glucose concentration provides the most reliable method for
dence of adrenal gland neoplasms that produce a number of
establishing a strong presumptive diagnosis for insulinoma
hormones. Excessive production of estradiol is a common
in the ferret, calculation of an amended insulin:glucose ratio
occurrence with adrenal gland neoplasms of ferrets, but
(AIGR) may aid in establishing the diagnosis of hyperinsu-
excessive cortisol production also can occur. The ACTH stim-
linism where
ulation and dexamethasone suppression tests have not been
useful in establishing the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism
AIGR = insulin (μU/mL)×100/fasting glucose (mg/dL)- 30
associated with adrenal neoplasia in domestic ferrets.
580
CHAPTER 34 Chemical Chemistry of Mammals: Laboratory Animals and Miscellaneous Species
8. Fox JG (ed.) (1998) Biology and Diseases of the Ferrert, 2nd ed.
Less common small mammal pets
Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins.
9. Harkmess JE, Wagner JE (1995) The Biology and Medicine of
African hedgehogs ( Atelerix aibiventris) and sugar gliders ( Pef-
Rabbirs and Rodenrs, 4th ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins.
1 0. Heard DJ, Collins B, Chen DL, et al. (l990) Thyroid and adrenal
aurus breviceps) are often presented for veterinary care and
function test in adult male ferrets. Am J Ver Res 5l: 33-5.
 blood is often sampled for biochermical testing.z.17 Little is
11. Hoffman, RA, Robinson PE, Magalhaes H (eds.) (1968) The
 known about interpretation of plasma biochemical testing
Golden Hamster:Its Biology and Use in Medical Research. Ames, Iowa
in these omnivorous animals; therefore, results are inter-
State University Pre ss.
preted in the same manner as domestic nonherbivorous
  s       
mammals.
berry KE, Carpenter JW (eds.). Ferrers, Rabbits, and Rodenrs Clini-
Blood for plasma biochemical evaluation can be collected
tal Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders, pp.
from hedgehogs and sugar gliders by puncture of the jugular
339-53.
vein or cranial vena cava. Both structures cannot be visual-
13. Kawasaki TA {1 994) Normal parameters and laboratory inter-
ized; however, knowledge of their anatomical location
pretation of disease states in the domestic ferret. Semin Avian
should guide one's approach. Jugular venipuncture is per-
Exoric Per Med 3: 40-7.
 s     (   
formed by inserting a small gauge needle (i.e., 25 gauge) on
rabbits. In: Kaneko J (ed.), Clinical Chemisrry of Domesric Animals.
the ventral aspect of the neck midway between the point of
San Diego: Academic Press, p. 869.
the shoulder and the ramus of the mandible avoiding the
15. Mann FA, Stockham SL, Freeman MB, et al. (1993) Reference
trachea and esophagus. Puncture of the cranial vena cava is
 intervals for insulin concentrations and insulin:glu cose ratios in
performed by inserting the needle at the thoracic inlet
the serum of ferrets. J Small Exoric Anim Med 2: 79-83.
(sternal notch) using a 30 degree angle and pointing the
16. Manning PJ, Ringer DH, Newcomer CE (eds.) (1994) The Biology
needle in the direction of the opposite hip.
of the Laboratory Rabbit. San Diego: Academic Press.
17. Ness RD, Booth R (2003) Sugar gliders. In Quesenberry KE.
Carpenter JW (eds.), Ferrers, Rabbits, and Rodents Clinical Medicine
and Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis, Saunders, pp. 330-8.
References
18. Rosenthal KL, Peterson ME, Quesenberry KE (1993) Evaluation
 of plasma cortisol and corticosterone responses to synthetic
1. Baker HJ, Lindsey JR, Weisbroth SH (eds.) (1979) The Laboratory
adrenocorticotropic hormone administration in ferrets. Am J Vet
Rat. Vol 1: Biology and Diseases. New York: Academic Press.
Res 54: 29-31
2. Coleman D (1982) Diabetes-obesity syndromes. In: Foster HL,
19. Seetharam S, Sussman NL, Komoda T, et al. (1986) The mecha-
nism of elevated alkaline phosphatase activity after bile duct
York: Academic Press, 4, pp. 126-32.
ligation in the rat. Heparology 6: 374-80.
3. Dent NJ (1977) The use of the Syrian hamster to establish its
 20. Suber RL, Kodell RL (1985) The effect of three phlebotomy
clinical chemistry and hematology profle. In: Duncan WA.
techniques on hematological and clinical chemical evaluation 
Leonard BJ (eds.), Clinical Toxicology, XVIll. Amsterdam-Oxford:
in Sprague-Dawley rats. Ver Clin Parho! 14: 23-30.
Excerpta Medica, pp. 321-3.
21. Van Hoosier GL, Ladiges WC (1984) Biology and diseases of
4. Esteves J1, Marini RP, Ryden EB, er al. (l994) Estimation of
hamsters. In: Fox JG, Cohen BJ, Loew FM (eds) (1984) Labora-
glomerular filtration rate and evaluation of renal function in
tory Animal Medicine, American College of Laboratory Animal
ferrets (Mustela putorius furo). Am J Ver Res 55: 166-72.
Medicine series. New York: Academic Press, pp. 123-47.
5. Falk HB, Schroer RA, Novak JJ, er al. (1 98l) The effect of freez-
22. Wagner J, Manning P (eds.) (1976) The Biology of the Guinea Pig.
ing on various serum chemistry parameters from common lab
New York: Academic Press.
animals. Clin Chem 27: 1039.
23. Waner T, Nyska A (1994) The influence of fasting on blood
6. Feld KI, Sibold AL (1999) Laborarory Hamsrer and Gerbil. New
glucose, triglycerides, cholesterol, and alkaline phosphatase in
York, CRC Press.
rats. Ver Clin Pathol 23: 78-81.
7. Foster HL, Small, JD, Fox JG (eds.) (198l) The Mouse in Biomedi-
24. Wriston JC Jr. (1984) Comparative biochemistry of the guinea
cal Researrh. Vol 1. New York: Academic Press.
pig: a partial checklist. Comp Biochem Physiol B 77: 253-78.
581
35
Clinical Chemistry of Birds
Terry W. Campbell
 Colorado State University
improperly stored. Blood that is stored at room temperature
Sample collection and handling
-a e yi oi ie idax iou I un ni jo poad e 1og
perature, or frozen will hemolyze.
A blood sample representing 1% of the bird's body weight
Fasting samples are not often obtained from birds, because
is generally accepted to be a safe volume of blood that can
withholding food from birds that are sick is not advisable.
be obtained from nonanemic and dehydrated birds. Avian
Also, considering the nature of their digestive physiology
veterinarians often collect the blood sample into a syringe
and anatomy. a fasting state may be difficult to achieve
that contains sodium heparin; however, this is not necessary
safely. As a result, plasma samples obtained from birds are
as a quality sample can be collected in a nonheparinized
often lipemic, which can interfere with many biochemical
syringe as long as the blood is immediately transferred into
tests. In some avian species, it is normal for the plasma to
a microcollection tube containing lithium heparin, which
 be yellow because of carotenoid pigments from the diet. It
must be filled to the appropriate volume. Adding heparin to
is important to note that such samples do not represent
the syringe has the risk of causing sample dilution and inter-
icterus and the pigment does not interfere with biochemical
ference with analytical testing of sodium and protein. Once
testing.
the sample has been collected into a syringe. it should not
be passed through the needle a second time, especially small
bore needles (25 gauge or smaller); the needle should be
Reference intervals and decision levels
removed before blood is dispensed into collection tube to
minimize hemolysis of the sample.
Published reference intervals for biochemical tests for a few
Most chemical analyses are conducted on plasma, although
testing could also be performed on a serum sample. The
traditionally have been established to produce a 95% con-
reason for this is that collection of serum from birds fre-
quently yields a very small sample size compared to what
of normal reference intervals for a given species of bird
can be obtained from plasma. This is especially important
depends on many factors, including age, state of health, and
when collecting blood from very small birds. Also, avian
nutrition. Because of the avian patient's ability to mask
serum often clots once it has been harvested and the gelled
illness, it is often difficult to guarantee that a given bird is
sample is difficult to analyze; therefore, plasma is preferred
free of disease for inclusion into a population of normal
for routine blood biochemical evaluations of birds.
healthy birds. Likewise, because the nutritional require-
The method by which blood samples are collected and
ments for most birds are unknown, it is difficult to deter-
handled during processing has a significant effect on the test
mine if their nutritional needs are being met. Both
results. Blood should be collected rapidly, immediately
environmental factors and the physiologic status of the birds
transferred into the lithium heparin collection tube. and
 should be considered when establishing reference values.
mixed well with the anticoagulant. Hemolysis of the sample
ud unu aieiaduan sae 'apua se yns sioios
during collection and handling should be avoided. Hemoly-
period, season of the year, and time of day may influence
sis results if blood is placed into tubes too quickly, agitated
the results of a particular analyte. Also, methodology often
too vigorously while mixing with an anticoagulant. or
varies among veterinary laboratories, which can create dif-
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
582
CHAPTER 35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds
ficulty when comparing laboratory data obtained from one
tion rates (GFR) compared to those of mammals; however.
center with reference values provided by another. For these
they more numerous and as a result the overall GFR of birds
reasons, reference values should be established for an indi-
is similar to that of mammals.1 The loops of Henle and the
vidual bird during health, and the same laboratory should
collecting ducts that drain both types of nephrons are bound
be used so that subtle changes in the blood biochemistries
by connective tissue to form a medullary cone, and each
can be detected.
cone ends as a branch of the ureter.
Because of the difficulty in obtaining meaningful refer-
Birds have a juxtaglomerular apparatus but only a rudi
ence intervals for each species of bird that may be presented
to a veterinary hospital, many avian clinicians use decision
consists of an afferent arteriole, secretory juxtaglomerular
levels when assessing avian biochemical profiles. Although
cells that produce renin, and extaglomerular mesangial cells.
variations associated with factors such as seasonal variability.
Renin leads to the formation of angiotensin I and II, which
circadian rhythm, and gender may be significant, they may
are vasoconstrictors that stimulate the release of aldoste-
be too small to influence the clinical decision making process.
rone. In turn, aldosterone stimulates NaCl and water reab-
Decision levels are threshold values above or below which
sorption by the distal convoluted tubules and collecting
a decision is made to respond to the abnormality. The
ducts.
response may vary from repeating the test, ordering addi-
Blood is supplied to the kidney by the renal arteries.
tional tests, or treatment of the patient. Decision levels may
which eventually supply the afferent glomerular arterioles.
be obtained by using published reference intervals and by
Avian kidneys also receive blood from a renal portal system,
 applying these values to those obtained by the laboratory.
in which the renal veins behave as arteries and supply blood
dap su u e a  saa una
to the kidney tubules; however, the amount of blood sup-
on their experience and the laboratory results. Values sug-
plied in this manner varies with species, stress, and tempera-
gested in this text for each analyte in the avian blood profile
ture.1.53 The cranial and caudal portal veins, which receive
are simply guidelines that can be used as decision levels.
blood from the pelvic limbs, intestines, and oviduct, form a
Obtaining a set of normal values from the healthy individual
vascular ring around the kidney. Valves at the junction of
bird housed in a stable environment with a consistent hus-
the bifurcation of the external iliac veins control the renal
bandry protocol can refine the process of evaluating that
portal blood supply: these valves are controlled by both
avian patient later when it becomes ill. Therefore, when the
adrenergic and cholinergic nerves. The renal portal system
bird becomes ill, it has its own set of normal reference values
facilitates tubular secretion by the cortical nephrons by sup-
for comparison.
plying blood to the peritubular capillary plexus, which sup-
plies the cortical nephron and the proximal and distal
tubules of the medullary nephron.
Laboratory evaluation of the avian kidney
The avian kidney plays a major role in osmoregulation by
maintaining water homeostasis and electrolyte balance. The
Normal anatomy and physiology of
avian kidney filters large volumes of water that is later
the avian kidney
resorbed by the tubules. The medullary nephron concen-
 The avian urinary system consists of paired kidneys that are
trates urine by the counter current multiplier mechanism;
located in the renal fossa of the synsacrum. Each kidney is
however, it is less efficient than mammalian kidneys, perhaps
composed of three divisions: cranial, middle, and caudal. In
because urea does not play a role in medullary hypertonicity
turn, each division is composed of lobules that contain
among birds. Filtration occurs in the glomeruli, in which
poorly demarcated, large cortical areas and smaller medul-
crystalloids and substances of small and medium molecular
lary areas. A ureter transports urine from each kidney to the
size pass into the glomerular filtrate. Electrolytes, glucose.
urodeum of the cloaca. Unlike mammals, birds lack a renal
uric acid, urea, and creatinine are a few of the substances
pelvis and a urinary bladder.
that are removed from blood by glomerular filtration. Some
filtrates (e.g.. glucose) are reabsorbed by the tubules. The
cortical or reptilian-type nephron has a glomerulus with a
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of birds is more variable
tubular system that is devoid of loops of Henle and is located
than that of mammals because of intermittent filtration by
entirely in the cortex. Cortical nephrons radiate around the
avian glomeruli. The GFR, as measured by inulin clearance.
central efferent veins to form lobules, and they empty at
varies between 1.2 and 4.6 mL/kg per minute and is affected
right angles to the collecting ducts. The deeper medullary or
by the state of hydration.'? Arginine vasotocin, like mam-
mammalian-type nephron has a glomerulus with a tubular
malian vasopressin, decreases the GFR and increases water
system that contains loops of Henle. Therefore, medullary
reabsorption in response to dehydration or increases in
nephrons are involved in the countercurrent multiplier and
osmotic gradient process to form urine as in mammalian
in the GFR as occurs with dehydration by shunting blood
kidneys. The glomeruli of birds are smaller with lower filtra-
from the reptilian-type nephrons to the mammalian-type
583
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
nephrons because of the latter's ability to concentrate urine.
function is required to increase the blood concentrations of
This urine concentration ability varies between species and
this analyte. Uric acid is also not a specific test for renal
appears to be related to the size of the bird; smaller birds
disease, because increases can occur after ingestion of a
have a greater ability to concentrate urine than do large
high-protein meal, during starvation, or with severe tissue
birds.18
necrosis. Therefore, whereas the blood uric acid can be used
The intestinal tract and salt glands of birds also aid the
as an indicator of renal function in birds, it does not provide
kidneys in their osmoregulatory function. Urine that makes
a diagnosis, nor do normal values guarantee an absence of
its way to the urodeum of the cloaca can retropulse into the
renal disease. Blood uric acid concentration when used as a
rectum via the coprodeum where water can be resorbed.
sequential evaluation can be useful in monitoring treatment
This retropulsion can have a profound effect on the
or progress of disease.
urinalysis.
Because birds are uricotelic, they possess only very small
Other important functions of the avian kidneys include
quantities of urea in plasma. Urea is formed in the liver as
excretion of metabolic wastes and toxins, metabolism of
a product of protein catabolism, and higher concentrations
vitamin D, and production of erythropoietin.
are present in carnivorous than in granivorous birds because
of differences in dietary protein intake. The normal blood
Blood chemistry evaluation
lrea nitrogen (BUN) concentration of normal, noncarnivo-
Uric acid, produced by the liver and kidneys, is the major
rous birds ranges between 0 and 5mg/dL (0-1.8 mmol/L).
end product of nitrogen metabolism in birds. Uric acid is
 Urea is generally considered to have limited diagnostic value
   s  r q  
in the detection of renal disease in birds compared with that
independent of tubular water resorption; however, decreased
of uric acid. Unlike uric acid, which is generally excreted
GFR from severe dehydration may result in stasis of uric acid
independently of hydration, BUN may be a sensitive test for
movement through the tubules.?2 The principal site of uric
prerenal azotemia in some avian species because it is elimi-
acid secretion appears to be in the proximal tubules of the
nated by glomerular filtration, which depends on the hydra-
    n   u 
tion status of the bird. Therefore, an increased BUN
removed by the kidneys.953 Therefore, evaluation of the
concentration may be useful in the detection of reduced
serum or plasma uric acid concentration has been widely
renal arterial perfusion in some birds. Like the uric acid
used in the detection of kidney disease in birds. In general,
concentration, the plasma urea nitrogen concentration
a blood uric acid concentration greater than 13mg/dL (750
increases in birds, especially raptors, after ingestion of a
Umol/L) is suggestive of impaired renal function from a
high-protein meal." Plasma BUN and uric acid values are
variety of causes, including nephrotoxins such as lead or
often evaluated together in an effort to differentiate prerenal
aminoglycoside antibiotics, urinary obstruction, nephritis.
azotemia, renal pathology. and postprandial effects
nephrocalcinosis, and nephropathy associated with hypovi-
 Potassium is filtered and actively excreted by the kidneys.
taminosis A. The blood uric acid concentration is influenced
Birds with severe renal disease may retain potassium and
by species, age, and diet. Juvenile birds tend to have lower
develop hyperkalemia.
blood uric acid values than adults, and carnivorous birds
 Sodium is filtered by the glomerulus and, depending on
   s   n 
the osmotic needs, may be resorbed into the plasma or
Increases in blood uric acid may be observed in birds shortly
secreted by the kidney tubules for elimination. Birds with
after consumption of a high-protein meal41.4s This is espe-
chronic renal disease may lose the ability to retain sodium,
thereby resulting in hyponatremia.
Hyperphosphatemia can occur in birds with severe renal
concentration. The uric acid concentration may also increase
disease. However, it is not a consistent finding with decreased
with severe tissue necrosis or starvation because of increased
GFR
Severe renal disease may result in an increased plasma
nucleic acids.
creatinine concentration. Creatinine is usually considered
When the plasma uric acid concentration exceeds the solu-
to have poor diagnostic value, however, because in birds.
bility of sodium urate, uric acid (in the form of monosodium
creatine is excreted by the kidney before it is converted to
urate monohydrate crystals) precipitates in tissues, which is
creatinine. Therefore, the plasma creatine rather than the
a condition known as gout. Birds with gout exhibit precipita-
creatinine concentration may better detect a decreased GFR
tion of urate crystals especially in the synovial joints and
n   s  n  
on the visceral surfaces. Blood uric acid concentrations are
tinely provide creatine analysis.
extremely increased (e.g., fivefold greater than normal) in
The presence of upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage in
birds with gout and result from severe renal dysfunction.
mammals leads to a disproportionate increase in BUN con-
Uric acid is not a sensitive test for renal disease in birds,
centration relative to reductions in the GFR resulting in a
because a significant loss (approximately 75%) of renal
584
CHAPTER 35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds
in birds where it has been demonstrated that plasma BUN.
contaminated with urates or containing large concentrations
creatinine, and uric acid concentrations are unaffected by
of cells, mucus, fat, or bacteria. Microscopic examina tion can
the presence of blood in the digestive tract.
determine the cause of the cloudy appearance. Green bile
pigment from the feces and dietary pigments can stain the
Urinalysis
urine especially if the dropping is held in the cloaca for a
A urinalysis, which routinely is applied to mammalian urine.
prolonged period of time. A positive urobilinogen on the test
also can be performed on avian urine. Indications for per-
strip is supportive of fecal contamination of the urine sample.
forming a urinalysis on an avian patient include polyuria.
The principle difference in the nitrogenous components
azotemia, and abnormal appearance of the urinary compo-
of avian urine compared with those of mammalian urine is
nent of the dropping. The urinalysis includes notation of
the large amount of uric acid and creatine. Uric acid in avian
the gross appearance, measurement of the specific gravity
urine typically occurs as a thick, mucoid, white to cream-
or osmolality. chemical evaluation, and microscopic
colored colloidal suspension containing the small spherical
examination.
conglomerates of insoluble sodium and potassium urates
Urine is collected by aspirating the liquid part of the drop-
and protein. This semisolid material is not part of the specific
q su audp an anuo aus no ana e ou su
 deposited onto a nonabsorbable surface (e.g., aluminum foil
Commercially available test strips for biochemical exami-
 or wax paper). Aspiration of fecal material or urates along
nation of mammalian urine can be used for avian urine as
with the liquid urine should be avoided. Ureteral urine
well.51 These test strips usually indicate a negative to trace
enters the cloaca and is forced into the colorectum by anti-
amount of protein in the urine of normal birds. Protein not
 peristaltic activity, thereby allowing reabsorption of water
reabsorbed from the proximal tubules becomes part of the
and electrolytes to occur. For this reason, exposure of urine
urate conglomerate, which is not measured in the superna-
to cloacal membranes and the large intestine cannot be
tant. For this reason, renal loss of protein may be difficult
prevented; however, this exposure is presumed to be
to detect by urinalysis; however, detection of significant
minimal when urine is produced at moderate to high rates.
proteinuria in the absence of hematuria, hemoglobinuria.
Catheterization of the ureter is possible but not routinely
and fecal contamination of the sample is suggestive of the
performed because it requires general anesthesia and is tech-
renal proteinuria that occurs with abnormal glomerular per-
nically difficult.
meability, such as that which occurs with glomerulonephri-
Normal avian urine is the clear fluid component of a bird's
tis. Alkaline urine (pH >8) can produce a false-positive
droppings. The amount of urine produced varies with
reading in the protein portion of the test strip. Therefore.
species, diet, and environmental factors, such as tempera-
other methods for testing urine protein should be employed
ture and humidity. Generally. avian urine is hyperosmotic
with alkaline urine. Postrenal proteinuria is associated with
to plasma (362-2000mOsmol/L). especially in birds that
inflammation of the lower urinary tract and cloaca.
have adapted to arid environments; however, this is affected
The pH of avian urine varies from 4.7 to 8.0 and depends
by the hydration status of the bird.s The normal specific
primarily on the diet. Carnivorous birds that ingest large
 gravity of avian urine ranges from 1.005 to 1.020 depending 
amounts of animal protein have acidic urine, whereas gra-
on the species, hydration status, and osmolality.22 Osmolality
nivorous birds have more alkaline urine. Increased urine
is a direct measure of the number of solute particles in the
acidity (pH <5.0) may result from acidosis or increased
urine, whereas the specific gravity is a crude index of renal
protein catabolism, such as that which occurs during starva-
tubule function and is affected by the number, size, and
tion. Increased urine alkalinity (pH >8.0) may be associated
weight of solute particles in the urine. The two determina-
with allkalosis. The urine pH also can vary with physiologic
tions are related, however, and both can be used to deter-
state. For example, in poultry, acidic urine is observed in
mine the loss of concentrating ability in birds with renal
laying hens that are depositing calcium into developing egg
disease. A urine osmolality of 450 mOsmol/kg represents
shells.50
 the normal renal concentrating abiliry in the pigeon (Colum-
Urine from normal birds contains no glucose, because
bia livia) and can be used as a guide for water-deprivation
glucose is completely reabsorbed by the tubules after glo-
studies in that species.34
merular filtration. Glucosuria occurs when the renal thresh-
The color of avian urine can be helpful in detection of
old for glucose is exceeded. In most birds, this threshold is 
certain diseases. For example, a biliverdinuria represented
approximately 600 mg/dL. Birds with diabetes mellitus.
by green urine is suggestive of severe liver disease or hemo-
however, often exhibit blood a glucose concentration of
lysis in birds. Yellow urine is observed in some species such
greater than 800mg/dL and significant glucosuria.
as macaws with liver disease, and this most likely represents
 Normal avian urine is devoid of ketones. Excessive ketone
bilirubinuria. Hematuria or hemoglobinuria is represented
formation and ketonuria occurs with increased oxidation
by red urine that changes to brown on standing. Polyuric
of fatty acids as an energy source. This may explain the
J Apno aq on ieadde Aeu ieui aun pinbi aonond spi
ketonuria found in migratory birds following migration.
585
sEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
Ketonuria may be expected with severe malnutrition or
renal hemorrhage and, typically, occur after trauma to the
diabetes mellitus, but this has been poorly documented in
kidneys.
birds. One explanation for negative ketones in avian urine
Crystals in avian urine sediment are primarily sodium and
may be a result of the urinalysis test strips that do not test
 potassium urates. These are round crystals with a spoke-like
for the major ketones produced by birds.
appearance that are refractile under polarized light. The
Biliverdin is the major bile pigment of birds; therefore.
needle-shaped uric acid crystals may also be present in avian
bilirubin is not normally present in the urine. Biliverdin does
urine. A few drops of sodium hydroxide can be added to the
not react with the bilirubin portion of the urine test strip.
urine sample to dissolve the uric acid crystals to facilitate the
Biliverdinuria is indicated by a green coloration of the urine
examination of the cellular components in the urine.
and is suggestive of hepatobiliary disease or hemolysis in
Microorganisms in urine sediments usually originate in
birds. The normal urinary urobilinogen concentration in
the intestinal tract or cloaca, and represent contamination
birds ranges from 0 to 0.l mg/dL. In general, this test has
of the sample. Large numbers of bacteria, however, may be
limited diagnostic value in birds and when positive suggests
indicative of a urinary tract infection, especially when they
fecal contamination of the sample.
occur as a uniform population of a single morphologic type
Occult blood in the urine of a normal bird measures nega-
and when casts are present. Because bacteria frequently
tive to trace on the urinary test strips. A positive occult blood
contaminate avian urine samples and multiply during
reaction is suggestive of erythrocytes, free hemoglobin, or
Storage, resulting in artificially high bacterial numbers, fresh
myoglobin in the urine. Microscopic examination of the
samples should be examined.
urine sediment can determine the presence of erythrocytes.
A positive test of the supernatant after centrifugation is sug-
gestive of hemoglobinuria, and increased plasma creatine
Electrolytes and acid/base balance
kinase (CK) values may be supportive of myoglobinuria.
Hematuria is indicative of hemorrhage originating from
Water consumption in birds is influenced by species, age.
either the urinary, reproductive, or gastrointestinal tracts or
size, environmental temperatures, and both the type and
the cloaca. Hemoglobinuria is suggestive of the intravascular
amount of food that is consumed. Water intake often relates
destruction of erythrocytes or, perhaps, the lysis of erythro-
inversely to body size and ranges between 5% and 50% of
cytes in hypotonic urine. Hemoglobinuria has been reported
in psittacine birds with heavy metal toxicity, especially lead
water than adults. Carnivorous birds as well as those that
poisoning.
    n   
 Urinary nitrite tests are designed to detect bacteriuria. This
wa ter.
test has limited diagnostic value, however, in the urine of
Water deprivation, hermorrhage, or administration of
birds.
hypertonic saline produces thirst in birds, which is caused
by the release of angiotensin I1.1" Angiotensin II induces the
urinalysis. Whereas 5mL of urine is suggested to provide a
release of arginine vasotocin (i.e., antidiuretic hormone
uniform semiquantita tion in mammalian urine, this amount
[ADH]}. aldosterone, and corticosterone. Arginine vasotocin
rarely is achieved in most avian samples. Microscopic exami-
increases the reabsorption of water in the renal tubules and
nation, however, can still provide valuable information.
collecting ducts; other neurohormonal factors also play a
Normal avian urine contains few cells. As many as three
role in the hypothalamic regulation of water intake. Disor-
      
ders of the hypothalamus and deficiency of ADH from the
(40x) are considered to be normal in direct smears of the
posterior pituitary result in diabetes insipidus, thereby
urine. Epithelial cells are rare in normal avian urine samples
ca using polydipsia and polyuria. These conditions have been
and can originate from the urinary tract, gastrointestinal
reported in chickens and a few other species. A water-
tract, reproductive tract, or cloaca. Increased cell numbers
deprivation test or administration of exogenous ADH can be
are a cause for concern.
performed to differentiate polyuric disorders of birds.' In
Casts in the urine of birds are indicative of renal disease.
chickens, water deprivation increases the plasma osmolality
because casts are formed within the renal tubules. Granular
from 315 to 325 mOsm/L after 24 hours and to 340 mOsm/L
casts are the most common and are suggestive of renal
after 72 hours.s During dehydration and 24-hour water
tubular epithelial cell degeneration (i.e., tubular nephrosis).
deprivation, the urine osmolality of normal birds is greater
Cellular casts also may be present, and the types of cells that
than 450 mOsm/L.
are observed reflect the renal pathology. Casts containing
The ability of the avian kidney to conserve and excrete
epithelial cells are suggestive of acute tubular damage that
water has a wider range than that of mammals. The frac-
results in sloughing of the cells that line the tubules. Lell-
tional excretion of water in birds can be as high as 33%
kocytes in the casts are indicative of renal inflammation
during hydration and as low as 1% during dehydration.50
(nephritis). Erythrocytes within the casts are indicative of
Cessation of renal water loss during dehydration results
586
CHAPTER 35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds
partially from shutdown of the cortical nephrons: it is not
Chloride
strictly a function of the tubular resorption of water.
Chloride is the anion of highest concentration in the extra-
       
cellular fluid. Chloride and sodium represent the primary
mammals. Therefore, predominate extracellular and intra-
osmotically active components of plasma. For most species.
cellular anions and cations are similar in both types of
hypochloridemia is indicated by a plasma chloride concen-
animals.
tration of less than 100 mEq/L (mmol/L). whereas hyper-
chloridemia is indicated by a plasma chloride concentration
Sodium
greater than 120 mEq/L (mmol/L). These conditions rarely
Sodium is the primary osmotically active electrolyte in the
are reported in birds. Hyperchloridemia can be associated
plasma and urine of birds. Dietary sodium is absorbed in the
with dehydration and salt loading.
 anxa  l aaa s a i   si
glomerular filtration. Depending on the need for sodium by
Potassium
the bird, sodium may be resorbed into the plasma or secreted
Potassium is the major intracellular cation. Therefore, an
by the renal tubules and then excreted.
artifactual increase in the serum or plasma potassium con-
Birds having salt (i.e., nasal) glands can excrete large
centration occurs with hemolysis. Artifactual hyperkalemia
amounts of sodium by an extrarenal route. The paired salt
or hypokalemia may occur with delayed separation of the
glands are located just above the orbits in most marine birds.
cells in the sample, and these changes are species specific.
Ducts from these glands deliver secretions into the nasal
For example, a 30% increase in plasma potassium occurs
cavity, which flow through the nares and drip off the tip of
in macaws (Anodorhynchus sp.) following a 4-hour delay in
the rhinotheca (i.e., beak). Nasal secretion of sodium occurs
plasma separation, whereas a 30% decrease was found in
not only in marine species but also in at least two orders of 
chickens (Gallus gallus) following a 2-hour delay in plasma
terrestrial birds (falconiforms and cuculiformes).'" Salt
separation.22 True hyperkalemia in most species is indicated
glands also are found in ducks and geese. The typical con-
by a plasma potassium concentration of greater than
centration of sodium in the salt-gland secretions of most
4.0mEq/L (mmol/L). Hyperkalemia results from renal
species that have been studied ranges between 500 and
failure with decreased secretion of potassium, acidosis, and
1000 mEq/L (mmol/L)." The rate of sodium secretion by the
severe tissue necrosis. Hypokalemia in most species of birds
salt glands varies among species, however, as do the degrees
is indicated by a plasma potassium concentration of less than
 of hydration and salt loading. The primary stimulus for salt-
2.0 mEq/L (mmol/L). Hypokalemia can be associated with
gland secretion is plasma osmolality. but hormonal influ-
chronic diarrhea, prolonged anorexia, and alkalosis. Hypo-
ences also affect nasal secretion, which is increased by
kalemia has also been reported in birds with renal disease.
adrenal corticosteroids and aldosterone.
which may be associated with chronic loss of potassium in
Hyponatremia in most species occurs when the plasma
the urine. Use of potassium-poor fluids during fluid therapy
sodium concentration is less than 130mEq/L (mmol/L). Dis-
in chronically anorectic birds may dilute the plasma potas-
eases affecting the kidneys. gastrointestinal tract, or perhaps.
sium to a hypokalemic level, which may enhance the renal
the salt gland can be associated with excessive sodium loss.
loss of potassium. Diuretic therapy rarely is used in birds.
Excessive hydration because of polydipsia or iatrogenic
but it may enhance renal potassium loss as well. Imbalances
delivery of low-sodium intravenous fluids (e.g., 5% dextrose
of plasma potassium may result in muscle weakness, serious
in water) also can result in hyponatremia. Hyponatremia
cardiac disturbances (e.g., sinus bradycardia and arrest), or
can be corrected by addressing the cause of the sodium loss.
both. Hypokalemia can be corrected with the addition of
control of overhydration, or use of fluid therapy with an
pota ssium to supportive fluids.
appropriate electrolyte balance.
Hypernatremia occurs when the plasma sodium concen-
tration exceeds l60mEq/L (mmol/L) and may be due to
Calcium
excessive dietary salt intake, decreased water intake, or
increased water loss. After salt loading. hypernatremia
-       
occurs more rapidly in birds without functional salt glands.
thormone (PTH). calcitonin, and vitamin D, (i.e., 1.25-
Marine birds that are given freshwater over a period of time
dihydrocholecalciferol, calciferol). Other hormones, such as
exhibit atrophy of the salt glands, thereby resulting in
estrogens, corticosteroids, thyroxine (Ta), and glucagon, also
influence calcium metabolism. The primary function of PTH
mia associated with salt loading can be associated with
is to maintain normal plasma calcium concentrations by its
excessive dietary sodium or administration of intravenous
action on bone, kidney, and intestinal mucosa. When plasma
fluids containing excessive sodium. Hypernatremia associ-
concentrations of ionized calcium decrease, the parathyroid
ated with excessive free-water loss occurs with diarrhea.
glands are stimulated to release PTH. The primary effect of
renal failure, or rarely, diabetes insipidus.
this is to mobilize calcium from bone; however, increased
587
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
calcium absorption by intestinal mucosa and calcium reab-
fore, the total plasma calcium concentration increases
sorption by renal tubules also aid in the restoration of
because of an increase in protein-bound calcium. This occurs
normal plasma ionized calcium concentration. Parathor
several weeks before oviposition in chickens. The ionized
mone also enhances the renal excretion of phosphorus to
calcium level remains unchanged.
maintain a normal calcium :phosphorus ratio.
Calcium for egg formation is derived from intestinal
Calcitonin is produced by the ultimobranchial glands of
absorption and bone mobilization. If the dietary calcium is
birds. Avian C cells, which are the calcitonin-secreting cells.
adequate, then most of the eggshell calcium is derived from
migrate from the sixth pharyngeal pouch during embryonic
intestinal absorption. Bone is an important source of egg-
development to form the ultimobranchial gland. In some
shell calcium during the night, when food is not being con-
species of birds, C cells also can be found in parathyroid or
sumed, or if the dietary calcium intake is inadequate.
thyroid tissue. Calcitonin has the opposite action from that
The normal plasma concentration of calcium in most
of PTH. Therefore, as the plasma calcium concentration
nonlaying birds ranges from 8.0 to 1l.0mg/dL (2.0-
increases, calcitonin is released to inhibit calcium reabsorp-
2.8 mmol/L). Approximately one-third to one-half of the
tion from bones.
plasma calcium is bound to albumin. Therefore, the total
Calciferol, which stimulates calcium and phosphorus
plasma calcium concentration is affected by the plasma
absorption by the intestinal mucosa, increases the sensitivity
albumin or total protein concentration; however, this may
-         
mineralization. The kidney is involved with the conver-
centration usually decreases with hypoalbuminemia and
sion of vitamin D, to its hormonally active state, 1.25-
increases with hyperalbuminemia. A significant correlation
dihydroxycholecalciferol (calciferol).  Renal synthesis of
between total calcium and albumin has been determined for
1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol is regulated, at least partially.
African Grey parrots (Psiffacus erithacus) with the following
by PTH.
correlation formula:
 Birds differ from mammals by the increased development
of medullary bone in the long bones (of hens) before egg
Adjusted Ca (mmol/L) = Ca (mmol/L) - 0.015
laying. hypercalcemia in response to estrogen (and repro-
× Albumin (g/L)+ 0.4
ductive activity) in females, and the ability of hens to use
10% of their total body calcium stores for egg production
A significant correlation was found between total calcium
on a daily basis for extended periods without detrimental
and total protein in the ostrich and Peregrine falcon (Hiero
physiologic consequences."s Calcium deposition occurs in
falco peregrinus) with correlation formulae for the ostrich:
the medullary spaces of the femur, tibiotarsus, and other
nonpneumatic long bones in female birds during the first 10
Adjusted Ca (mmol/L) = Ca (mmol/L) - 0.09
days before oviposition (egg-laying). This is referred to as
× Total protein (g/L)+ 4.4
medullary bone formation, and it is under the influence of
the ovarian hormones, estrogen and testosterone. Medullary
And for the Peregrine falcon:
bone formation occurs 1 to 2 weeks before the increase in
total plasma calcium concentration and renal hydroxylase
Adjusted Ca (mmol/L) =Ca (mmol/L) - 0.02
activity that increases formation of the hormonally active
× Total protein (g/L)+ 0.67
vitamin D,. During the ovulation-oviposition cycle, periods
of medullary bone formation alternate with periods of med-
These examples indicate that the total calcium, albumin,
ullary bone depletion.
and total protein concentrations have a linear relationship
Prolactin and sex hormones influence the l-hydroxylation
that varies between species of birds.?2 These formulae may
of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, in the kidney, which in turn plays
not be clinically useful when dealing with other avian
an important role in calcium metabolism.s This activity
species.
increases just before egg laying and corresponds to the
Evaluation of ionized calcium would be more clinically
increase in total blood calcium concentration. Therefore.
useful because it is the most physiological active fraction of
the renal vitamin D endocrine system is involved in the
the total calcium concentration; however, there have been
 increased intestinal calcium absorption during the ovulation-
few studies evaluating ionized calcium to disease states
oviposition cycle of laying hens.
in birds and reference values have not been established.
The total blood calcium concentration of a laying hen
Ionized calcium concentration of birds that have been
ranges from 20 to 30 mg/dL (5.0-7.5mmol/L). Total calcium
studied suggest that normal concentrations range between
consists of ionized calcium, which is the biologically active
1.0 and 1.6 mmol/L.2 The concentration of ionized calcium
form, and calcium bound to anionic proteins and nonprotein
is affected by the acid-base balance. The ionized calcium
anions. Estrogen stimulates the production of calcium-
level will increase during acidosis and decrease during
binding proteins such as vitellogenin and albumin; there-
alkalosis.
588
CHAPTER 35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds
Most species of birds are considered to be hypocalcemic
when the plasma total calcium concentration becomes less
Acid-base balance
than 8.0 mg/dL (2.0 mmol/L), and hypocalcemia has been
associated with dietary calcium and vitamin D, deficiency.
The normal pH of birds is maintained between 7.33 and
excessive dietary phosphorus, alkalosis, and hypoalbumin-
7.45, and the buffering systems that regulate blood pH in
emia. African Grey parrots often exhibit a hypocalcemic
 mammals appear to be present in birds. The bicarbonate/
syndrome with a plasma calcium concentration of less than
carbonic acid buffer system is the most important because
6.0 mg/dL (1 .5 mmol/L) that results in seizure disorders. The
of the rapid rate of CO, elimination by the lungs after con-
pathophysiology of this condition is unknown, but it has
version from H,CO, Therefore, alterations in plasma bicar-
been considered to be a form of nutritional hypoparathy-
bonate and COz content are useful in the detection of
 roidism or, possibly, a result of hypovitaminosis D,. Second-
acid-base disturbances in birds. Because most CO in plasma
is derived from bicarbonate, the clinical interpretation of the
in birds that are fed calcium-poor diets (e.g., all-seed or all-
total CO, concentration is the same as that of the bicarbon-
meat diets). Affected birds have a decreased plasma calcium
ate concentration. The total COz concentration rarely is
concentration, normal plasma phosphorus concentration,
reported, but concentrations between 20 and 30 mmol/L are
and increased plasma alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity.
considered to be normal for most species. Increases in the
 Hypercalcemia in most species of birds is indicated by a
total CO, concentration are suggestive of a metabolic alka-
plasma calcium concentration of greater than llmg/dL
losis or a compensation for a respiratory acidosis, whereas
(2.7mmol/L). Hypercalcemia has been associated with
decreases are suggestive of a metabolic acidosis or compen-
hypervitaminosis Ds, osteolytic bone lesions secondary to
sation for a respiratory alkalosis, as occurs with excessive
neoplasms, and hyperalbuminemia. Causes of hypercalce-
ventilation. During active shell formation in laying hens, the
mia in mammals, such as primary and pseudohyperparathy-
plasma bicarbonate concentration decreases, thereby result-
roidism, certain plant toxicities, and hypoadrenocorticism,
ing in a metabolic acidosis.
have not been documented in birds, but should also be
Blood gases rarely are determined in birds. Avian eryth-
considered as possible causes of this condition.
rocytes continue to be metabolically active after blood col-
lection, and alterations in blood gas values in vitro can occur
quickly. These alterations are infuenced by temperature;
Phosphorus
therefore, blood gas analysis should be performed as quickly
as possible after sample collection. Portable blood gas analyz-
Plasma phosphorus is primarily regulated via renal excretion
ers that are designed for bedside monitoring of human
stimulated by PTH. Young. growing birds tend to have higher
patients may provide a quick, reliable method for monitor-
plasma phosphorus concentrations compared with adult
ing blood gases in birds.
birds.
Hypophosphatemia in birds is indicated by plasma phos-
phorus concentrations of less than 5mg/dL (1.6 mmol/L)
Laboratory evaluation of the avian liver
This may occur with hypovitaminosis D, (hypocalcemia also
occurs), malabsorption, or starvation. Long-term corticoste-
Liver enzymes
Interpretation of liver enzyme activity, as commonly used in
other disorders in mammals that result in hypophosphate-
mammalian medicine, has been applied to birds. However.
mia have not been reported in birds, but should also be
experimental studies evaluating the sensitivity and specific-
considered as possible causes.
ity of these enzymes for detecting liver disease have been
Hyperphosphatemia in birds is indicated by plasma
limited to only a few avian species. Because the specificity
phosphorus concentrations of greater than 7.omg/dL
 a    s    
(2.3mmol/L). and may occur with severe renal disease
and the type of hepatic disease, only general statements 
because of reduced glomerular filtration, hypervitaminosis
regarding alterations in enzyme activity can be made. Alter-
D, resulting in increased intestinal phosphorus absorption,
ations in the plasma activity of enzymes used to detect 
and excessive dietary phosphorus. Hypoparathyroidism also
hepatic disease in birds can reflect either hepatocellular
may be considered in some cases of hyperphosphatemia in
injury or increased enzyme production.
birds. Improper sample handing can cause artifactual hyper-
phosphatemia because erythrocytes contain a higher con-
Aspartate aminotransferase
High aspartate aminotransferase (AsT) activity has been
Therefore, hemolysis or delayed separation of plasma from
reported in the liver of birds. High AST activity has also been
erythrocytes, which allows intracellular phosphorus to lealk
found in skeletal muscle, heart muscle, brain, and
out, will increase the plasma phosphorus concentration.
kidney.17.3435 The distribution of AST among tissues varies
589
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
with the species, thereby making interpretation of increased
appears to be a specific test for hepatocellular disease in
plasma AST activity challenging. In general, increases of
birds: however, sensitivity is low.437 Because GLDH is a
mitochondria-bound enzyme, it is released when severe cell
ity is greater than 275IU/L. Increases result from either
injury has occurred. Significant GLDH activity has been
hepatic or muscle injury, which allow the leakage of intra-
found in the liver, kidney. and brain of pigeons, chickens.
cellular AST into the blood. Plasma AST activity is consid-
ducks, turkeys, and budgerigars. In general, plasma GLDH
ered to be markedly increased when the activity is greater
than 800IU/L. Activity of this magnitude is suggestive of
and indicative of hepatic necrosis. The degree of increase in
severe hepatic insult, especially in the presence of biliverdin-
the plasma GLDH activity reflects the severity of the hepa-
uria or biliverdinemia. However, increased AST activity does
tocellular injury. Plasma GLDH activity does not appear to
not provide information about hepatic function. It is useful
increase with muscle injury, as do the activities of AST, ALT.
to evaluate CK activity (see Laboratory Detection of Muscle
and LD, thereby making GLDH the most liver-specific plasma
enzyme among those species of birds that have been evalu-
between muscle and liver injury.
ated. Plasma GLDH appears to have a shorter mean elimina-
tion half-life (0.68hr) than does AST (7.66hr) and ALT
Alanine aminotransferase
(5.69hr), and it can be used to evaluate not only the severity
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) activity has been reported
of the hepatocellular injury but also the duration (if the
in the liver, skeletal muscle, and many other tissues of birds.
insult is not ongoing).34.38
Plasma ALT activity is considered to be neither a specific nor
Sorbitol dehydrogenase
a sensitive test for hepatocellular injury in birds. Plasma ALT
activity in most species of normal birds ranges from 19 to
cytosolic enzyme, and it may be useful in establishing the
50 IU/L and may be more useful for the detection of hepatic
diagnosis of hepatocellular injury in birds. Plasma SD has a
disease in carnivorous birds. Plasma ALT activity increases
short half-life, and its activity may remain increased for
with significant liver or muscle injury in birds (especially
shorter periods of time than those of AST and other
test for hepatocellular disease.
nostic advantage compared with plasma GLDH.
Lactate dehydrogenase
Plasma lactate dehydrogenase (LD) activity is nonspecific for
Alkaline phosphatase
hepatocellular disease in birds. Lactate dehydrogenase iso-
Alkaline phosphatase activity occurs in multiple tissues
enzymes are found in nearly all avian tissues.17.3435 Specific
including bone and intestine, and increased plasma AP activ-
LD isoenzymes could be helpful in determining the source
ity results not from leakage of the enzyme but from increased
of increased plasma LD activity: however, verification studies
cellular production. Plasma AP activity in birds results pri-
evaluating LD isoenzymes in various avian tissues would be
marily from osteoblastic activity. Therefore, increases in the
required for a large number of avian species.
plasma AP activity are suggestive of skeletal growth, nutri-
Plasma LD activity is less than 1ooo IU/L in normal birds,
tional secondary hyperparathyroidism, healing fractures.
and increased activity has been associated with hepatocel-
and the preovulation condition of medullary calcification in
lular disease. Compared with plasma AST and ALT activity.
hens. Plasma AP activity is not useful in the detection of
plasma LD activity increases and declines more rapidly after
hepatobiliary disease in birds. Aflatoxin B,-induced liver
injury to liver or muscle. The short mean elimination half
necrosis and bile duct hyperplasia have not significantly
life of LD (0.48 hr) compared to that of CK (3.07 hr) makes
increased the serum AP activity in the pigeon, cockatiel
LD a valuable test in differentiating between muscle and
(Nymphicus hollandicus), great horned owl (Bubo virginianus).
liver disease in the pigeon.34.38 Determination of the plasma
and red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis). Plasma AP activity
LD activity has no diagnostic advantage compared with
appears to be a sensitive indicator of intestinal diseases,
plasma AST activity, especially because the former typically
such as coccidial infections in the duodenum, jejunum, and
 has a wide normal reference interval in birds and its low
cecum.29
specificity for liver disease in birds.3037.33 In addition, avian
erythrocytes have high LD activity: therefore, hemolysis
Gamma glutamyltransferase
 results in increased plasma LD activity.
Plasma Y-glutamyltransferase (GGT) activity does not pre-
dictably increase in birds with hepatobiliary disease. Similar
Glutamate dehydrogenase
to AP, increased plasma activity of GGT is due to increased
Although not commonly offered by most veterinary labora-
cellular production rather than leakage. Measurable GGT
tories, plasma glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH) activity
activity occurs in the kidney, brain, and intestines of birds;
590
CHAPTER 35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds
however, disorders of these tissues do not increase the
tions. The length of required fasting varies between species.
plasma GGT activity. The highest GGT activity is found in
For example, plasma bile acid concentrations demonstrate a
the kidney of birds. The plasma activity does not increase
postprandial peak at 2 hours in Goffin cockatoos (Cacatud
with renal disease, however, because the enzyme is excreted
gofini). 4 hours in African Grey parrots (Psittacus erithacus).
in the urine.?s Increased serum GGT activity has increased
and over 8 hours in Amazon parrots (Amazona sp).27
in some cases of birds with liver disease. but not others.
 Increases in fasting plasma bile acid concentrations are
suggesting that the plasma GGT activity may increase in
suggestive of abnormal hepatic function, and may be due to
some species of birds depending on the nature of the hepatic
failure of the liver to uptake bile acids from the portal blood.
insult. 2545 Plasma GGT activity is not routinely measured in
abnormal bile acid excretion caused by blockage or leakage.
birds with hepatobiliary disease; therefore, the usefulness of
or portal circulation abnormalities. When measuring the bile
this enzyme in detection of avian liver diseases has not been
acid concentration, a l2-hour fast is recommended because
fully determined.
of the digestive physiology of birds. The emptying time of
the ingluvies or crop varies both with diet and among species
Biliverdin and bilirubin
of birds; thus, the timing of postprandial sampling for bile
Because the avian liver generally lacks the enzyme biliver-
acid testing is difficult.273 Moreover, ill birds often have a
din reductase, which is required to convert biliverdin to bili-
slow gastrointestinal transit time—or even stasis. Conversely.
rubin, the primary bile pigment in birds is biliverdin, which 
increased gastrointestinal motility may interfere with bile
is a green pigment. In spite of the fact that birds produce
acid release from the liver and absorption from the intes-
little to no bilirubin, clinical icterus with an increased plasma
tines. Because fasting is better tolerated in carnivorous birds.
bilirubin concentration has been reported in ducks and
such as raptors, and postprandial concentrations remain
macaws (Ara sp.). Presumably. some biliverdin may be
higher for longer periods of time, a 24-hour fast is recom-
reduced to bilirubin by nonspecific extrahepatic enzymes or
 mended for bile acid testing for those species.? Both the
bacteria; however, bilirubin is considered to be a poor indi-
cator for hepatobiliary disease in most birds. The healthy
been used for determination of bile acids in birds.'’ Results 
avian kidney is efficient in clearing bile pigments from the
of the two methods correlate well in plasma samples obtained
blood; therefore, green-colored urine and urates are sugges-
from six species of birds. The RIA method is linear to
tive of biliverdinuria and significant liver disease in birds
50μmol/L, whereas the enzymatic method is linear to
The presence of biliverdinemia is indicated by green sera or
200 μmol/L. Lipemia and hemolysis interfere with bile acid
plasma, which reflects severe hepatobiliary disease in birds.
n  s in  a a n 
and is associated with a poor prognosis for survival. Most
with the RIA method. Variable results have been reported
veterinary laboratories do not offer biliverdin testing. Bili-
using the RIA method, which is designed for use with
verdin is an unstable bile pigment that is sensitive to light
human serum samples. Potential explanations include dif-
degradation. The yellow color of the plasma in many avian
ferences in the binding of antibodies to different binding
species may be associated with carotenoid pigments from the
sites in avian bile acids; the tendency of avian samples to
 diet and should not be misinterpreted as bilirubinemia.
have higher bile acid concentrations than are found in
humans; and the different predominating bile acids in
Bile acids
various species of birds. Others have reported that both
Because plasma enzymes are neither sensitive nor specific
methods have adequate precision and accuracy.
for the detection of liver disease in birds and also do not
Reference intervals for fasting plasma bile acid concentra-
reflect the degree of liver disease, other blood biochemical
tions have not been determined for many species of birds.
Overall, the plasma bile acid concentration of normal birds
excretion. Moreover biliverdin and bilirubin concentrations
is greater than that of mammals; therefore avian samples
       a  a 
often require dilutions, especially with RIA methods, to stay
 detection of liver disease. Bile acid determination, however.
within the linear parameters of the assay. In general, bile
is a sensitive test for liver function in some species of birds.15
acid concentrations determined by the enzymatic method
Bile acids are produced in the liver, excreted in the bile.
are considered to be normal if they are less than 75 μmol/L.22
reabsorbed by the intestines into the portal circulation, and
Assay-specific and species-specific reference intervals for
removed from the blood by the hepatocytes. This process is
normal fasting bile acid concentrations are recommended.
referred to as the enterohepatic circulation.
Bile acids normally occur in very small amounts in the
Cholesterol
peripheral blood of healthy birds. The primary bile acids in
The normal plasma cholesterol concentrations of most
birds vary among species and may not be the same as those
species of birds range between 100 and 250 mg/dL. Because
found in dogs. cats, and humans.7916.22 Fasting plasma bile
cholesterol is eliminated in the form of bile acids, increases
in the plasma cholesterol concentration may be associated
591
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
with extrahepatic biliary obstruction, hepatic fibrosis, and
 protein concentration is essential to the maintenance of the
bile duct hyperplasia. Hypercholesterolemia also can be
normal colloidal osmotic pressure, which preserves normal
associated with conditions other than liver disease, such as
blood volume and pH. Hens demonstrate a marked increase
hypothyroidism, high-fat diets, lipemia, and during egg pro-
in plasma total protein concentration just before egg produc-
duction. A hypercholesterolemia occurs during vitelogenesis
 tion.2s This estrogen-induced hyperproteinemia is associated
in female birds preparing to lay eggs. Postprandial increases
with an increase in vitellogenin and lipoproteins, which are
in cholesterol may occur as well. Hypocholesterolemia may
necessary for yolk production. These proteins are produced
occur with end-stage liver disease, maldigestion or malab-
in the liver, transported in the blood, and incorporated into
sorption, and starvation.
the oocytes of the ovary.
The biuret method is the method of choice for determin-
Iron
ing plasma or serum total protein concentration in birds.
Excessive iron storage (hemochromatosis) is a common
This method provides accurate and repeatable results when
hepatic disorder of ramphastids (toucans), hill mynahs
the total protein concentrations fall between 1 and 10 g/dL
(Gracula religiosa), and sturnids (birds of paradise) and occurs
(10-l00g/L). Because proteins in the serum are primarily
responsible for changes in the refractive index, a refractom-
been suggested that these species of birds develop this dis-
eter commonly is used to obtain a total plasma or serum
protein concentration in birds. Temperature-compensated
their intestines compared to other birds and like humans,
refractometers, as well as those that are not temperature
compensated, tend to overestimate the total protein concen-
for the disorder. Birds with this condition may exhibit
tration. The high glucose concentration and chromogens in
increased plasma AST activity because of iron-induced hepa-
the plasma of birds as well as lipemia and hemolysis affect
tocellular damage. Usefulness of serum iron concentration,
the accuracy of the refractometric method, which frequently
is used for a rapid estimate of the plasma protein concentra-
capacity testing for excessive hepatic iron storage have not
tion."2 The biuret method, however, is more accurate.
been fully evaluated in birds. Studies in toucans with this
The plasma albumin concentrations generally range from
0.8 to 2.0 g/dL (8-20 g/L) in normal birds. These values may
with hepatic iron concentrations. The disease is currently
not be accurate, however, because most analyzers determine
diagnosed based upon histopathology and tissue iron levels.
albumin spectrophotometrically using the bromcresol green
(BCG) dye-binding method using human albumin standards
Other tests
and controls that may have different binding affinity for the
Other abnormalities that may be suggestive of hepatic insuf-
dye compared to that of avian albumin. Thus, the BCG
method has not been validated in avian plasma samples and
hyperammonemia. and decreased levels of coagulation
may be inaccurate at the low albumin concentrations found
factors. Hypoglycemia and hypoalbuminemia could result
 in avian plasma.22
from chronic liver disease in birds but rarely are reported.
 Protein electrophoresis provides a more accurate measure
An increased plasma ammonia concentration with hepatic
of the albumin concentration as well as those of other
plasma proteins; however, there are species differences in
not been documented in birds. Coagulation studies are per-
albumin migration on gel electrophoresis.4 The total protein
formed only rarely in birds but could be used to help estab-
concentration as obtained by the biuret method combined
lish the diagnosis of hepatic insufficiency.
with electrophoretic separation of plasma proteins provide
an accurate absolute concentration of the plasma proteins.
The primary plasma protein fractions include albumin, alpha
Laboratory evaluation of plasma and
globulins (alpha-l and alpha-2), beta globulins (beta-l and
serum proteins
beta-2). and gamma globulin.2 A transthyretin (prealbu-
min) fraction may be present in some species (e.g.. psitta-
The normal plasma protein concentration in birds is less
cines) and absent in others (e.g., waterfowl and raptors).
than that in mammals, generally ranging from 2.5 to 4.5 g/
Normal concentrations for transthyretin, albumin, alpha
dL (25-45 g/L). Albumin, which represents 40-50% of the
 globulin, beta globulin, and gamma globulin as obtained by
 total plasma protein in birds, is produced in the liver. Other
 plasma proteins also produced in the liver include transport
specific reference intervals. 14.20.22
proteins, proteins of coagulation, fbrinogen, enzymes, and
The normal albumin: globulin (A:G) ratio for most psitta-
hormones. Immunoglobulins produced by B lymphocytes
cine birds is between 1.2 and 3.6 when transthyretin is
and plasma cells represent a significant component of the
included with the albumin fraction, or 0.6-2.2 if it is not.
total plasma protein concentration. The normal plasma
Transthyretin can be considered to be an acute-phase reac-
592
CHAPTER 35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds
tant, which is reason not to include it with the albumin
and protein-losing enteropathies (e.g., intestinal parasitism
fraction. β-globulin predominates in the globulin electro-
and bacterial enteritis).
phoretic fraction in psittacine birds; whereas c-l globulin
Hypoproteinemia in birds associated only with a hypoal-
predominates in waterfowl and raptors. Acute-phase pro-
buminemia occurs with starvation, malnutrition, intestinal
teins in cases of inflammation typically result in increases of
malabsorption, and gastrointestinal parasites leading to
the alpha (specifically c-2 globulins) and total globulin frac-
amino acid deficiencies. Hypoproteinemia also occurs with
tions of the electrophoretic tracing. Increases in c-2 globu-
liver failure resulting in a decreased production of albumin
lins may also signal hepatic disease in psittacine birds
or renal disease resulting in an increased loss of albumin in
 Chronic inflammatory disorders such as aspergillosis, sarco-
the urine.
cystosis, and chlamydophilosis are often associated with
Fibrinogen concentration is often evaluated in raptors to
increases in β-globulins. The Y-globulin fraction is composed
detect the presence of inflammatory diseases, especially
of immunoglobulins such as IgA, IgM, IgG, and IgE, which
those associated with bacterial infections. A plasma total
increase with a humoral immune response. Some of the
protein/fibrinogen ratio in raptors that is less than 1.5 is
immunoglobulins (e.g.. IgM and IgA) may migrate into the
indicative of inflammation and possible bacterial infection,
beta globulin fraction. A polygammopathy is indicative of
whereas a ratio greater than 5 indicates dehydration.22
active chronic inflammatory diseases, especially those asso-
ciated with infectious agents such as Chlamydophila, Aspergil-
lus, and Mycobacterium spp. Decreased Y-globulin fractions
Laboratory evaluation of glucose
may be indica tive of immunodeficiency.
metabolism
 Hyperproteinermia in most birds is indicated by plasma
total protein (biuret) concentrations of greater than 4.5g/dL
In general, the blood glucose concentration in normal birds
(45 g/L). Hyperproteinemia is usually the result of dehydra-
ranges from 200 to 500 mg/dL (11.10-27.76mmol/L). The
tion, acute or chronic inflammation, or a preovulatory con-
plasma glucose concentration varies according to a circadian
dition in hens. Increased albumin and globulin concentrations
rhythm; however, this variation is clinically insignificant in
with a normal A:G ratio are commonly associated with
healthy birds. The normal blood glucose concentration is
dehydration. Hyperproteinemia caused by hyperglobulin-
maintained by hepatic glycogenolysis during short-term
emia with hypoalbuminemia results in a decreased A:G ratio
fasting. Specifically, short-terrm fasting (e.g., 1-8 days) in
and is frequently associated with chronic inflammatory dis-
birds does not decrease glucose utilization per unit body
eases in birds, especially with diseases such as Chlamydophi-
weight, as it does in fasted mammals."4 During fasting. the
losis, aspergillosis, tuberculosis, and egg-related coelomitis.
greatest energy loss is associated with fat depletion and
A decreased A:G ratio with a normal total plasma protein
protein mobilization, thereby resulting in the loss of body
weight in birds, which is seen as a reduction in the pectoral
Hyperproteinemia associated with normal albumin and ele-
muscle mass. The blood glucose concentration remains
vated globulin concentrations is suggestive of acute inflam-
remarkably stable during short-term fasting in birds, and it
matory diseases or preovulatory conditions in egg-laying
is more stable in carnivorous birds during prolonged periods
hens. With acute inflammation, electrophoretic patterns
of fasting compared with granivorous birds.
typically demonstrate increased concentration of alpha and/
Blood glucose regulation varies with avian species.
or beta globulins; however, gamma globulin increases may
Whereas insulin plays a key role in mammalian and carnivo-
also be observed. Hens undergoing active folliculogenesis
rous bird glucose homeostasis, glucagon plays a major role
will exhibit a hyperproteinemia with a decreased A:G ratio
in the maintenance of normal blood glucose concentrations
as a result of estrogen-induced production of yolk proteins
in granivorous birds.24.3 This idea is supported by the rela-
that migrate with globulins on electrophoresis. Hyperpro-
tive abundance of alpha cells in the pancreas of granivorous
teinemia associated with hyperalbuminemia and hypoglob-
birds while the distribution of the pancreatic islet cells of
ulinemia results in an increased A:G ratio and suggests
carnivorous birds resembles that of mammals. Granivorous
dehydration in birds with low plasma globulin concentra-
birds also have a lower insulin:glucagon ratio compared with
tions. Dehydrated birds subjected to chronic stress or other
that of mammals. Their pancreas insulin content is less than
immunosuppressive conditions may demonstrate this type
20% of the insulin content of a mammalian pancreas while
 of plasma protein profile.
the glucagon content is 2 to 5 times greater. Also, pancre-
Hypoproteinemia in birds can be associated with hypoal-
atectomy induces hypoglycemia in granivorous birds, but 
buminemia and hypoglobulinemia. This can occur with
hyperglycemia in carnivorous birds.
 overhydration during fluid therapy or a proportional loss of
 Glucagon is produced by pancreatic alpha cells that main-
albumin and globulins. The latter can be associated with
tain normal plasma concentrations of 1-4ng/mL, which
    sa s  
is 10-50-fold greater than the normal mammalian concen-
failure resulting in large volumes of intracoelomic effusion).
trations.?4 The blood glucagon concentration increases by
593
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
100-200% in birds during a 24-48-hour fast. As a result,
correction of the hyperglycemic state with insulin therapy.
the blood glucose concentration increases along with an
Based on euglycemic psittacine birds, reference intervals for
increase in free fatty acids, insulin, and cholecystokinin. On
fructosamine are 1l3-238μmol/L and intervals for β-
the other hand, glucose decreases the release of pancreatic
hydroxybutyric acid are 450-1422 μmol/L. It has been dem-
glucagon. A significant increase in glucose stimulates the
onstrated that blood glycated hemoglobin (HbG) can also
release of insulin from pancreatic beta cells.
be an indicator of the blood glucose status of the ostrich
Hypoglycemia in most birds is indicated by blood glucose
(Struthio camelus) and kestrel (Faico sparverius).?? The gly-
concentrations of less than 200 mg/dL (1l.10 mmol/L) and
cated hemoglobin of these birds is 1.2 ± 0.20% of the total
results from prolonged starvation, severe liver disease (e.g.-
hemoglobin compared to 3-6% in most mammals. The rela-
Pacheco disease), septicemia, enterotoxemia, or endocrine
tively low normal HbG of birds appears to be related to the
disorders (e.g..  hypothyroidism).  Delayed separation of
      d 
serum or plasma from avian blood cells does not significantly
blood glucose. Blood glycated hemoglobin reflects the
decrease the glucose level in the sample, as it does in mam-
malian blood, because avian erythrocytes use fatty acids
than does fructosamine concentration because it reflects the
rather than glucose for energy." Hypoglycemia-induced sei-
blood glucose concentration during the lifespan of the
erythrocyte. Although measurement of glycated hemoglo-
glucose can fall as low as 80mg/dL (4.44mmol/L) with
bin may be useful in monitoring recovery from the hyper-
sudden exercise following prolonged food restriction during
glycemic state, it takes longer to detect changes than does
flight training.22
measurement of fructosamine because of its long life span
 In general, hyperglycemia in most birds is indicated by
in erythrocytes.
blood glucose concentrations of greater than 500mg/dL
(27.76 mmol/L). Hyperglycemia occurs with diabetes melli-
tus, catecholamine release, and glucocorticosteroid excess,
Laboratory detection of exocrine
such as occurs with stress or administration of corticoste-
pancreatic insufficiency
roids. Excess glucocorticosteroids result in a mild to moder-
ate increase in the blood glucose concentration (<600mg/dL
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is a disorder resulting from
(33.3l mmol/L)) in birds. Exertion, excitement, and extreme
an insufficient secretion of pancreatic digestive enzymes.
temperatures stimulate the release of catecholamines, which
Clinical signs associated with this disorder result from diges-
also results in a mild to moderate increase in the blood
tive malabsorption and include voluminous feces with a
glucose concentration. Glucose concentrations of greater
than 700 mg/dL (38.86 mmol/L) are suggestive of diabetes
chalklike appearance, polyphagia, and weight loss. This dis-
order is a result of a severe progressive loss of pancreatic
mellitus in most birds. The pathophysiology of diabetes mel-
acinar tissue, either from atrophy or destruction associated
litus in birds varies among different species and may result
with an inflammatory disease (pancreatitis). A presumptive
from increased glucagon secretion or hypoinsulinemia.
diagnosis can be obtained based upon clinical signs and
Although glucagon appears to have a major role in glucose
response of affected birds to oral pancreatic enzyme supple-
metabolism in granivorous birds, those with diabetes mel-
mentation. In birds there has been limited use of plasma
litus have been shown to respond to insulin therapy. Birds
assays for the activities of pancreatic digestive enzymes sulch
       
as amylase and lipase that may leak from injured pancreatic
concentrations exceeding 1 mg/dL (0.055 mmol/L). Pancre-
cells into the blood. Reference values for pigeons indicate
atic islet cell tumors and pancreatitis (bacterial and viral
normal plasma amylase activity to be between 382 and
etiologies) have been suggested as being causes of diabetes
556 IU/L and lipase activity between 0 and 5 IU/L.2
mellitus in psittacine birds. Detection of pancreatitis by
increased serum  amylase activity  has been occasionally
reported in birds. In some species (e.g., toucans, Ramphasti-
dae), diabetes mellitus occurs commonly and appears to be
Laboratory detection of muscle injury
related to a fruit diet. Excessive iron storage. another
common disorder of toucans, can also be associated with
Creatine kinase (CK) is a muscle-specific enzyme in birds
diabetes mellitus in birds.
 that can be used to detect muscle cell damage.ss The normal
 Plasma fructosamine and β-hydroxybutyric acid concen-
plasma CK activity in most species ranges from lo0 to
trations appear to be useful when monitoring the avian
500IU/L. Increased plasma CK activity can result from
patient being treated for diabetes mellitus. It has been
muscle cell injury or marked exertion and is frequently
demonstrated that both analytes increase in diabetic birds
observed in birds with seizure disorders or birds that are
with prolonged hyperglycemia and decrease following the
struggling against restraint during blood collection. Muscle
594
CHAPTER 35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds
tissue damage can occur with traumatic injury, intramuscu-
lar injections of irritating fluids, or systemic infections that
Laboratory evaluation of endocrine
affect the skeletal or cardiac muscle.
disorders
Skeletal muscle injury should also be considered when
plasma AST activity is increased. Measurement of plasma CK
Thyroid
activity can be useful for determining if muscle injury versus
Both thyroxine or tetraiodothyronine (Ta) and triodothyro-
hepatocellular injury is the cause of increased plasma AST
activity. Thus, an increased plasma AST activity without an
secreted hormone is T4, whereas T, is formed peripherally by
increased plasma CK activity is suggestive of hepatocelular
deiodination of Ta and in comparison to mammals, birds 
disease in birds; however, other tests should also be employed
contain less Ta, but similar T, concentrations. The plasma or
to fully evaluate the presence of hepatic disease in birds.
serum Ta concentration of adult birds of many species ranges
(See discussion under Laboratory Evaluation of the Avian
between 5 and 15ng/mL (6-19 pmol/mL) and the T, con-
Liver.) Severe skeletal muscle injury often results in marked
increases of the plasma CK activity and moderate increases
Ml)44 Circulating Ta and T, are bound to protein. A T4-
of the plasma AST activity. Plasma AST appears to have a
binding globulin is absent in birds; therefore, most of the 
longer half-life (mean of 7.lohr from muscle) than CK
thyroid hormones are bound to albumin. These hormones
(mean of 3.07 hr from muscle),. and after a single insult to
also are bound secondarily to other proteins (e.g. trans-
muscle, as may occur with an intramuscular injection of an
thyretin (prealbumin) and alpha globulin). The binding of
irritating drug. the CK activity may return to normal before
thyroid hormones to albumin and other blood proteins is
the AST activity3438 Regarding situations in which
the
weak, however, thereby resulting in greater free-Ta percent-
plasma CK activity has returned to normal after muscle
ages in the blood of birds compared with those in mammals.44
injury but the plasma AST activity remains increased, an
Compared with Ta. T, is more metabolically active at the
erroneous diagnosis of hepatobiliary disease may be made if
cellular level. The ratio of T, to T, in blood varies with the
  s  a  s i 
plasma CK activity. plasma AST activity does not usually
in the bile and urine. In birds, T, and T, have relatively short 
increase significantly with normal capture and restraint of
half-lives compared with those in mammals, and a signifi-
struggling birds, but under these conditions, a bird with a
cant diurnal rhythm is more easily demonstrated in birds
compared with mammals. In chickens, plasma T concentra-
the AST and the CK activity.
tions decrease during the light phase and increase during
Increased plasma ALT activity may occur with muscle
the dark phase of the light cycle. Plasma T, concentrations 
injury. Plasma ALT appears to have a longer half-life
 behave in the opposite manner. The pattern of food intake
(mean of 1l.99 hr from muscle) compared with plasma CK
may influence this rhythm.
(mean of 3.07 hr from muscle); therefore, activity of ALT
       
sensitive methods used to measure the plasma or serum T4
injury.34.38
and T, concentrations in birds. Protein-bound iodine deter-
Plasma LD activity also increases with muscle injury.
mination is not a sensitive test for iodine-containing hor-
Because the plasma half-life of LD (mean of 0.48 hr from
mones in birds, primarily because avian blood contains a
muscle)is shorter than that of CK (mean of 3.07hr from
large amount of nonhormonal iodo-proteins compared with
muscle), the two enzymes can be evaluated concurrently to
mammalian blood.
differentiate hepatocellular damage from muscle injury.34.3s
Secretion of thyroid hormones by the thyroid gland is
In most birds, increased plasma LD activity with normal CK
governed by the concentration of circulating thyroid hor-
activity is suggestive of hepatocellular disease. Validation
mones. A decrease in the circulating concentration of thyroid
and evaluation of LD isoenzymes may be helpful in differ-
hormones
 stimulates the pituitary gland to release
entiating hepatic versus muscle disorders; however, most
thyrotropin-releasing hormone, which stimulates the release
veterinary laboratories do not routinely offer LD isoenzyme
of thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH]} via
determination.
neuroendocrine-controlled mechanisms. In turn, the release 
Capture myopathy in Sandhill cranes (Grus Canadensis
of TsH stimulates the secretion of thyroid hormones.
A TSH-stimulation test has been used to evaluate thyroid
AST, and LDH within 1 hour of capture. The peak activity
function in a variety of birds.32,33 In general, a prestimulation
      o  a go
plasma Ta concentration is obtained to compare with a post-
10-17 days, CK and LDH activities had returned to normal;
stimulation sample, which is obtained 4 to 6 hours after the
however, plasma AST activities were still 2-5 times higher
intramuscular administration of TSH. A dosage of 1 IU of
than normal reference values.
TSH per bird, regardless of the body weight, is typically used.
595
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
A normal response is indicated by a 2.5-fold or greater
strate a greater than 10-fold increase in post-ACTH stimula-
increase in the T, level after TSH stimulation. Responses of
tion plasma corticosterone concentration compared with
lesser magnitude are suggestive of hypothyroidism. Mea-
pre-ACTH stimulation concentration. Stimulation dosages
surements of T, concentrations appear to be inconsistent and
of 50 and 125 mg of ACTH have been used in birds for this
unreliable. Low baseline total Ta concentrations are poor
test.32
indicators of hypothyroidism in birds, beca use many healthy
Hyperadrenocorticism in birds is usually iatrogenic, caused
birds normally have low Ta concentrations. This may.
by excessive administration of exogenous glucocorticoste-
however, reflect diurnal variation. Also, other conditions
roids; excess endogenous corticosterone is rare. The effects
(e.g. stress and systemic disease) can decrease plasma T4
 of glucocorticosteroid administration are variable and depen-
concentrations. Therefore, TSH-stimulation testing provides
dent on both dose and duration. Hematologic changes
a more reliable method for detecting hypothyroidism in
include lymphopenia, leukocytosis, and heterophilia. Blood
birds.21
biochemical changes include hypercholesterolemia and mild
Other blood biochemical abnormalities often associated
hyperglycemia, with blood glucose concentrations ranging
with hypothyroidism in birds include increases in choles-
between 500 and 600 mg/dL (27.76-33.31 mmol/L). Glucos-
terol, triglycerides, uric acid, AST, and LDH. Hypothyroidism
uria should also be expected.
Adrenal insufficiency (i.e., Addison disease) is also rare in
nonregenerative anemia.
birds. The decreased production of corticosterone or aldoste-
Hyperthyroidism is rare in birds. An increased plasma
 rone (or both) in this condition results in a decreased plasma
concentration of Ta and T, is suggestive of hyperthyroidism.
sodium:potassium (Na:K) ratio. A Na:K ratio of less than 27.
hypoglycemia, hypercalcemia, and low urine specific gravity
Parathyroid
are suggestive of adrenal insufficiency. Beca use hyperkale-
The primary function of parathyroid hormone (PTH).
mia from other causes (e.g., delayed separation of plasma
secreted by the parathyroid gland, is maintenance of the
from cells, acidosis, hemolysis, and renal disease) may result
normal plasma calcium concentration by its action on bone.
in a decreased Na:K ratio, an ACTH-stimulation test may be
kidney, and intestinal mucosa. Unfortunately, plasma PTH
helpful in confirming the presence of adrenal insufficiency.
analysis in birds is commercially unavailable. Therefore.
detection of disorders associated with abnormal blood PTH
concentrations  (e.g..  hyper-  and  hypoparathyroidism)
References
depends on the evaluation of blood calcium and phosphorus
concentrations in birds. Hypoparathyroidism has not been
1. Alberts H, Halsema WB, de Bruijne J, et al. (1988) A water
reported in birds.
deprivation test for the differentiation of polyuric disorders in
birds. Avian Patho! 17: 385-9.
Adrenal
2. Amann O, Visschers JM, Dorrestein GM, Westerhof I, Lumeij
Corticosterone is the primary glucocorticoid that is produced
 JT (2006) Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in pigeons. Avian
by the avian adrenal gland.? Corticosterone secretion in
Patho! 35: 58-62.
3. Anderson CB (1989) Determination of chicken and turkey
birds is regulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH),
which is released from the pituitary gland in response to
and the biuret method. Avian Dis 33: 93-6.
corticotropin-releasing factor. In birds given an intramuscu-
 4. Battison AL, Buczkowski S, Archer FJ (1996) The potential use
lar injection of ACTH, plasma corticosterone concentrations
of plasma glutamate dehydrogenase activity for the evaluation
peak in 3 hours followed by a sharp decrease at 4 hours. The
of hepatic disease in the cockatiel (Nymphicus hoflandicus). Ver
plasma corticosterone concentration increases during times
Clin Pathol 25: 43-7.
of stress. Corticosterone also has mineralocorticoid activity.
5. Bollinger T, Wobeser G, Clark RG (1989) Concentration of cre-
Plasma corticosterone concentrations exhibit a diurnal
atine kinase and aspartate aminotransferase in the blood of wild
rhythm as well, with maximum concentrations occurring at
mallards following capture by three methods for banding.
the beginning of the day. Plasma corticosterone concentra-
J Wildl Dis 25: 225-31.
tions are also influenced by other physiologic factors, such
6. Braun EJ (1985) Comparative aspects of the urinary concen-
as the ovulatory cycle of hens and changes in the seasons.
trating process. Ren Physio! 8: 249-60.
 Plasma corticosterone concentrations in birds can be
7. Bromidge ES, Wells JW, Wight PAL (1985) Elevated bile acids
in the plasma of laying hens fed rapeseed meal. Res Ver Sri 39:
determined by radioimmunoassay. Single baseline corticos-
378-82.
 terone determinations may have little value in establishing
8. Businga NK, Langenberg J, Carlson L (2007) Successful treat-
the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in birds. An ACTH-
ment of capture myopathy in three wild greater sandhill cranes
stimulation test may be more valuable, however, when pre-
[Grus Canadensis tabida]. J Avian Med Surg 2l: 294-8.
and 60- to 90-minute post-ACTH stimulation corticosterone
9. Clarkson MJ, Richards TG (197l) The liver with special refer-
concentrations are compared. Normal birds should demon-
ence to bile acid formation. In: Bell DJ, Freeman BM (eds.).
596
CHAPTER 35 Clinical Chemistry of Birds
Physiology and Biochemistry of the Domestic Fowt. New York: Aca-
30. Lewandowski AH, Campbell TW, Harrison GJ (1986) Clinical
demic Press, pp. 1085-1114.
chemistries. In: Harrison GJ, Harrison LR (eds.), Avian Medicine
10. Clubb SL, Schubot RM, Joymer K (l99l) Hematologic and
and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp. 192-200.
serum biochemical reference intervals in juvenile cockatoos.
31. Lothrop C, Harrison GJ, Schultz D, Utteridge T (1989) Misce]-
J Assoc Avian Ver 5: 16-26.
laneous diseases. In: Harrison GJ, Harrison LR (eds.), Clinica!
11. Clubb SL, Schubot RM, Joymer K {l990) Hematologic and
Avian Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp.
serum biochemical reference intervals in juvenile eclectus
525-7.
parrots (Eclectus roratus). J Assoc Avian Ver 4: 218-25.
32. Lothrop CD Jr. (1996) Diseases of the endocrine system. In:
12. Clubb SL, Schubot RM, Joymer K (199l) Hematologic and
Rosskopf WJ, Woerpel RW (eds.). Diseases of Cage and Aviary
serum biochemical reference intervals in juvenile macaws {Ara
Birds. 3rd ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins,:368-79.
sp.). J Assoc Avian Vet 5: 15462.
33. Lothrop CD Jr, Loomis MR, Olsen JH (1985) Thyrotropin stimu-
13. Cray C, Andreopoulos A (2003) Comparison of two methods
lation test for evaluation of thyroid function in psittacine birds.
to determine plasma bile acid concentrations in healthy birds.
J Am Ver Med Assoc 186: 47-8.
J Avian Med Surg 17: 1l-15.
34. Lumeij JT (l987) A Contribution to Clinical Investigative
14. Cray C, Rodriquez M, Zalas J (2007) Protein electrophoresis in
Methods for Birds, with Special Reference to the Racing Pigeon
psittacine plasma. Ver Clin Pathol 36: 64-72.
(Columbia livia domesrica) [thesis]. Utrecht, Proefschrift.
15. Cray C, Gautier, Harris DJ, Arheart KL (2008) Changes in clini-
 35. Lumeij JT (1994) Avian clinical enzymology. Semin Avian Exotic
 siq and u saa Pe a e e aa [e
Per Med 3: 14-24.
altered liver function and disease. J Avian Med Surg 22: 17-24.
36. Lumeij JT (199l) Fasting and postprandial bile acid concentra-
16. Duke GE (1986) Alimentary canal: secretion and digestion,
tions in racing pigeons (Columbia livia domesrica) and mallards
special digestive functions, and absorption. In: Sturkie PD, (ed.).
(Anas plary rhynchus). J Assor Avian Ver 5: 197-200.
Avian Physiology. 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag. pp.
37. Lumeij JT (1994) Hepatology. In: Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Har-
289-302.
rison LR (eds.). Avian Medicine: Principles and Application. Lake
17. Franson JC, Murray HC, Bunck C (1985) Enzyme activities in
Worth, FL: Wingers Publishing. pp. 522-37.
plasma, kidney, liver, and muscle of five avian species. J Wildlife
38. Lumeij JT, de Bruijne JJ, Slob A {1998) Enzyme activities in
Dis 21: 33-9.
tissues and elimination half-lives of homologous muscle and
18. Goldstein DL, Braun EJ (1989) Structure and concentrating
ability in the avian kidney. Am J Physiol 256: R501-9.
Avian Pathol 17: 851-64.
 19. Goldstein DL, Skadhauge E (2000) Renal and extrarenal regula-
39. Lumeij JT, Meidam M, Walfswinkel J (1 988) Changes in plasma
tion of body fluid composition. In Whittow GC (ed.), Srurkie's
chemistry after drug induced liver disease or muscle necrosis in
Avian Physiology. 5th ed. San Diego, Calif. Academic Press. pp.
racing pigeons (Columbia livia domestica). Avian Pathol 17: 865-74.
265-98.
40. Lumeij JT, Overduin LM (1990) Plasma chemistry reference
20. Griminger P, Scanes CG (1986) Protein metabolism. In: Sturkie
values in Psittaciformes. Avian Parhof 19: 235-44.
PD (ed.). Avian Physiology. 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag.
41. Lumeij JT, Remple JD (199l) Plasma urea, creatinine, and uric
pp. 326-44.
acid concentrations in relation to feeding in peregrine falcons
21. Harms CA, Hoskinson J, Bruyette DS, et al. (1994) Develop-
(Falco peregrinus). Avian Patho! 20: 79-83.
ment of an experimental model of hypothyroidism in cockatiels
42. Lumeij JT, Remple JD (1992) Plasma bile acid concentrations
(Nymphicus hollandicus). Am J Ver Res 55: 399-404.
in response to feeding in peregrine falcons (Falco peregrinus).
22. Harr KE (2002) Clinical chemistry of companion avian species:
Avian Dis 36: 1060-2.
a review. Ver Clin Patho! 3l: 140-51.
43. Lumeij JT, Wolfswinkel J (l988) Blood chemistry reference
23. Harvey S, Scanes CG, Brown KI (1986) Adrenals. In: Sturkie
values for use in Columbine hepatology. Avian Pathol 17:
PD (ed.). Avian Physiology. 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag.
515-17.
pp. 479-93.
44. McNabb FMA (2000) Thyroids. n: Whittow GC (ed.), Srurkie's
 24. Hazelwood RL (1 986) Carbohydrate metabolism. In: Sturkie PD
Avian Physiology. 5th ed. San Diego: Academic Press, pp.
{ed.). Avian Physiology, 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag. pp.
461-88.
303-25.
45. Munson L, Clyde VL, Orosz SE (1996) Severe hepatic fibrosis
25. Hochleithner M (1994) Biochemistries. In: Ritchie BW, Harri-
 and bile duct hyperplasia in four Amazon parrots. J Avian Med
son GJ, Harrison LR (eds.) Avian Medicine: Principles and Applica-
Surg 10: 252-7.
tion. Lake Worth, FL: Wingers Publishing. 223-45.
46. Scope A, Frommlet F Schwendenwein I (2004) Circadian and
26. Hochleithner M (1989) Reference values for selected psittacine
seasonal variability and influence of sex and race on eight clini-
species using a dry chemistry system. J Assoc Avian Ver 3:
cal chemistry parameters in budgerigars (Melopsittacus undularus.
207-9.
Shaw, 1805). Res Ver Sci 78: 85-91.
27. Hoefer HL (1994) Bile acid testing in psittacine birds. Semin
47. Shahbazkia HR, Nazifl S (2008) Glycated haemoglobin (HbG)
Avian Exotic Per Med 3: 33-7.
 a5 a stable indicator of blood glucose in ostrich. Comp Clin Patho!
28. Johnson AL (1986) Reproduction in the female. In: Stukie PD
17: 9-12.
(ed.), Avian Physiology. New York: Springer-Verlag, pp. 403-31.
48. Sheldon J, Hoover JP, Payton, ME (2007) Plasma uric acid,
29. Kogut MH, Powell KC (1993) Preliminary findings of altera-
 creatinine, and urea nitrogen concentrations after whole blood
tions in serum alkaline phosphatase activity in chickens during
administration via the gastrointestinal tract in domestic pigeons
coccidial infections. J Comp Parh 108: 113-19.
[Columba livia]. J Avian Med Surg 2l: 130-4.
597
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
49. Sopano JU, Whitesides JF, Pedersoli WM, et al. (1988) Compara-
52. Wentworth BC, Ringer RK (1986) Thyroids. Im: Sturkie PD
tive albumin determination in ducks, chickens, and turkeys by
(ed.), Avian Physiology. 4th ed. New York: Springer-Verlag, pp.
electrophoretic and dye-binding methods. Am J Ver Res 49:
452-65.
325-6.
53. Wideman RF, Jr. (l99l) Autoregulation of avian renal plasma
50. Sturkie PD (l 986) Kidneys, extrarenal salt excretion, and urine.
flow: contribution of the renal portal system. J Comp Physio! B
In: Sturkie PD (ed.). Avian Physiology. 4th ed. New York:
160: 663-9.
Springer-Verlag. pp. 359-82.
51. Tschopp R, Bailey T, Di Somma A, Silvanose C (2007) Urinalysis
J Avian Med Surg 2l: 8-12.
598
36
Clinical Chemistry of Reptiles
Terry W. Campbell
Calorado State University
Normal reference values for specific blood biochemical tests
Environmental conditions, such as temperature, season,
have been established for only a few of the 7,500 or so rep-
geographic area, ecological habitat, and wild versus captive
tilian species. Reference values for snakes include Australian
status as well as physiologic factors, such as species, nutri-
elapid snakes, ball python (Python regius). common boa
tional status, reproductive status, gender, and age affect the
constrictor (Constrictor constrictor). common kingsnake (Lam-
propeltis getulus). diamond-backed water snake (Nerodia
that significant metabolic disorders occur in captive reptiles
rhombifera rhombifera), Eastern massasauga rattlesnake (Sis-
exposed to unhealthy conditions, such as inadequate nutri-
trurus catenatus catenatus), emerald tree boa (Coralius caninus).
tion, improper environment, and overcrowding. These
gopher snake (Pituophis melanoleucus). green tree python
factors often have not been considered when establishing
(Chondropython viridis). indigo snake (Drymarchon coralis),.
reference intervals, thereby making those intervals less
jungle carpet python (Morella spilota cheynei). milk snake
meaningful. Methods of sample collection, handling, and
(Lampropeltis frianguium). rainbow boa (Epicrates cenchiria).
biochemical analysis are additional sources of variation in
red rat snake (Elaphe guttata). reticulated python (Python
the published reference values. Sample collection and han-
reticulatus). South American rattlesnake (Crotalus durissus fer-
dling are specifically problematic for blood biochemical
rifcus). and yellow rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta quadrivita-
studies of wild reptile populations. Therefore, published ref-
tfta).3.32 Reference values for lizards include bearded
erences are generally used as a broad guide to the interpreta-
dragons (Pogona vitticeps), blue-tongued skink (Tillqua scin-
tion of blood biochemical results in reptiles. Because of the
coldes). Egyptian spiny-tailed lizard (Uromastyx aegyptius).
difficulty in obtaining meaningful reference intervals for
green crested basillsk (Basilliscus plumifrons). green iguana
each reptilian species seen in clinical practice, most clinicians
(lguana iguana). Nile monitor (Varanus exanthematicus).
use decision levels or common ranges when assessing such
Savannah monitor ( Varanus niloticus), Tegu lizard (Tupinambus
patients. As discussed with the interpretation of avian blood
teguixin), and Tokay gecko (Gecko gecko).&32 Reference values
biochemical results (see Chapter 34, Clinical Chemistry of
for chelonians include African spurred tortoise (Geochelone
Birds). decision levels may vary among clinicians dealing
sulcata). Aldabra tortoise (Geochelone sp.). common box
with reptiles, depending on laboratory results and experi-
turtle (Terrapene carolina), desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii),
ence. The values suggested in this text are general guidelines
gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus). green sea turtle (Che-
that can be used as decision levels when evaluating each
lonia mydas). leopard tortoise (Geochelone pardalis), logger-
analyte in the reptilian blood biochemical profile. As sug-
head sea turtle (Caretta caretta), Mediterranean pond turtle
gested with valued avian patients, the process of evaluating
(Mauremys leprosa). Mediterranean tortoise (Testudo spp.).
the blood chemistries of reptilian patients can be refined by
ornate box turtle (Terrapene ornata), painted turtle (Chryse-
obtaining a set of normal values from that patient when
mys picta), radiated tortoise (Testudo radiate), red-eared slider
housed under a given set of environmental and nutritional
(Trachemys scripta). red-footed tortoise (Geochelone carbon-
parameters. When that patient becomes ill, a more meaning-
aria), and star tortoise (Geochelone elegans).16,233234 Refer-
ful set of reference values, which are specifc for that indi-
ence values for crocodilians include American alligator
vidual patient, can be used to evaluate the chemistry results.
(Alligator mississippiensis) and dwarf caiman (Paleosuchus
Blood biochemistry profiles are frequently used to assess
palpebrosus).
the health of reptilian patients;: however, controlled studies
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
599
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
 a  s n  a a on i
 diately after blood collection. This may be difficult to achieve
chemistries of reptiles compared with those of domestic
in field studies. The reason for immediate separation is that
mammals generally are lacking. Therefore, reptilian clinical
prolonged contact between the plasma and the cells may
chemistry has not achieved the same critical evaluation as
cause an artifactual decrease in plasma glucose due to cel-
that in domestic mammalian medicine. In general, interpre-
lular metabolism and an increase in plasma potassium due
tations of reptilian blood biochemistries are considered to be
to leakage from the cells. Also, as erythrocytes age, the cell
the same as those for domestic mammals, with the consid-
membranes become increasingly porous resulting in hemo-
eration that external factors (e.g. environmental condi-
lysis which affects biochemical testing of the blood. In
tions) have greater influence on the normal physiology and
mammals, hemolysis may. depending upon the specific
health of ectothermic vertebrates compared with endo-
assay used, result in increases in potassium, calcium, phos-
therms. Reptilian blood biochemistries are influenced by
phorus, magnesium, glucose, aspartate aminotransferase.
species, age gender, nutritional status, season, and physio-
alanine aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine
logic status, thereby making the interpretation of results
kinase, total bilirubin, total protein, lipase, and amylase with
challenging.
decreases in creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, and bile acids.
In the green iguana (Iguana iguana); however, hemolytic
plasma samples revealed no change in sodium, calcium, uric
acid, or creatine kinase, but did reveal an increase in potas-
Sample collection and handling
sium, phosphorus, total protein, albumin, and aspartate
aminotransferase. Increased storage time or temperature
Blood samples for biochemical studies can be collected from
resulted in a decrease in plasma sodium in two species of
reptiles using a variety of methods; the choice depends on
tortoises with variable effects on potassium. Blood from log-
the species, needed volume, size of the reptile, physiologic
gerhead turtles (Caretta caretta) stored up to 24 hours at 4°℃
condition of the patient, and preference of the collector (see
(39°F) before the cells were separated from the plasma did
Chapter 20, Hematology of Reptiles)." Depending on the
not reveal significant changes in the majority of the bio-
collection site, blood samples from reptiles, especially chelo-
    s 
nians, are often contaminated with lymphatic fluid. It has
onstrated significant decreased activity).'s In the same study.
been suggested, based upon evaluation of plasma and lymph
there were also no significant differences in plasma bio-
samples in red-eared sliders (Trachemys scripta elegans) that
chemistries between blood collected in lithium heparin or
most of the analytes in lymph (i.e. glucose, calcium, phos-
sodium heparin.
phorus, sodium, urea, and enzymes) are comparable with
Depending upon the analytic method, the sample col-
those of plasma or serum in reptiles while a few others (i.e.
lected from small reptiles is often of sufficient volume for
- m    s   go
only a few tests and not for a complete panel. Therefore, the
centrations in lymph compared with blood." The same com-
clinician must decide which tests are most beneficial in the
parisons, however, may not be true to all species of reptiles.
evaluation of the reptilian patient. Blood biochemical tests
Therefore, the amount of lymph contamination in the blood
that appear to be most useful include total protein, glucose.
sample should be considered when interpreting the blood
uric acid, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), creatine kinase
biochemical parameters of reptiles. The best results are
(CK), calcium, and phosphorus. Other tests that may be
obtained from blood samples that are uncontaminated with
helpful include creatine, lactate dehydrogenase (LD),
lymph.
sodium, potassium, chloride, total COz, and protein electro-
Many clinicians prefer to collect blood using an anticoagu-
phoresis. Modern blood chemistry analyzers can perform
lant (e.g., lithium heparin) for plasma biochemical testing of
many of these tests using a small sample volume (l0-30 μL),
reptiles, primarily because a greater sample volume can be
Commercial veterinary laboratories often offer chemistry
achieved for plasma compared with serum. Collection of
profiles that require a minimal volume of serum or plasma
blood into lithium heparin also allows for evaluation of both
(0.5 mL). Blood chemistry analyzers that use dry reagents
the hemogram and blood biochemistries using one sample.
and reflectance photometry for "in-house" testing may be
Plasma is preferred over serum because clot formation in
used for reptilian samples and often require smaller sample
reptilian blood is unpredictable and often prolonged, thereby
volumes.
producing significant changes in some of the chemistries
The plasma of most reptiles is colorless; however, it may
(e.g., serum electrolytes). Reptilian blood clots slowly
 be orange to yellow because of carotenoid pigments in the
because of alow intrinsic thromboplastin activity and a
diets of herbivores such as the green iguana (Iguana iguana).
strong natural, circulating antithrombin factor, which com-
The plasma of some snakes. such as pythons, may be a
pensates for the sluggish flow of blood.
 greenish yellow because of dietary carotenoids and ribofla-
 The ideal sample for biochermical testing is obtained by
vin. Some lizards normally have green plasma because of
separating the cells by centrifugation from the plasma imme-
high concentrations of biliverdin.3
600
CHAPTER 36 Clinical Chemistry of Reptiles
amount of available forage and water as determined by
Laboratory evaluation of reptilian kidneys
rainfall. In a study by Dickenson et al. (2002), free-ranging
tortoises that exhibited increased plasma uric acid, sodium,
The paired kidneys of many reptilian species are located
and potassium concentrations with decreased osmolality
within the pelvic canal. The elongated kidneys of snakes are
and urea nitrogen were considered to be actively consuming
located in the dorsal caudal part of the coelomic cavity, with
       i  r
the right kidney being cranial to the left. The ureters of snakes
is in contrast to the same population of tortoises that were
 u op n s ' an no an an oi 
not consuming significant amounts of food or water as sug-
Most species of lizards and chelonians (i.e., turtles, tortoises.
gested by increased plasma osmolality and urea nitrogen
and terrapins) have a urinary bladder; however, it differs
along with decreased uric acid concentration. Increased urea
from that of mammals in that the ureters of these reptiles do
nitrogen concentration was considered to be a reflection of
not empty directly into the bladder but empty into the
increased protein catabolism and perhaps dehydration.
urodeum of the cloaca.2 Terrestrial chelonians and, possibly.
Increased uric acid concentration was considered to be an
lizards use the urinary bladder primarily for water storage.
indication of increased dietary protein intake. Tortoises that
The reptilian renal cortex contains only simple nephrons
were feeding with restricted water intalke revealed higher
(i.e., cortical nephrons) with a tubular system devoid of
plasma osmolality with decreased BUN and increased uric
loops of Henle.'3 Therefore, reptiles cannot concentrate their
acid concentrations. During wet seasons, plasma osmolality
urine. Nitrogenous wastes excreted by the reptilian kidney
and uric acid, urea nitrogen, potassium, and sodium con-
include variable amounts of uric acid, urea, and ammonia,
centrations were lower than other seasons due to increased
depending on the animal's natural environment. Freshwater
rates of water consumption and bladder ermptying. Plasma
turtles that spend much of their lives in water excrete equal
concentrations of these analytes in captive tortoises having
amounts of ammonia and urea, whereas those with amphib-
constant access to water are expected to resemble free-
ious habits excrete more urea.'3 Sea turtles excrete uric acid.
ranging tortoises in wet years.
ammonia, and urea. Alligators excrete ammonia and uric
Creatinine is a normal constituent of mammalian urine.
acid. Terrestrial reptiles such as tortoises must conserve
but the amount formed in most reptiles is negligible (< lmg/
water, and ammonia, urea, and other soluble urinary nitrog-
dL or 88.4μmol/L). The blood creatinine concentration is
enous wastes require large amounts of water for excretion.
generally considered to be of poor diagnostic value in the
Therefore, to conserve water, terrestrial reptiles produce
detection of renal disease in reptiles. By contrast, the blood
more insoluble nitrogenous waste in the form of uric acid
       
and urate salts, which are eliminated in a semisolid state.
detection of renal disease in some reptilian species, but the
Blood biochemical detection of renal disease in reptiles is
test is unavailable from most veterinary laboratories.
more difficult than in mammals because of the physiologic
Uric acid is the primary catabolic end product of protein,
differences in their kidneys. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and
nonprotein nitrogen, and purines in terrestrial reptiles, and 
      
it represents 80-90% of the total nitrogen excreted by the
kidneys.' The normal blood uric acid concentration in most
centrations may be more useful in the evaluation of renal
reptiles is less than 10mg/dL.
disease among aquatic reptiles that primarily excrete urea.
Hyperuricemia is indicated by uric acid values of greater
      
than 15 mg/dL, and is usually associated with renal disease.
normal urea nitrogen concentration in these species is less
Renal diseases that are associated with hyperuricemia
than 15mg/dL (<5.36 mmol/L). with the exception of ter-
include severe nephritis, nephrocalcinosis, and nephrotoxic-
restrial chelonians (especially desert species), which typically
ity. Hyperuricemia is not sensitive or specific for renal disease
have plasma urea nitrogen concentrations that vary from 30
in reptiles. Hyperuricemia associated with renal disease most
to 100mg/dL (10.71-35.70 mmol/L). This is considered to be
lilkely reflects the loss of two-thirds (or more) of the func-
a mechanism to elevate the plasma osmolarity and reduce
tional renal mass. Hyperuricemia in reptiles can also be
water loss from the body.?7 The plasma osmolarity of fresh-
associated with gout or recent ingestion of a high-protein
water turtles and crocodilians is approximately the same as
diet. Carnivorous reptiles tend to have higher blood uric acid
that of common domestic mammals, but it is higher in ter-
concentrations than herbivorous reptiles, and their plasma
restrial reptiles. An increase in plasma urea nitrogen concen-
uric acid concentrations generally peak the day after a meal,
tration in reptiles may be suggestive of severe renal disease.
thereby resulting in a 1.5-2.0-fold increase in uric acid.19
prerenal azotemia, or a high dietary urea intake; however, it
Gout can result from an overproduction of uric acid (i.e.,
does not reliably increase under these conditions.
primary gout) or from an acquired disease that interferes
Free-ranging desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) demon-
with the normal production and excretion of uric acid (i.e..
  a   , e a
secondary gout). Conditions that result in secondary gout
nitrogen, uric acid, and osmolality values respond to the
among reptiles include starvation, renal disease (especially
601
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
tubular damage). severe and prolonged dehydration, and
rhea). kidneys, or possibly. the salt gland. Iatrogenic
excessive dietary purines (i.e., herbivorous reptiles fed diets
hyponatremia can occur with overhydration when admin-
rich in animal proteins). Hyperuricemia associated with
istering intravenous or intracoelomic fluids that are low in
renal disease and gout often results in greater than twofold
sodium. Hypernatremia results from dehydration, either
increases in uric acid concentrations.
from excessive water loss or inadequate water intake, or
      n
from excessive dietary salt intake.
(ALT) and allkaline phospha tase activity. Significant increases
Chloride is the principle anion in the blood, and along
in the plasma activities of these enzymes, however, do not
with sodium, represents the primary osmotically active com-
occur with renal disease, because most of the enzymes
ponent of plasma in most reptiles. The normal serum or
released from damaged renal cells are released in urine, not
plasma chloride concentration of reptiles varies among
in plasma.30
species but generally ranges between 100 and 130mEq/L
 Reptiles rarely exhibit polyuria with renal disease. There-
(mmol/L). Plasma chloride concentrations of turtles tend to
fore, urinalysis rarely is performed to assess renal disease
range between 100 and 1l0mEq/L (mmol/L). whereas
because a lack of available urine to perform the tests.
those of most lizards and snakes range between lo0 and
The normal glomerular filtration rate (GFR) based upon
1 30 mEq/L (mmol/L). The blood chloride concentration pro-
iohexol clearance has been established for the green iguana
vides the least clinically useful information regarding the
( Iguana iguana} and can be used to evaluate kidney function in
electrolytes. Hypochloremia in reptiles is rare and, when
that species.2122 Reported values are 14.78-18.34mL/kg/hr
present, is suggestive of the excessive loss of chloride ions
(mean and standard deviation of 16.56 ± 3.90mL/kg/hr).
or of overhydration with fluids that are low in chloride ions.
Hyperchloremia is associated with dehydration and, possi-
bly, renal tubular disease or disorders of the salt glands.
Electrolytes and acid base
Potassium
Water balance
Normal serum or plasma potassium concentrations vary
Species, diet, and environmental conditions such as tem-
among reptilian species, but they generally range between
2 and 6mEq/L (mmol/L). The normal plasma potassium
reptiles. Desert species require less water than temperate
concentration of most turtles, lizards, and snakes ranges
and tropical species. Some reptiles have developed methods
between 2 and 6. 3 and 5. and 3 and 6mEq/L (mmol/L).
for conserving water. For example, tortoises and some lizards
respectively. The amount of potassium in erythrocytes also
store water in the urinary bladder. Many reptiles can achieve
differs among reptiles; therefore, the potential for artifactual
water uptake through the cloaca by soaking. Water also is
hyperkalemia due to hemolysis varies with species.
conserved in reptiles by the elimination of nitrogenous
waste in the form of uric acid and urate salts, which are
inadequate dietary potassium intake or excessive gastroin-
excreted in a semisolid state.
testinal potassium loss (i.e., hypokalemia) or decreased renal
secretion of potassium (i.e., hyperkalemia). Hypokalemia
Sodium and chloride
can also be associated with severe allkalosis. Hyperkalemia
Dietary sodium is absorbed in the intestines and transported
can also result from excessive dietary potassium intake or
to the kidneys, where it then is excreted or resorbed, depend-
severe acidosis.
ing on the reptile's need for sodium. Some reptiles have
nasal salt glands that participate in the regulation of sodium.
Acid-base
potassium, and chloride concentrations in the blood. There-
The normal blood pH of turtles and most other reptiles
fore, disorders of the salt gland may affect the electrolyte
ranges between 7.5 and 7.7 at 23-25°℃.24 The normal blood
balance.
pH of some snakes and lizards may fall below 7.4. The blood
 The normal serum or plasma sodium concentration ranges
pH of reptiles is labile, however, and it changes with fluctua-
between 120 and 170mEq/L. The normal plasma sodium
tions in temperature. An increase in temperature or excite-
concentrations of tortoises and freshwater turtles range
ment may cause the blood pH to decrease.31 The blood pH
between 120 and 150 mEq/L (mmol/L). Sea turtles tend to
may increase to 7.7-7.8 during anesthesia. As in mammals,
have higher normal sodium plasma concentrations, which
the oxygen dissociation curve for reptilian hemoglobin shifts
range between 150 and 170mEq/L (mmol/L). The normal
to the left as the pH increases, thereby producing an increased
 plasma sodium concentrations of lizards range between 140
affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen but a decreased release to
and 170 mEq/L (mmol/L), and those of snakes, such as boas
tissues. The buffering systems that regulate blood pH in
and pythons, range between 130 and 160mEq/L (mmol/L),
mammals are most likely the same in reptiles, with the
Hyponatremia can result from excessive loss of sodium asso-
bicarbonate/carbonic acid buffer system being the most
ciated with disorders of the gastrointestinal tract (i.e., diar-
important because of the rapid rate of CO, elimination via
602
CHAPTER 36 Clinical Chemistry of Reptiles
the lungs after conversion from H,CO,. Total plasma CO, 0r
reproductive activity (vitellogenesis) at the time of sample
bicarbonate concentrations are rarely reported in reptiles;
collection. Regardless of age and gender, plasma ionized
however, normal total CO, values for most reptiles are
calcium concentrations remain consistent in healthy rep-
expected to range between 20 and 30mmol/L. A marked
tiles. The normal plasma ionized calcium concentration for
fasting physiologic metabolic alkalosis occurs in postprandial
healthy green iguanas (Iguana iguana) has been determined
alligators because of an anion shift, with bicarbonate replac-
to be 1.47 ± 0.105 mmol/L (5.9mg/dL ± 0.42).14
ing chloride in the blood as chloride is lost (as HCl) via
 In most reptiles hypocalcemia occurs when the plasma
 gastric secretions.' Therefore. a postprandial decrease of
calcium concentration is less than 8mg/dL (2.0mmol/L).
chloride and increase of bicarbonate concentrations are seen
Hypocalcemia can occur with dietary calcium and vitamin
in alligators and perhaps other reptiles.
D, deficiencies, excessive dietary phosphorus, alkalosis.
hypoalbuminemia, or hypoparathyroidism. Secondary
Calcium and phosphorus
herbivorous reptiles such as green iguanas (Iguana
Both blood calcium metabolism and the amount of
cient in calcium and contain excessive amounts of phospho-
ionized calcium in reptilian plasma are mediated by para-
rus. In addition, dietary deficiency in vitamin D, or lack of
thormone (PTH), calcitonin, and activated vitamin D, (1.25-
proper exposure to ultraviolet light predisposes reptiles to
dihydrocholecalciferol). Other hormones, such as estrogen,
hypocalcemia. Juvenile reptiles (especially green iguanas)
thyroxin, and glucagon, may also influence calcium metabo-
with secondary nutritional hyperparathyroidism commonly
lism in reptiles. The primary function of PTH is to maintain
 develop metabolic bone disease with fibrous osteodystrophy
normal blood calcium levels by its action on bone, kidneys.
and bone fractures.? Adult reptiles often develop muscle
and intestinal mucosa. Low blood levels of ionized calcium
tremors, paresis, and seizures with hypocalcemia. Carnivo-
stimulate the release of PTH, which results in calcium mobi-
rous reptiles that are fed all-meat, calcium-deficient diets
lization from bone, increased calcium absorption from the
intestines, and increased calcium reabsorption from the
ances in calcium and phosphorus. Secondary renal hyper-
kidneys.
parathyroidism may result in hypocalcemia as well.
 The exact role of calcitonin in reptiles is unknown, but it
 Hypercalcemia in reptiles is indicated by a plasma calcium
most likely has a physiologic role opposite that of PTH (i.e..
concentration of greater than 20 mg/dL (5.0 mmol/L). Typi-
inhibiting calcium resorption from bone). Increases in the
cally. this is an iatrogenic condition that is associated with
blood calcium level stimulate the release of calcitonin from
oversupplementation with oral or parenteral calcium and
the ultimobranchial gland.
vitamin D, Other differentials for hypercalcemia include
The active form of vitamin D, stimulates the absorption
primary hyperparathyroidism, pseudohyperparathyroidism,
of calcium and phosphorus by the intestinal mucosa. Pho-
and osteolytic bone disease; however, these disorders are
tochemical production of the active form of vitamin D, by
rarely reported in reptiles.
exposure to ultraviolet radiation (wavelength, 290-320nm)
The normal plasma phosphorus concentration for most
is believed to be essential for normal calcium metabolism in
reptiles ranges between 1 and 5 mg/dL (0.3 and 1.6mmol/L).
reptiles, especially basking species.
Gender differences have been reported for plasma phospho-
Female reptiles exhibit features of calcium metabolism
rus concentration in free-ranging populations of reptiles
 similar to those of birds during egg production. During egg
where females exhibit significantly higher concentrations
development, female reptiles exhibit hypercalcemia in
than males. This difference is likely to be associated with
response to estrogen and reproductive activity. The increase
reproductive (vitellogenesis) activity at the time of sample
in total plasma calcium is associated with an increase in
collection.
protein-bound calcium during follicular development before
ovulation, and the total plasma calcium level may increase
tional deficiency of phosphorus. Hyperphosphatemia is indi-
by two- to fourfold or more.15
cated by a plasma phosphorus concentration of greater than
The normal plasma calcium concentration for most rep-
5 mg/dL (1 .6 mmol/L). Disorders resulting in hyperphospha-
tiles ranges between 8 and 11 mg/dL (2.0-2.7 mmol/L). and
temia include excessive dietary phosphorus, hypervitamin-
it varies both with the species and the physiologic status of
osis Ds, and renal disease. Rare causes of hyperphosphatemia
the reptile. For example, some species of tortoises have low
include severe tissue trauma and osteolytic bone disease. In 
blood calcium concentrations (<8mg/dL or 2.0mmol/L).8
mammalian blood samples, an artifactual hyperphosphate-
Gender differences have been reported for plasma calcium
mia can occur when serum or plasma is not promptly
concentration in free-ranging populations of reptiles where
separated from the clot, thereby allowing phosphorus to be
females exhibit significantly greater calcium concentrations
released from erythrocytes. A few studies have suggested
than males. This difference is likely to be associated with
this may be less likely with reptilian blood samples; however.
603
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
hyperphosphatemia has been related to hemolysis in reptil-
lizards (Scincidae} of the southwestern Pacific, which are
ian blood samples.4 The ideal sample for biochemical testing
rarely presented for clinical evaluation.? The physiologic
is obtained by the immediate separation of the cells from
advantage of this is not known. Biliverdin appears to be less
plasma with no hemolysis.
toxic to tissues compared with bilirubin, and the normal
biliverdin concentration in the plasma of some species of
lizards (i.e., Prasino haema) can be greaterthan 1000 μmol/L.35
Laboratory evaluation of the reptilian liver
Liver enzymes in reptiles appear to be similar to those in
Laboratory evaluation of plasma and
birds and mammals. The LD and AST activities are high in
serum proteins
reptilian liver tissue, and although few critical studies have
examined the biochemical testing of reptilian blood to evalu-
The plasma total protein concentration of normal reptiles
ate hepatic disease, increases in the plasma activities of these
generally ranges between 3 and 7 g/dL (30-70 g/L). Female
enzymes may suggest hepatocellular disease. The plasma
reptiles demonstrate marked increases in their plasma total
AST activity is not considered to be organ specific, because
protein concentration during active folliculogenesis. This
activity for this enzyme can be found in many tissues. In
general, normal plasma AST activity for reptiles is less than
increased levels of the proteins (primarily globulins) neces-
250 IU/L. Increased plasma AST activity suggests hepatic or
sary for yolk production. The plasma total protein concen-
muscle injury. Generalized diseases such as septicemia or
tration returns to normal after ovulation. Captive reptiles
toxemia, however, may damage these tissues, thereby pro-
may exhibit greater plasma total protein concentrations
ducing increased plasma AST activity. Increased AST activity
when compared to the same free-living species due to pro-
     n  an 
longed high-protein diets.17
related to muscle activity and injury due to increased male
The biuret method is the most accurate for determining
aggression during the breeding season.
the plasma or serum total protein concentration. The refrac-
The plasma LD activity is also considered to have a wide
tometer method, however, is commonly used to rapidly
tissue distribution in reptiles. Therefore, increases in the
estimate the plasma protein concentration in reptilian blood.
plasma LD activity(>l000 IU/L) may be associated with
Although the refractometric method tends to overestimate
damage to the liver, skeletal muscle, or cardiac muscle.
the total protein value, it is useful for clinical decisions.
Hemolysis also may result in increased plasma LD activity.
 Protein electrophoresis provides an accurate assessment of
Like AST, plasma ALT is not considered to be organ specific
the serum or plasma albumin and globulin concentrations
in reptiles. The normal plasma ALT activity for reptiles is
in reptilian blood. Absolute concentrations of the various
usually less than 20IU/L. Although ALT activity occurs in
plasma proteins are obtained by determining the total
the reptilian liver, increases in the plasma ALT activity may
protein concentration using the biuret method in conjunc-
not be as reliable in the detection of hepatocellular disease
tion with electrophoretic separation of the proteins.
compared with increases in the plasma AST or LD activity.
 In most reptiles hyperproteinemia is indicated by total
However, it has been suggested that elevated plasma ALT
protein values of greater than 7g/dL (70g/L); common
activity can be associated with a prolonged diet of unnatural
ca uses include dehydration or hyperglobulinemia associated
foods which causes liver disorders in captive tortoises.
with chronic inflammatory diseases. The alpha, beta, and
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is also widely distributed in
gamma globulins may increase with infectious diseases. A
the reptilian body, and the plasma activity of this enzyme is
significant increase in total protein as measured by chemical
not considered to be organ specific. Little information is
analyzers can occur with hemolysis.4
available concerning the interpretation of increased plasma
 Hypoproteinemia, as indicated by a total protein value of
alkaline phosphatase activity in reptiles; however, increased
less than 3g/dL (30 g/L). is commonly associated with
activity may reflect increased osteoblastic activity rather
chronic malnutrition in reptiles. Other causes, however.
than hepatobiliary disease. Increased plasma ALP has been
such as malabsorption, maldigestion, protein-losing enter-
associated with hyperparathyroidism and bone diseases.
opathy. severe blood loss, and chronic hepatic or renal
such as Paget's disease.
disease, should also be considered.
Biliverdin, a green bile pigment, is generally considered
to be the primary end product of hemoglobin catabolism in
reptiles. Green plasma results from the accumulation of bili-
Laboratory evaluation of serum and
    a    
plasma lipids
finding that suggests hepatobiliary disease in these animals.
A nonpathologic accumulation of biliverdin can occur in the
The normal serum cholesterol concentration of reptiles
blood of some reptilian species, such as arboreal scincid
varies depending upon the natural diet. In general, healthy
604
CHAPTER 36 Clinical Chemistry of Reptiles
glycemia and glucosuria are suggestive of diabetes mellitus.
lesterol concentrations (77-270 mg/dL or 2-7mmol/L) com-
which is a rarely reported disorder of reptiles. Hyperglyce-
pared to that of omnivores and carnivores. Low-density
mia also may occur with glucocorticosteroid excess 12.3
lipoprotein (LDL) is the major carrier of cholesterol in the
serum of tortoises (Agrionemys horsfeldi, Testudo graeca, and
T. hermanni) with high-density lipoprotein (HDL) represent-
Laboratory detection of muscle injury
ing a minor carrier.?
Seasonal and gender variation in the plasma lipid profile
Creatinine kinase (CK) is considered to be a muscle-specific
can occur in reptiles. For example, serum lipid concentra-
enzyme and is used to test for muscle cell damage. Increases
tions tend to be higher in males than females. In one study.
in the plasma CK activity can result from muscle cell injury
cholesterol represented 2l% of the total lipid content in
or exertion. Increased plasma CK activity is frequently
male Asian tortoises (Agrionemys horsfeidi) and only 14% in
observed in reptiles that are struggling to resist restraint
females.? Triglycerides and phospholipids are the major
during blood collection, or that are exhibiting seizure activ-
serum lipids in both sexes of these tortoises during reproduc-
ity. Increased plasma CK activity resulting from muscle cell
tion (vitellogenesis). The lipid content of free-ranging tor-
damage occurs with traumatic injury, intramuscular injec-
tions of irritating drugs or fluids, and systemic infections that
by phospholipids and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
affect skeletal or cardiac muscle. Brain tissue generally has
(LDL-C) being the major lipid fractions in serum, whereas
high CK activity: however, whether brain lesions contribute 
triglycerides are very low.?
significantly to plasma CK is not known.
Muscle injury also results in mild to moderate increases
in plasma AST and LD activities. These enzymes are not
Laboratory evaluation of glucose
organ specific for muscle, however, and their activities could
metabolism
increase with hepatobiliary disease. When plasma CK activ-
e   i pas  s lou s a
In general, the normal blood glucose concentration of
hepatobiliary disease should be suspected. Damage to both
most reptiles ranges between 60 and 100mg/dL (3.33-
liver and skeletal muscle can occur simultaneously, such as
5.55mmol/L), but this is subject to marked physiologic vari-
occurs with trauma and septicemia, which would result in
ation. The blood glucose concentration of normal reptiles
elevated plasma AST, LD, and CK activities.
varies with species, nutritional status, and environmental
conditions. For example, an increase in temperature pro-
duces hypoglycemia in turtles but hyperglycemia in alliga-
Laboratory evaluation of endocrine
tors.' In aquatic reptiles, hypoxia associated with diving
disorders
results in a physiologic hyperglycemia because of anaerobic
glycolysis. Normal oral glucose tolerance curves in reptiles
Laboratory evaluation of reptilian thyroid and adrenal func-
differ both among species and with temperature. A signifi-
tion is uncommon. Because of the ectothermic nature of
cant gender difference in plasma glucose concentration has
reptiles, their physiologic status, which includes endocrine 
been observed in free-ranging tortoises where males have
physiology. is highly dependent on the external environ-
S  n  a  s n s 
ment. Therefore, correction of environmental and nutri-
not known.
tional deficits usually results in restoration of normal
Common causes of hypoglycemia in reptiles include star-
physiologic health.
vation and malnutrition, severe hepatobiliary disease, and
The hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis of reptiles appears
septicemia. Clinical signs associated with hypoglycemia in
to be typical of most vertebrates: therefore, a reptile's
reptiles include tremors, loss of righting reflex, torpor, and
response to stress has an influence on glucose utilization and
dilated, nonresponsive pupils.
other metabolic activities modulated by the adrenal gland.
In mammals, prolonged exposure of the serum with
Use of plasma corticosterone concentration as the sole mea-
surement of stress is not recommended due to physiological
at a rate of approximately lo% per hour. Limited studies
variations. For example, there is a circadian and seasonal
have shown that this does not occur in reptiles. A significant
variation in plasma corticosterone concentrations in free-
decrease in plasma glucose concentration may not occur
ranging reptiles, which tend to have higher concentrations
until erythrocytes have been in contact with the plasma for
than do captive reptiles of the same species. Because a
twofold increase in corticosterone is expected to occur in 1
cyte metabolism compared to that of mammals.
hour following capture with peak increases in 3 hours, it is
Hyperglycemia in reptiles often results from the iatrogenic
recommended that baseline concentrations be obtained
delivery of excessive glucose. A persistent, marked hyper-
within l0 minutes of capture.
605
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
18. Eisenhawer E, Courtney CH, Raskin RE, Jacobson E (2008)
References
Relationship between separation time of plasma from heparin-
ized whole blood on plasma biochemical analytes of Loggerhead
1. Allender MC, Mitchell MA, Phillips CA, Gruszynski K, Beasley
sea turtles (Carerta carerta). J Zoo Wild! Med 39: 208-15.
VR (2006) Hematology. plasma biochemistry, and antibodies to
19. Frye FL (199l) Biomedical and Surgical Aspecrs of Captive Reptile
 selected viruses in wild-caught eastern massasauga rattlesnakes
Husbandry. 2nd ed. Melbourne, FL: Krieger Publishing, pp.
(Sistrurus catenarus catenarus) from lllinois. J Wild Dis 42:
209-77.
107-14.
20. Frye FL, Centofanti BV (199l) Successful treatment of iatro-
2. Asadi F Rostami A, Pourkabir M, Shahriari A (2007) Serum
lipid and lipoprotein profile of Asian tortoise (Agrionemys hors-
an iguana (Iguana iguana). In: Proceedings of the Fourth Interna-
fieldi) in prehibermation state. Comp Clin Pathol 16: 193-5.
tional Colloquium on the Pathology and Therapeutics of Reptiles and
3. Austin CC, Jessing KW (1994) Green-blood pigmentation in
Amphibians, Bad Nauheim, Germany, pp. 244-50.
lizards. Comp Biochem Physiol 109A: 619-26.
21. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Innis CJ (2006) Renal disease in reptiles:
4. Benson KG, Paul-Murphy J, MacWilliams P (1999) Effects of
diagnosis and clinical management. In: Mader DR (ed.), Reprile
hemolysis on plasma electrolyte and chemistry values in the
Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
:0e pa pim oz r “(uni pun) euenat uaaa uouus
878-92.
413-15.
22. Hernandez-Divers SJ, Stahl SJ, Stedman NL, el αl. (2005) Renal
5. Bissell DM (l986) Heme catabolism and bilirubin formation.
In: Ostrow JD (ed.), Bile Pigments and Jaundice: Molecular, Meta-
ment of plasma biochemistry, glomerular filtration rate, and
bolic, and Medial Aspers. New York: Marcel Dekker. pp.
endoscopic biopsy. J Zoo Wiid! Med 36: 155-68.
133-56.
23. Hidalgo-Vila J, Diaz-Paniagua C, Perez-Santigosa N, Plaza A,
6. Boyd JW (1988) Serum enzymes in the diagnosis of diseases in
Camacho I, Recio F (2007) Hematologic and biochemical refer-
man and animals. J Comp Patho! 98: 381-404.
ence intervals of free-living Mediterranean pond turtles (Mau-
7. Boyer TH (1996) Metabolic bone disease. In: Mader DR (ed.).
remys leprosa). J Wild Dis 43: 798-801.
Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders. pp.
24. Holz P, Holz RM (1994) Evaluation of ketamine, ketamine/
385-92.
xylazine, and ketamine/midazolam anesthesia in red-eared
8. Campbell TW (2006) Clinical pathology of reptiles. In: Mader
sliders (Trachemys scripta elegans). J Zool Wild! Med 25: 531-7.
DR (ed.), Reprile Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis: Saunders
25. Holz P (2006) Renal anatomy and physiology. In: Mader DR
Elsevier pp. 453-70.
(ed.), Reprile Medicine and Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis: Saunders
9. Carpenter JW (2005) Exotic Animal Formulary, 3rd ed. St. Louis:
Elsevier, pp. 135-44.
Elsevier Saunders, pp. 94-108.
26. Jacobson ER (1993) Blood collection techniques in reptiles:
10. Coulson RA, Hernandez T (197l) Reptiles as research models
laboratory investigations. In: Fowler ME (ed.). Zoo and Wild
for comparative biochemistry and endocrinology. J Am Ver Med
Animal Medicine: Current Therapy. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB
Assoc 159: 1672-7.
Saunders, pp. 144 52.
11. Crawshaw GJ, Holz P (1996) Comparison of plasma biochemi-
27. Jacobson ER, Gaskin, JM, Brown MB, er al. {l990) Chronic
cal values in blood and blood-lymph mixtures from red-eared
upper respiratory tract disease of free-ranging desert tortoises.
sliders. Trachemys scripta elegans. Bull Assoc Rept Amphib Ver 6:
Xerobates agassizii. J Wiidl Dis 27: 296-316.
7-9.
 28. Mader DR (2006) Metabolic bone diseases. In: Mader DR (ed.),
12. Cuadrado M, Diaz-Paniagua C, Quevedo MA, Aquilar JM,
Reptile Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier,
-s u A [ pe o (oo) n m
pp. 841-51.
tocic and healthy post-reproductive female chameleons. J Wild
29. Marcus LC (198l) Vererinary Biology and Medicine of Captive
Dis 38: 395-401.
Amphibians and Reptiles. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, pp. 1-53.
13. Davies PMC (l98l) Anatomy and physiology In: Cooper JE.
 30. Ramsay EC, Dotson TK (1995) Tissue and serum enzyme activi-
Jackson OF (eds.), Diseases of the Repuilia. San Diego: Academic
ties in the yellow rat snake (Elaphe obsolera quadrivitatta). Am J
Press, I, p. 9.
Ver Res 56: 423-8.
14. Dennis PM, Bennett RA, Harr KE, Lock BA (200l) Plasma
31. Reeves RB {l977) The interaction of body temperature and
concentration of ionized calcium in healthy iguanas. JAVMA
acid-base balance in ectothermic vertebrates. Annu Rev Physio!
219: 326-8.
39: 559-86.
15. Dessauer HC (1970) Blood chemistry of reptiles: physiological
32. Stein G (1996) Hematologic and blood chemistry values in
and evolutionary aspects. In: Gans C, Parsons TC (eds.), Biology
reptiles. In: Mader DR (ed.). Reprile Medicine and Surgery. Phila-
of the Reprilia. New York: Academic Press, 3C, pp. 1-72.
 delphia: WB Saunders, pp. 473-83.
16. Dickenson VM, Jarchow JU, Trueblood MH (2002) Hematology
33. Swimmer JY (2000) Biochemical responses to fibropapilloma
and plasma biochemistry reference interval values for free-
and captivity in the green turtle. J Wid! Dis 36: 102-10.
ranging desert tortoises in Arizona. J Wild! Dis 38: 143-53.
34. Whiting SD, Guinea ML, Limpus CJ, Fomiatti K (2007) Blood
17. Donoghue S (2006) Nutrition. In: Mader DR (ed.), Reprile Medi-
chemistry reference values for two ecologically distinct popula-
cine and Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, pp.
tions of foraging green turtles, Eastern Indian ocean. Comp Clin
251-98.
Pathol 16: 109-18.
606
37
Clinical chemistry of Fish
and Amphibians
Terry W. Campbell
 Colorado State University
electrolyte concentrations resulting from transmembrane
Fish
shifts of H+, Nat, Cl, and HO also may continue until the
erythrocytes and plasma are separated. The magnitude of
Blood biochemical evaluation is not routinely part of the
these changes varies directly with the handling time and
with the time that elapses between blood collection and
the expense involved and lack of meaningful reference
analysis. In vitro changes after blood collection can be mini-
intervals. As a result, much of the blood biochemical studies
os se saia an  esed as aq paz
have focused on economically important species, such as
as possible after the specimen is obtained.
salmonids (salmon and trout), catfish, and cyprinids (carp.
Capture stress is unavoidable when dealing with wild-
goldfish, and koi). Routine assay methods for the biochemi-
caught fish or removal of fish from large exhibits. The stress
cal evaluation of mammalian blood appear to be useful for
response will have a significant effect on some plasma bio-
fish blood; however, interpretation of the results can be dif-
chemistry analytes.7.1p.17.1s For exarmple, lactic acidosis may
ficult. Many endogenous (i.e. species, age, nutritional status.
occur after 5 minutes of capture involving strenuous muscle
gender, reproductive status) and exogenous factors (i.e.
activity as a result of lactate released from the white muscle
environmental conditions, population density, time of day
of fish. The resulting intracellular fluid shift affects the
(diel cycle). and method of capture) influence the plasma
majority of plasma constituents. Complete recovery of the
biochemistry results of fish. These factors should be taken
blood parameters may require 2 weeks following two minute
into consideration when establishing reference intervals for
handling stress. Chermical restraint of captive fish may also
fish.
affect plasma biochemical results. For example, tricaine
Reference intervals are available for a few teleost fish.
methanesulfonate, a commonly used anesthetic for fish, can
These include bass (Morone saxarilis);'” goldfish (Carassius
cause increases in plasma glucose and potassium and urinary
auratus):* koi (Cyprinus carpio):2 rainbow trout (Salmo gaird-
electrolyte loss is teleost fish.
neri):" red pacu (Piaractus brachypomus):2? siraz (Capoeta
Biochemical evaluations on piscine blood can be performed
capoeta umbla).' Blood biochemical reference values are also
available for elasmobranch fish, such as the bonnethead shark
(Sphyrna fiburo) and southern stingray ( Dasyatis americana).3
sample. Plasma is preferred over serum in some species of fish
owing to the long time required for clot formation that may
produce significant changes in some of the blood biochemical
Sample collection and handling
values. Furthermore, a larger sample volume can usually be
obtained when performing biochemical tests on plasma
Blood samples for biochemical studies of fish are collected
versus serum; an important consideration when testing small
in the same manner as that described for hematologic studies
fish. Collection of blood into lithium heparin also allows for
(see Chapter 2l, Hematology of Fish). When collecting
evaluation of the hemogram and plasma chemistry parame-
blood, emersion and handling of fish for as little as 30
ters with use of only a single sample.
seconds can elicit changes in plasma biochemical analytes
The sample size is often small, especially when blood is
such as electrolytes and ammonia.7ip Changes in plasma
collected from small fish. Therefore, the clinician must
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry, Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison.
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
607
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
decide which tests would be most beneficial in the evalua-
and both fluid and salt are reabsorbed in the distal tubule to
tion of piscine patients. Blood biochemical tests that may be
establish an osmotic gradient, thereby facilitating a tubular
useful include those for total protein, glucose, aspartate ami-
countercurrent system to promote the passive reabsorption
notransferase (AST), ammonia, creatinine, calcium, sodium,
of urea. The high urea concentration of marine elasmo-
chloride, potassium, and bicarbonate.
branchs causes the plasma to be slightly hyperosmotic to the
surrounding seawater. Thus, marine elasmobranchs face a
net osmotic influx of water, because their gill epithelium is
Laboratory evaluation of the
 permeable to water but not to NaCl. The high plasma urea
piscine kidney
concentration of these fish would be fatal without the pres-
ence of trimethylanine oxide (TMAO), which, when present
Both grossly and histologically. the anatomy of the piscine
at 5o% of the urea concentration, counteracts the toxic
effects of urea. Both plasma urea and TMAO are derived
    s a 
from hepatic biosynthesis, and the concentrations are main-
of marine species, some of which have aglomerular kidneys.
tained by low branchial (gill) permeability and renal tubular
When present, fish glomeruli resemble those of mammals.
reabsorption. Freshwater rays have lost the ability to reab-
Fish kidneys lack a loop of Henle, and collecting ducts occur
sorb urea and actually excrete urea to lower the plasma
only in freshwater species. Fish also lack a true urinary
osmolarity: therefore they produce dilute urine similar in
bladder, although an enlargement of the distal ureter, which
is of mesothelial rather than endothelial origin, resembles
that urea is the primary osmolyte.14.15
a bladder in some species. The primary urinary function
occurs in the caudal kidney.
Plasma urea, uric acid, creatine, and creatinine
Piscine kidneys primarily are involved in ion excretion and
Normal renal physiology of freshwater fish
The kidney of freshwater teleosts (bony fish) have well-
the excretion of nitrogenous wastes, interpretation of the
developed glomeruli, proximal and distal tubules, and col-
plasma concentrations of urea nitrogen, uric acid, and cre-
lecting ducts. The proximal tubule has two subunits. The
atinine may not be useful in the evaluation of renal disease
first (segment I) is homologous to the proximal tubule of
in fish. Urea is derived primarily from degradation of purines
tetrapod vertebrates, and the second (segment II) is found
via uric acid. Most fish produce small amounts of urea with
only in fish. Freshwater bony fish faced with a water volume
the exception of marine elasmobranchs, a few ureogenic
load and salt loss maintain a high glomerular filtration rate
teleosts, and coelacanths that produce urea as the major end
(GFR) and urine production rate to counteract the marked
product of nitrogen metabolism. Little is known concerning
osmotic uptake of water, whereas they conserve sodium
factors that regulate urea metabolism in teleosts. The gills.
chloride (NaCl) by reabsorption in the renal tubules and
however, appear to predominate over the kidneys as the
collecting ducts. The final processing of urine occurs in the
major organ of urea excretion in most fish (except perhaps
marine elasmobranchs). Therefore, increases in the plasma
tion is substantial.
lrea concentration may be more indicative of branchial
epithelial disease than of renal disease in teleost fish.24 Fresh-
Normal renal physiology of saltwater fish
water teleosts living in alkaline lakes with high pH have high
The kidneys of marine teleosts have fewer and smaller glom-
plasma urea concentrations because of a possible interaction
eruli compared to those of freshwater species, and the distal
of acid-base with urea production. Plasma urea concentra-
tubule is usually missing. Glomeruli and proximal tubules
tions increase in species such as the lungfish (Protopterus sp.).
also are missing in some marine species. Marine teleosts face
which can survive out of water (i.e., estivation) for extended
water volume depletion and salt loading. In these fish, some
periods. These fish primarily are ammoniotelic when living
reabsorption of urine occurs in the tubules and the "urinary
in water, but during estivation, the plasma ammonia con-
bladder." which is permeable to water.
centration decreases to negligible levels and the urea con-
centration increases to avoid ammonia toxicity. The plasma
Normal renal physiology of sharks and rays
urea concentration also increases in cyprinids (carp. goldfish,
The kidneys of elasmobranchs (i.e., cartilaginous fish such
and koi) exposed to high environmental levels of ammonia.
 as sharks, skates, and rays) are extrerely complex and com-
The normal plasma urea concentration of freshwater and
2 posed of glomeruli, proximal tubules and distal tubules that
marine teleosts is less than 10mg/dL (3.57mmol/L) and
are divided into segments, and collecting tubules and ducts.
5 mg/dL (1.79 mmol/L). respectively. Marine elasmobranchs
 The GFR of marine elasmobranchs approaches that of fresh-
(sharks and rays) have a normal mean plasma urea concen-
water teleosts to balance the osmotic influx of water across
tration that ranges between 350 (125 mmol/L) and 1000 mg/
the gill.? The proximal tubules of these fish can secrete NaCl.
dL (357 mmol/L). Decreases in the plasma urea concentra-
608
CHAPTER 37 Clinical Chemistry of Fish and Amphibians
tion, especially in marine elasmobranchs, suggest hepatic
transporter drives the water uptake in the intestinal epithe-
disease or starvation.? Renal disease in marine elasmo-
lium, and the high uptake of monovalent ions is compensated
branchs also may produce a decreased plasma urea concen-
for by excretion of these ions via the gills. Therefore, marine
tration owing to reduced reabsorption. Decreases in food
teleosts ingest saltwater to balance the osmotic loss of water
intake in marine elasmobranchs also results in decreases in
across the gills, and freshwater teleosts excrete large volumes
plasma urea concentration.
of dilute urine to balance the osmotic uptake of water.
Fish produce small amounts of uric acid, creatine, and
Whereas plasma sodium chloride contributes to greater
creatinine, but little is known regarding their physiologic
than 75% of the osmolarity of teleost fish, it contributes to
role. Uric acid, a degradation product of purine nucleotides
only 50% or less in elasmobranchs (sharks, rays, and skates).
and protein catabolism (via purines), produced primarily in
Nonprotein nitrogen, primarily urea, makes up most of the
the liver and white muscle of fish is generally converted to
balance in marine elasmobranchs to raise the osmotic pres-
urea for excretion. Creatine, an endproduct of glycine, argi-
sure to slightly greater than that of the ambient seawater.
nine, and methionine metabolism primarily in white muscle.
Therefore, marine elasmobranchs, unlike marine teleosts, do
represents more than 50% of the nitrogenous waste that is
not lose water across the gills; instead, they gain small
excreted through the kidney. Therefore, the plasma creatine
amounts that allow for urine formation. Thus, marine elas-
concentration may be valuable in the assessment of renal
mobranchs do not drink seawater. A decrease in plasma urea
disease among fish. Unfortunately, studies have not been
concentration and osmolarity occurs in marine elasmo-
performed to evaluate the use of creatine as an indicator of 
branchs during fasting because of a decrease in urea biosyn-
 such renal disease, and most veterinary laboratories do not
thesis. These decreases also occur when marine elasmobranchs
offer creatine assays.
move to environments with lower salinity because of
Creatinine is formed from creatine and it also is secreted
increases in renal urea clearance.
by piscine kidneys. The normal plasma creatinine concentra-
Some freshwater elasmobranchs have higher plasma
tion of teleosts ranges between 0.5 (44 μmol/L) and 2.0 mg/
osmolarity (Osmnaci approximately 380) compared to that of
dL (l77μmol/L). In the English sole (Parophrys verulus).
         
increases in the plasma creatinine concentration have been
tration, although it may be 50% that of marine elasmo-
associated with renal disease, although the urea concentra-
tions remained normal.4
emigrants to the freshwater environment. Freshwater rays.
known to be long-term inhabitants of freshwater habitats.
Divalent ions
have a lower osmolarity (Osmnaci approximately 28l) with
Excess divalent and monovalent ions are excreted in marine
urea having negligible partici pation.
teleosts by different routes after the oral ingestion of seawa-
Osmoregulation of marine elasmobranchs involves the
ter. The kidneys excrete divalent ions such as magnesium
kidneys, rectal glands, gills, and diet. A high level of urea is
and sulfate, and increases in the plasma concentrations of
maintained by renal tubular reabsorption. In freshwater.
these ions may indicate renal disease in these fish.
urea is excreted to lower the osmolarity. Rays adapted to
living in freshwater have lost the ability to reabsorb urea.
The rectal gland of marine elasmobranchs is a salt secreting
Laboratory evaluation of electrolytes and
organ. When exposed to freshwater, these fish exhibit
acid/base balance
regression of the gland. Freshwater rays have no functional
rectal gland. Two-thirds of the total sodium and chloride
Osmoregulation
excreted by elasmobranchs occurs in the gills. Their gills
Teleost (bony fish) plasma is hyperosmotic to freshwater but
have low permeability to urea. Finally, metabolic urea is
hypoosmotic to seawater. Freshwater teleosts are hyper-
directly related to food availability.
diffusion. They maintain osmotic and ionic homeostasis by
Sodium chloride
active uptake of ions across the intestinal and branchial
Nat and Cl- are the major ions in the blood of all fish.5
epithelium. Because plasma sodium and chloride concentra-
Marine teleosts display a higher branchial permeability to
tions are more commonly measured than plasma osmolarity.
salt; therefore, the unidirectional Na+ and Cl- fluxes are 10-
the formula Osmnci = [Nat + Cl-] × 0.9l is frequently used
to 50-fold greater than those of freshwater teleosts. Ionic
as a measurement of osmolarity in the literature. Marine
gradients across the gill epithelium are of the same magni-
teleosts (Osmnaci greater than 300) are hyporegulators and
tude as those of freshwater fish, but they are reversed in
direction. Because the kidney of marine teleosts cannot
of seawater and slightly greater than that of freshwater
produce urine, which is hyper-osmolar relative to plasma.
     = 
extrarenal salt secretion must occur. The mitochondria-rich
loss compensated for by drinlking seawater. A Nat/K+/Cl- co-
chloride cells of the gills are most likely the sites of ionic
609
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
and/or acid-base regulation involving Na/H [NHa] and Cl/
is a readily available source of calcium, the plasma calcium
HCO, exchanges in fish.
concentration is influenced by the environmental calcium
The rectal gland is the site of extrarenal salt secretion in
concentration. Fish have access to a continuous supply of
marine sharks and rays. This gland produces a solution that
calcium, so they must limit their calcium intake (unless the
is iso-osmotic to the plasma but that contains more NaCl
environmental calcium levels are low). In freshwater tele-
than seawater (in a manner similar to the NaCl transport
osts, calcium is transported by the chloride cells in the gills
system in the thick, ascending limb of the loop of Henle in
to the blood. Calcium ions enter these cells passively along
mammals). An increase in plasma volume, rather than in
the electrochemical gradient via calcium channels in the
NaCl concentration, appears to stimulate rectal gland secre-
apical cell membrane. Stanniocalcin is a hormone that is
tions in marine elasmobranchs.?
unique to certain fish (e.g.. teleosts) and that acts as a
 Fish have adapted to marine or freshwater environments
calcium-channel blocker to prevent the development of
by using osmotic and ionic regulating mechanisms allowing
hypercalcemia.' Fish do not have parathyroid glands or a
-       o 
parathormone-like hormone. How fish that do not produce
lular salt concentration as well as cellular volume. Whereas
stanniocalcin regulate their blood calcium concentrations is
the lkidney is the primary osmoregulatory organ of terrestrial
not yet known.
vertebrates, fish use organs such as the gills, intestines, rectal
 In contrast to tetrapods, calcitonin whose role is to correct
glands, and to a lesser extent, the kidneys to regulate fluid
excessive calcium levels does not play a prominent role in
volume and salt concentration.
calcium regulation in fish. Calcitonin is produced by the
The normal plasma sodium and chloride concentrations of
ultimobranchial bodies of fish and has a role in protecting
freshwater teleosts and marine teleosts are approximately
the skeletal system during periods of increased dermand for
1 50 mEq/L (mmol/l) and 130 mEq/L (mmol/L), respectively.
Ca”t during active oogenesis.
Plasma sodium and chloride concentrations are affected by
 In male and nongravid female freshwater teleost fish,
changes in ambient salinity, gill function, and stress. Within
30-40% of the total plasma calcium is bound to protein.
a few minutes of capture and handling trauma, catechol-
Approximately 22% of the total calcium is bound to protein
amines and cortisol are released along with lactic acid release
in marine teleosts. Therefore, changes in plasma protein will
from muscles. Stress-induced release of catecholamines
affect the plasma total calcium concentration. For example.
during vitellogenesis, a greater than threefold increase in
electrolyte permeability of the gills that causes a rapid decrease
total protein and calcium will be expected; however, free
in sodium and chloride in freshwater teleost fish and increase
Catt concentration remains constant.
in those ions in marine teleost fish. Hyponatremia and hypo-
chloremia in freshwater fish can be associated with gill and
renal disease or with acidic or soft-water environments.
Magnesium
Potassium
The plasma magnesium concentration of freshwater fish and
The normal plasma potassium concentration of freshwater
marine elasmobranchs is generally lower than the calcium
fish is approximately 3 mEq/L (mmol/L). Less than 2% of
concentration; however, marine teleosts have magnesium
the total body potassium is found in extracellular fluids;
concentrations that are greater than calcium. In general,
therefore, plasma levels are unaffected by changes in gill
inorganic ions, such as Na, Cl, and Ca, are kept below levels
electrolyte permeability. Greater than 95% of the potassium
found in the ambient marine water. Approximately 25% of
ingested by marine fish is absorbed in the intestines, and the
the plasma magnesium concentration is bound to protein;
  e    i a  a
however, the mechanism of magnesium regulation is
Hypokalemia may be associated with alkalosis, gastrointes-
unknown. Because magnesium concentration within eryth-
tinal or cutaneous potassium loss, or nitrite toxicity. Hyper-
kalemia may be associated with acidosis, such as occurs
be expected to produce an artificial increase in plasma mag-
 following strenuous muscle activity during capture and han-
nesium concentration.
dling. and decreased renal secretion of potassium in fresh-
water teleosts. Hemolysis will also cause an artificial increase
in plasma potassium.
Acid-base balance
Acid-base regulation in fish is more challenging compared
Calcium
with that of terrestrial animals, because the composition of
water varies to a greater degree than that of air. Large and
The normal plasma calcium concentration of teleosts is
rapid changes in oxygen and carbon dioxide (COz) levels.
approximately 8-10 mg/dL (2-2.5 mmol/L). Because water
electrolyte concentrations, and temperature are significant
610
CHAPTER 37 Clinical Chemistry of Fish and Amphibians
challenges to acid-base regulation. The branchial epithelium
to water and an electro-neutral Na*/NH. exchange located
is the site of gas exchange and principal ion regulation in
on the apical mermbranes of the branchial epithelial cels.12.24 
fish; ions readily transfer across the gill surface. Therefore.
Electro-neutral H+/NH,+ exchange also may occur in the gill
changes in the water ionic composition affect the ionic
membranes of fish. Marine teleosts excrete ammonia by
transfer process across the branchial epithelium, which in
NH,+ diffusion along an electrochemical gradient from blood
turn affects osmotic and acid-base regulation.
to water.
Fish have a low blood CO, concentration compared with
The inflammation, swelling. and mucinification that occur
that of terrestrial animals.'s This results from the high rate
with gill damage result in an increased diffusion distance
of gill ventilation and the much larger capacity of water for
between blood and water, thereby creating an increased
carbon monoxide (CO) dissolution. The small environmen-
blood ammonia concentration. Environmental toxins,
tal CO, and arterial CO, differences limit the ability of fish
changes in the environmental pH and ammonia concentra-
to compensate for changes in arterial CO, by hyper- or
tions, or infections can damage the gills of fish, thus result-
hypoventilation. Therefore, changes in CO, are too small to
ing in increased blood ammonia concentrations. Increases in
contribute significantly to the acid-base balance in fish.
the environmental pH and ammonia concentration also can
However, even though respiratory regulation contributes
increase the blood ammonia concentration by the inhibition
little to acid-base balance, fish have a larger epithelial ionic
of ammonia diffusion, thereby reversing the blood-to-water
transfer capacity than that of air-breathing mammals, and
gradient.
they also have the capacity for a net gain of bicarbonate from
Plasma total ammonia is highly variable and rarely used
the environment to facilitate normalization of the acid-base
in diagnostic testing of piscine patients. Both the site of
status. This epithelial ionic transfer is a function of the
blood collection and the duration of restraint affect the blood
chloride cells located in juxtaposition to the secondary cir-
ammonia concentration in fish. Total plasma ammonia con-
centration is higher in samples obtained by caudal venipunc-
fer for acid-base regulation also occurs, although to a lesser
ture (prehepatic blood) compared to samples obtained by
extent, across the skin and kidney of fish.
cardiocentesis (posthepatic blood). Venous blood contains
50-60% more ammonia than arterial blood. During restraint,
the release of ammonia from hypoxic muscles and the inter-
Laboratory evaluation of
ference with branchial excretion also can increase the blood
branchial epithelium
ammonia concentration in fish. Plasma ammonia levels
increase with feeding. exhaustive exercise, exposure to air,
Because the gills of fish are important organs for osmotic.
and under certain water quality parameters, such as an
ionic, and acid-base regulation as well as for removal of
 nitrogenous waste, changes in the blood biochemistry may
tration, and alkaline pH.
reflect damage to the branchial epithelium. Injury to gill
tissue may result in thickening of the branchial epithelium
and an increased distance for diffusion from blood to water.
Laboratory evaluation of the piscine liver
In turn, this may lead to an increased plasma concentration
of analytes normally excreted by the branchial epithelium.
Little information is available regarding laboratory evalua-
Therefore, acid-base disturbances, electrolyte imbalances,
tion of the liver in fish. The liver tissue of teleosts appears
and increases in the blood ammonia and urea concentrations
to be rich in aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and possible
may occur with damage to the branchial epithelium of fish.
alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Therefore, plasma activity
 a  a    r
disease in some piscine species.
Ammonia
There is a general lack of information regarding the influ-
ence of nonpathogenic factors on the activities of these
Ammonia is the major end product of nitrogen metabolism
enzymes in the plasma of fish; however, a few studies have
in most fish except marine elasmobranchs. Ammonia is
suggested that plasma enzyme evaluation in fish may not be
the most reduced and energy-efficient nitrogenous waste
as straightforward as it is in mammals. For example, the high
product of the biologic oxidation of dietary or structural
ammonia levels of fish may lead to high transaminase activ-
proteins. The primary mechanism of ammonia excretion in
ites; therefore, the increase in activities may be associated
freshwater teleosts is branchial excretion. The skin also con-
tributes to ammonia excretion, especially in marine teleosts.
tion. High activities of AST and creatine kinase (CK) also
The kidneys excrete less than 15% of ammonia.
occur in muscle of fish; therefore, elevated plasma activities
The mechanism of branchial ammonia excretion primarily
of these enzymes will increase following muscle injury
involves diffusion along a concentration gradient from blood
or strenuous muscle activity associated with capture and
611
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
restraint. Temperature changes have been reported to affect
disease. Most fish, except for elasmobranchs, normally have
plasma enzyme activity of allkaline phosphatase (AP). The
higher blood cholesterol concentrations than do mammals.
method of blood collection influences plasma lactate dehy-
The majority of the blood cholesterol (60-90%) of fish is
drogenase (LDH) and CK activities in fish leading to the
carried by high density lipoproteins (HDL). The blood cho-
recommendation that blood collected by cardiocentesis be
lesterol concentration of elasmobranchs is lower than that
used for enzyme studies. Plasma LDH activity is also influ-
of teleosts and varies with gender and reproductive status.
enced by feeding and activity levels resulting in lower LDH
Males undergoing active spermatogenesis have higher cho-
values starvation and inactivity. It has also been shown that
lesterol values compared to inactive males. Females have
plasma LDH activity is positively correlated with water tem-
lower blood cholesterol concentrations compared to males
perature and pH.
were females undergoing active egg production have the
 Bile pigments in most fish include both bilirubin and bili-
lowest values.
verdin; however, the percentages of these pigments vary
between species. The serum usually is a light yellow color
because of the presence of bilirubin. Hepatic disease in fish
Laboratory evaluation of endocrine
may not reliably cause an increased plasma bilirubin con-
disorders
centration. The serum from some fish (e.g., certain eels) is
bluish green because of the presence of biliverdin.
The neuroendocrine system of fish is similar to those of
There is little information about the normal bile acid
 other vertebrates. Because fish have a very close interaction
metabolism in fish. Fish may continuously secrete bile
with the ambient aquatic environment, their endocrine
acids into the intestines resulting in no change in plasma
system may differ functionally from those of terrestrial
bile acid concentration associated with feeding.
animals. For example, hormones such as prolactin, growth
Plasma glucose concentration in fish is variable and can
hormone, cortisol, glucagon, and somatostatin have impor-
be as low as 30 mg/dL (1.67 mmol/L) in some species. The
tant ionic regulating functions in fish that are not observed
source of plasma glucose in fish is hepatic glycogen metabo-
in terrestrial vertebrates. Fish also have unique hormones.
lism; therefore depletion of hepatic glycogen reserves may
including somatolactin, melanophore-concentrating hormone,
result in hypoglycemia. Plasma glucose concentration in fish
urotensin, and stanniocalcin. Parathormone and aldoste-
is highly dependent upon the activity level of the fish. For
rone are not found in fish, however, and this implies the
example, sluggish benthic species have lower plasma glucose
absence of a requirement for these hormones because of
concentrations compared to the more active pelagic species.
their close association with their aquatic environment.
Plasma glucose concentration also varies with age. nutri-
Commercial kits for the measurement of hormones in
tional and reproductive status, and stress. The duration and
mammalian plasma have been used successfully in the
magnitude of postprandial hyperglycemia in fish depends
determination of hormones that are common to both types
upon dietary carbohydrate intake. The affect of starvation
 of animals.2 Hormologous radioirmmunoassays (RIA) have
on plasma glucose concentration is species and time depen-
been developed to assay the blood hormones of a few species
dent because many species of fish exhibit normal blood
of fish (salmonids and cyprinids).
glucose concentrations (up to 150 days) following prolonged
starvation. The mechanism allowing for maintenance of
normal blood glucose concentrations with prolonged starva-
Thyroid
tion is not known. Variation in blood glucose concentration
also occurs with the reproductive status of fish were lowest
Fish thyroid tissue appears to behave similarly to that of
blood glucose values in males and females are associated
terrestrial mammals. It is stimulated by a thyroid-stimulating
with spawning.
hormone to release thyroxine (Ta). which is de-iodinated to
Stress-induced hyperglycemia is a common occurrence
triodothyronine (T;)in target organs such as the gills and
in fish and the extent and duration is influenced by the
liver. There are species differences associated with blood
severity of stress. The increased plasma concentrations of
thyroid hormone concentrations. The plasma concentration
catecholamines and adrenocorticosteroids associated with
of thyroid hormones may be influenced by plasma protein
stress changes the muscle and hepatic glycogen reserves in
concentration as they are bound to transport proteins.
fishes. Catecholamines mobilize glycogen stores and cortico-
Increases in plasma T, and T, concentrations are associated
steroids induce glycogen synthesis. Therefore, the plasma
with significant physiologic functions in fish, such as the
 hyperglycemia associated  with  marked glycogenolysis in
adaptation of salmonids to seawater. Decreases in T concen-
liver and muscle is likely due to stress-induced increases in
tration indicate either decreased thyroid  secretion
1or
catecholamines.
increased conversion of T. to T,. In general, both hormones
 It is not known whether changes in the plasma cholesterol
are elevated during growth and decreased during conditions
such as stress, starvation, and vitelogenesis.
612
CHAPTER 37 Clinical Chemistry of Fish and Amphibians
values in bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana). Extrinsic factors such
Adrenal (interrenal tissue)
as environmental temperature and humidity, photoperiod.
season, water-quality parameters, diet, and population
The interrenal tissue of fish is homologous to the adrenal
density likely affect the normal plasma biochemistries.
tissues of higher vertebrates. The major corticosteroid pro-
duced by this tissue in most jawed fish is cortisol. The major
the variation in plasma biochemistry values. As an example.
corticosteroid in ela smobranchs is l o-hydroxycorticosterone.
female bullfrogs have higher plasma total protein, calcium,
Plasma cortisol concentration is cyclic and affected by the
and sodium concentrations than male bullfrogs.
photoperiod (diel cycle) and time of feeding with peak con-
Because adult newts and salamanders and gilled aquatic
centrations occurring prior to the onset of light and increased
amphibian larvae are more fishlike than adult toads and
locomotory activity. Cortisol is involved in energy metabo-
frogs, the interpretation of changes in their plasma biochem-
lism, ion regulation, and response to stress. Cortisol secretion 
istry profiles may be more lilke those in fish. The plasma
is stimulated by the stress response (i.e. capture, handling.
 biochemical changes in adult toads and frogs may be more
crowding. transport, rapid changes in water quality. and
like those of reptiles.
other physical disturbances) mediated by ACTH resulting in
Blood samples for use in biochemical studies of amphib-
a rapid hyperglycemia. The corticosteroid stress response of
ians are collected in the same manner as that described for
elasmobranchs is small compared to that of teleost fish.
hematologic studies (see Chapter 22). Blood to be evaluated
lected into an anticoagulant (e.g., lithium heparin). Plasma
Amphibians
is preferred to serum, because a larger sample volume
usually can be obtained when collecting plasma.
Blood biochemical evaluation is not routinely part of the
clinical assessment of amphibian patients. Routine assay
References
methods for the biochemical evaluation of mammalian
blood appear to be useful for amphibians. Interpretation of 
1. Bayir, A, Sirkecioglu AN, Polat H, Aras NM (2007) Biochemical 
the results is difficult, however, because little information is
profle of blood serum of siraz Capoeta capoeta umbla. Comp Clin
 available regarding plasma or serum chemistry values. Table
Path. 16: 119-26.
37.1 demonstrates the expected normal serum biochemical
2. Butler PJ, Metcalfe JD (1988) Physiology of Elasmobranch Fishes.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1988.
3. Cain DK, Harms CA, Aegars A (2004) Plasma biochemistry
Table 37.1 Normal serum biochermistry reference values for
reference values of wild-caught southerm stingrays (Dasyaris
Arerican bullfrogs (Rana catesbeiana) kept at 20oC to 25°℃.
americana). J Zoo Wild Med 35: 471-6.
4. Casillas E, Myers MS, Rhodes LD, er al. (1 986) Serum chemistry
Urea (mg/dL)
3.00 ± 1.00a
of diseased English sole, Parophyrs veruius Girard, from polluted
Creatinine (mg/dL)
0.99 ± 0.20
areas of Puget Sound, Washington. J Fish Dis 8: 437-49.
Uric acid (mg/dL)
0.06 ± 0.05
5. Evans DH (1993) Osmotic and ionic regulation. In: Evans DH
Total protein (g/dL)
4.40 ± 0.30 (females)
(ed.), The Physiology of Fishes. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. pp.
3.70 ± 0.80 (males)
315-41.
Albumin (g/dL)
1.60 ± 0.30
6. Groff JM, Zink] JG (1999) Hematology and clinical chemistry
Aspartate amninotransferase (IU/L)
45 ± 21 
of cyprinid fish. Ver Clin North Am (Exotic Anim Pracr) 2:
Lactate cehydrogenase (IU/L)
33 ± 20
741-76.
Calcium (mg/dL)
8.7 ± 0.6 (females)
7. Harms CA, Sullivan CV, Hodson RG, Stoskopf MK (1996) Clini-
7.4 ± 0.6 (males)
Phosphorus (mg/dL)
LOFE'E
Sodium (mEq/L)
111 ± 3.0 (females)
 8. Harms C, Ross T, Segars A (2002) Plasma biochemistry reference
105 ± 4.0 (males)
values of wild bonnethead sharks, Sphyrma riburo. Ver Clin Path
Potassium (mEg/L)
2.7 ± 0.4
31: 111-15.
Chloridle (mEq/L)
77 ± 6.0
9. Heisler N (1993) Acid-base regulation. In: Evans DH (ed.). The
Total carbon dlioxide (rnmol/L)
25 ± 4.5
Physiology of Fishes. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 343-78.
Anion gap (calculated)
9.9 ± 6.5
10. Heming TA {1989) Clinical studies of fish blood: importance of
sample collection and measurement techniques. Am J Ver Res 50:
Modified from Cathers T, Lewbart GA, Correa M, et al. (1997) Serum
93-7.
chemistry and hematology values for anesthetized American bullfrog5
11. Hille S (1982) A literature review of the blood chemistry of
(Rana catesbeiana). / Zool Wildf Med 28: 171-4.
rainbow trout Salmo gairdneri. J Fish Bio! 20: 535-69.
 All values represent meant +/- standard deviation.
12. Hoar WS, Randall DJ (eds) (1 984) Fish Physiology. Orlando, FL:
Academic Press.
613
SEcTloN V Clinical Chemistry of Common Nondomestic Mammals, Birds, Reptiles, Fish, and Amphibians
13. Hrubec TC, Smith SA, Robertson JL (2008) Age-related changes
21. Sink TD, Lochmann RT, Fecteau KA (2008) Validation, use and
ds p ui sa Aa ed e oa 
bass (Morone chrysopsx x Morone saxatilis). Ver Clin Path 30:
detection of cortisol in channel catfish, largemouth bass, red
8-15.
pacu, and golden shiners. Fish Physiol Biochem 34: 95-101.
14. Janech MG, Fizgibbon WR, Ploth DW, Lacy ER, Miller DH
22. Stoskopf MK (ed.) (1993) Fish Medicine. Philadelphia: WB
(2006) Effect of low environmental salinity on plasma composi-
Saunders.
tion and renal function of the Atlantic stingray. a euryhaline
23. Tripathi NK, Latimer KS, Lewis TL, Bumley VV (2003) Bioch-
elasmobranch. Am J Physiol Renal Physio! 291: F770-F780.
15. Janech MG, Piermarini PM (2005) Renal water and solute
Path 12: 160-5.
excretion in the Atlantic stingray in fresh water. J Fish Biol 61:
24. Wood CM (1993) Ammonia and urea metabolism and excre-
1053-7.
tion. In: Evans DH (ed.), The Physiology of Fishes. Boca Raton, FL:
16. McDonald DG, Milligan CL (1992) Chemical properties of the
CRC Press, pp. 329-425.
blood. In: Hoar, WS, Randall DJ, Farrell AP (eds.), Fish Physiology
25. Cathers T, Lewbart GA, Correa M, et al. (1997) Serum chemistry
Vol XIl, Part B The Cardiovascular System. New York, Academic
and hematology values for anesthetized American bullfrogs
Press, pp. 55-471.
17. Noga EJ, Wang C, Grindem CB, Avtalion R (1999) Comparative
26. Duellman WE, Trueb L (l994) Biology of Amphibians. Baltimore:
dinicopathological responses of striped bass and palmetto bass
The John Hopkins University Press.
to acute stress. Trans Am Fisheries Sor 128: 680-6.
27. Mitruka BM, Rawnsley HM {l98l) Clinical Biochemical and
18. Perry SF McDonald G (1993) Gas exchange. In: Evans DH (ed.).
Hematological Reference Values in Normal Experimental Animals. 2nd
The Physiology of Fishes. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. pp.
ed. New York: Masson Publishing. pp. 89-145.
251-78.
28. Wright KM (1996) Amphibian husbandry and medicine. In:
19. Railo E, Nikinmaa M, Soivio A {1985) Effects of sampling on
Mader DR (ed.). Reptile Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: WB
blood parameters in the rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri Richard-
Saunders, pp. 436-58.
50n. J Fish Biol 26: 725-32.
20. Sakamoto K, Lewbart GA, Smith TM II (2001) Blood chemistry
values of juvenile red pacu (Piaracrus brachypomus). Ver Clin Path
30: 50-2.
614
VI
Clinical Case Presentations
Clinical Case Presentations
Introduction
Case 14: Dog with hyperproteinemia and monoclonal
This section presents a number of case studies taken from
gammopathy due to myeloma, 638
animal medical records. Each case is presented with its rel-
evant clinicopathologic data. The cases are organized more
Coagulation
or less by the primary disease or organ system involved in
Case 15: Disseminated intravascular coagulation, 640
disease, with the understanding that many of them have
Case 16: Dog with hemophilia A, 642
multiple system abnormalities. For example, the first 14
Case 17: Dog with vitamin K antagonist (rodenticide)
cases focus on common primary hematologic disease.
toxicity, 643
However, abnormal hematologic processes are dispersed
Case 18: Disseminated intravascular coagulation associated
throughout the remaining cases. The following is a directory
with pancreatitis, 644
 of cases classifed by the primary system abnormality or
disease problem.
Renal Disease
Case 19: Dog with acute renal failure associated with
Cinical Case Presentations: Contents
heatstroke, 646
Hematology
Case 20: Dog with end-stage renal disease, 648
Case l:
Cat with hemolytic anemia due to Mycoplasma
Case 2l: Dog with glomerular disease, amyloidosis, 650
haemofelis.620
Case 22: Cat with acute renal disease associated with
Case 2:
 Dog with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
thromboembolic disease, 652
622
Case 23: Dog with chronic renal failure associated with
Case 3:
Cat with myeloproliferative disorder M6 (E). 624
infiltrative neoplastic disease, 655
Case 4:
Cat with iron deficiency anemia, 625
Case 24: Horse with hypercalcemic chronic renal failure.
Case 5:
 Dog with chronic inflammatory disease and iron
and salmonellosis, 657
deficiency. 626
Case 25: Cat with kaliopenic polymyopathy/nephropathy
Case 6:
 Dog with chronic external blood loss, iron
syndrome, 659
 deficiency anemia, 627
Case 26: Dog with congenital Fanconi's syndrome, 661
Case 7:
 Dog with iron deficiency anemia, 628
Case 27: Dog with hypercalcemic nephropathy. 664
Case 8:
Dog with hemangiosarcoma, acute blood loss,
 Case 28: Dog with polydipsia associated with
631
hypercalcermia, 666
Case 9:
 Dog with chronic ehrlichiosis and Mycoplasma
Case 29: Cat with renal disease and severe acidemia, 667
haemocanis. 632
Case 30: Cat with acute renal failure due to ethylene
Case 10: Dog with anemia of inflammatory disease and
glycol toxicity. 668
DIC, 633
Case 3l: Dog with atypical ethylene glycol toxicity. 670
 Case ll: Dog with acute inflammatory disease and sepsis.
Case 32: Foal with uroabdomen, 671
634
Case 12: Dog with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
Fluid and Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disturbances
blood loss, 636
 Disorders of electrolytes and acid base disturbances are not
Case 13: Dog with lymphocytic leukemia, 637
primary disease problems. Therefore, most electrolyte and
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 2012 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
617
SECTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
acid-base disturbances are best considered with their
Case 59: Dog with protein-losing enteropathy. 718
primary disease process(es). Therefore, for more broad
Case 60: Dog with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 721
exposure to this category, also see:
Electrolyte abnormalities
Endocrine Disorders
Cases: #'s 11, 16, 24, 25.30, 32, 34, 35, 41, 45,47, 53,54,
Case 6l: Dog with hypothyroidism, 723
56, 57, 58, 63, 64, 65. 66
Case 62: Dog with diabetes and secondary
Acid base disturbances
hypothyroidism, 724
Cases: #'s 19, 29, 31, 33, 40, 54, 56, 57. 58, 65
Case 63: Dog with hypoadrenocorticism, 726
Case 64: Dog with hypoadrenocorticism, 728
Case 33: Cat with compensated metabolic acidosis
Case 65: Dog with hypoadrenocorticism, 730
associated with diabetes, 673
Case 66: Dog with hypoadrenocorticism, 732
Case 34: Cat with sodium chloride depletion due t0
Case 67: Dog with hyperadrenocorticism, 734
meningomyelocele, 674
Case 68: Dog with iatrogenic Cushing's disease, 736
Case 35: Horse with colic, 676
Case 69: Dog with pituitary adenoma secreting ACTH, 738
Case 70: Dog with pituitary dependent
Hepatic Disease
hyperadrenocorticism, 740
Case 36: Dog with cholangiohepatitis and cholestasis, 677
Case 7l: Dog with hyperparathyroidism, 742
Case 37: Dog with hepatitis and cholestasis associated with
Case 72: Dog with primary hyperparathyroidism, 744
steroid hepatopathy. 679
Case 73: Dog with humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy.
Case 38: Dog with chronic liver disease due to metastatic
746
neoplasia, 680
Case 74: Dog with hypoparathyroidism, 748
Case 39: Dog with liver failure associated with chronic
 diaphragmatic hernia, 682
Perspective on use of this section
Case 40: Dog with liver failure associated with severe
 Interpretation of laboratory data is an art that is developed
hepatic infiltrate with lymphoma, 684
through accumulated experience. The interactions and pat-
Case 4l: Dog with bile peritonitis, 686
terns of data related to disease diagnosis are complex. One
Case 42: Dog with end-stage liver disease, cirrhosis, 688
also must develop an appreciation for magnitudes of abnor-
Case 43: Dog with portosystemic shunt, 689
mality that influence interpretation of each measurement.
Case 44: Dog with hepatocellular injury associated with
This case discussion appendix is designed to provide the
trauma, 692
reader with both experience and guidance in beginning to
Case 45: Dog with cirrhosis and cholestasis, 694
learn the art of interpretation. This art is then continually
Case 46: Dog with portosystemic shunt, 696
cultivated through real-time experience in the clinical
Case 47: Dog with hepatic lipidosis and cellular injury
setting.
associated with diabetes, 697
The laboratory data are presented for each case in a form
Case 48: Cat with hepatic lipidosis syndrome, 698
that allows the reader to learn from malking his or her own
Case 49: Alpaca with hepatic lipidosis and serum lipid
effort at describing and interpreting data. Please note the
abnormalities, 699
following formatting:
Case 50: Dog with end-stage liver disease and
1. Data are presented in conventional units. In sorme areas,
hepatocutaneous syndrome, 701
international (SI) units are given; these are shown in italics.
2. Laboratory values that are abnormal and central to the
Pancreatic & Gastrointestinal Disease and Glucose
 interpretation are given in bold type
Metabolism
Following each data set, an interpretive discussion is pre-
Case 5l: Dog with hyperlipidemia syndrome. 703
sented. These narratives may be used by the reader for self-
assessment of proficiency in interpretation of data.
Case 53: Cat with diabetic non-ketotic hyperosmolar
syndrome, 707
List of abbreviations
Case 54: Cat with diabetic ketoacidosis, 709
The following list of abbreviations identifies test results that
Case 55: Dog with hypoglycemia associated with insulin
 are typically used in laboratory reports. The user should
secreting neoplasia, 711
refer to these as needed while learning the content of labora-
Case 56: Calf with secretory diarrhea and hypotonic
tory reports.
dehydration, 712
Case 57: Bull with upper gastrointestinal obstruction, 714
Alb
Albumin
Case 58: Calf with non-secretory diarrhea and hypertonic
ALP
Alkaline phosphatase
dehydration, 716
ALT
Alanine aminotransferase
618
Clinical Case Presentations: Contents
An.Gap
Anion gap
Metas
Metamyelocytes
aPTT
Activated partial thromboplastin time
Monos
Monocytes
AST
Aspartate aminotransferase
Na
Sodium
Bands
Band neutrophils
NCC
Total nucleated cell count (Also
BUN
Blood urea nitrogen
commonly called WBC for "white
Ca
Calcium
blood cell count".)
Calc. Osmolality
Calculated osmolality
PCV
Packed cell volume
Chol
Cholesterol
Phos
 Phosphorus
CK
Creatine kinase
PT
 Prothrombin time
CL
Chloride
RBC
Red blood cells
Creat
Creatinine
Retics
Reticulocytes
Eos
 Eosinophils
SDH
Sorbitol dehydrogenase
Epith cells
Epithelial cells
Segs
Segmented neutrophils
GGT
Gamma glutamyl transferase
Sp. Gr.
Specific gravity
Glob
Globulin
T. Bili
Total bilirubin
Gluc
Glucose
TCO
Total CO
Hgb
Hemoglobin
TP
Total protein
Hpf
High power fields
TP (P)
Total plasma protein
Lymphs
Lymphocytes
TP (S)
Total serum protein
MCHC
 Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
Trig
Triglyceride
concentration
UN
Urea nitrogen (same as BUN)
MCV
Mean cell volume
WBCs
White blood cells
Meas. Osmolality
 Measured osmolality
WRI
Within reference interval(s)
619
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment and History: 1l-year-old male cat.
 Biochemical Profile
Reference
Lethargy and polydipsia. One month ago PCV was 38%.
Interval
Hematology
Reference
Gluc (mg/dL)
249
67-124
Interval
BUN (mg/dL)
96
17-32
Creat (mg/dL)
6.6
0.9-2.1
PCV (%)
13
25-45
Ca (mg/dL)
10.2
8.5-11
RBC (×10%/μL)
1.55
5-11
 Phos (rng/dL)
7.9
3.3-7.8
Hgb (g/dL)
4.0
8-15
TP (gy/dL)
8.4
5.9-8.1
MCV (fL)
84
05-66
Alb (g/dL)
E'6
2.3-3.9
MCHC (g/dL)
31
 Glob (g/dL)
5.1
2.9-4.4
Retics (×103/μL)
155,000
0-60,000
T. Bili (mng/dL)
E0
E:0-0
NCC (x103/μL)
20.6
5.5-19.5
Chol (rng/dL)
386
60-220
Metas (x10°/μL)
0.4
ALT (IU/L)
53
30-100
Bands (×10²/μL)
0.8
E'0-0
ALP (IU/L)
19
6-106
Segs (x103/μL)
9.9
2.5-12.5
Na (mEq/L)
150
146-160
Lynphs (x10/μL)
1.4
1.5-7.0
K (mEq/L)
4.9
3.7-5.4
Monos (×10²/μL)
3.1
0-0.8
CL (mEq/L)
127
112-129
Eo5 (×10²/μL)
0.2
0-1.5
TCO2 (mEq/L)
10
14-23
Nucleated RBCs (x103/μL)
4.8
0
An. gap (mEq/L)
18
10-27
Adequate 
Calc. osmolality (mOsm/kg)
Platelets (x10²/μL)
150-700
LEE
290-310
TP (P) (g/dL)
8.9
6.0-8.5
 Hemopathology: Many Hemobartonella felis (Mycoplasma
haemofelis) organisms on erythrocytes. Occasional reactive
 ymphocyte.
Urinalysis (cystocentesis)
45
84
Color
Yellow
 Urine Sediment 
 Transparency 
Apno
WBCs/hpf
6-8
Sp. gr.
1.020
 RBCs/hpf
1-2
 Protein 
 Negative
 Epith cells/hpf 
1-3 transitional
2+
Casts/lpf
0
 Biirubin 
Negative
Crystals 
0
300
Blood 
Negative 
 Bacteria 
0
Cell Volume (fl)
pH
5.0
Other
fat croplets 
Histogram  Solid line = patient; Dashed line = normal
Ketones 
 Negative
620
Case l
Interpretive discussion
The BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are
increased, and in the face of a urine specific gravity of only
Hematology
1.020, is indicative of renal azotemia.
Packed cell volume, Hemoglobin, Red blood cell count: The
The serum phosphorus concentration is mildly increased.
cat is severely anemic; all measurements of red blood cell
and is compatible with decreased glomerular filtration rate.
mass are decreased.
The serum total protein concentration is increased due to
MCV: The mean cell volume is increased, which one
an increase in the globulin concentration. The increase in
would expect with a regenerative anemia. However.
the
globulin should trigger protein electrophoresis to determine
- a q e a aq un    a
if gammopathy is monoclonal or polyclonal.
locytes, suggesting that agglutination is causing the increase.
The
serum cholesterol concentration
 is  moderately
since doublets are being counted as one erythrocyte. This is
increased. This may be due to metabolic disorders associated
confirmed by the histogram tailing to the right.
with diabetes mellitus.
 Reticulocytes are increased, indicating that the anemia is
Serum total CO, is decreased, suggesting metabolic
regenerative. Regenerative anemia is due to blood loss or
acidosis.
 blood destruction. The protein concentration suggests hemo-
The increased calculated serum osmolality is primarily due
lysis and tends to rule out blood loss.
to hyperglycemia and increased BUN.
Nucleated RBCs are increased due to early marrow release.
and are often present in a regenerative anemia.
Urinalysis
Erythrocyte morphology: The presence of Hemobartonella
As evidenced by the relatively low urine specific gravity in
felis (Mycoplasma haemofelis) organisms explains the anemia
the face of azotemia, the animal is not concentrating ade-
(blood destruction). Agglutination is likely due to the pres-
quately. indicating renal dysfunction. The presence of
ence of antibodies against the organisms.
glucose indicates that the renal threshold of glucose has
Monocytosis and increased immature (band) neutrophils
been exceeded.
 are indicative of an inflammatory leukogram.
Lymphopenia is indicative of a stress component in the
leukogram.
Summary
Total protein: Total protein is increased. In this patient, it
is due to hyperglobulinemia (see biochemical profile inter-
This animal had been previously diagnosed with diabetes
pretation below) .
mellitus and was not being controlled adequately. Hemobar-
tonella felis (Mycoplasma haemofelis) is often an opportunist in
Biochemical profile
 cats that are immunosuppressed. The hyperglobulinemia
The serum glucose concentration is moderately increased.
was polyclonal, indicating antigenic stimulation, possibly
This could be due to stress (glucocorticoid release), as the
due to Mycoplasma felis.
lymphopenia suggests, but could also be due to diabetes
mellitus.
621
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
-15E
Signalment: 5-year-old spayed female cocker spaniel
 Biochemical Profile
Reference
History: Acutely lethargic
Interval
Physical Examination: Pale, slightly icteric mucous
membranes
Gluc (mg/dL)
143
75-130
BUN (mg/dL)
6E
7-28
Creat (mg/dL)
1.3
0.9-1.7
 Hematology
Reference
Ca (mg/dL)
9.0
9.0-11.2
Interval 
 Phos (rng/dL)
4.4
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
6.5
5.4-7.4
 PCV (%)
12
37-55
Alb (g/dL)
E'E
2.7-4.5
Hgb (g/dL)
3.6
12-18
 Glob (g/dL)
3.2
1.9-3.4
RBC (×10%/μL)
0.95
5.5-8.5
T. Bili (mng/dL)
4.7
0-0.4
MCV (fL)
114
60-72
 Chol (rg/dL) 
269
130-370
MCHC (g/dL)
OE
34-38
ALT/μL (IU//L)
32
10-120
Retics (x1 0²/μL)
123
<60
AST/μL (IU/L)
OE
16-40 
NCC (×10²/μL)
96.1
6-17
ALP (IU/L)
438
35-280
Segs (x103/μL)
69.1
3-11.5
Na (mEq/L)
146
145-158
Bands (x10²/μL)
6.7
E'0-0
K (mEq/L)
5.0
4.1-5.5
Metas (x10°/μL)
1.0
0
CL (mEq/L)
118
106-127
Monos (x10²/μL)
5.8
0.1-1.3
TCO2 (mEq/L)
14
14-27
Lyrmphs (x10²/μL)
0
1-4.8
An. gap (mEq/L)
19
8-25
E05 (×103/μL)
0
0.1-1.2
NRBCs (×10°/μL)
13.5
0
 Platelets (×103/μL)
284
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.8
8-9
 Hemopathlogy: Polychromasia increased, agglutination present, many
 spherocytes present. Occasional Howell-Jolly body.
Urinalysis (catheterized)
65
114
Color
Orange
Urine Sediment 
Transparency
Turbid 
WBCs/hpf
Sp. Gr.
1.038
RBCs/hpf 
10
 Protein 
1+
Epith Cells/hpf
0
Gluc
Negative 
Casts/lpf
0
 Biirubin 
2+
Crystals 
 Numerous 
24
300
Bilirubin 
Cell Volume (fl)
Blood 
1+
Bacteria
0
Histogram
 Solid line = patient; Dashed line = normal
pH
6.0
622
Case 2
Interpretive discussion
    s a i 
bleeding into the GI tract. Since the creatinine is within the
Hematology
reference interval, and the dog is concentrating urine, this
Packed cell volume, Hemoglobin, Red blood cell count: The
is likely prerenal azotemia, due to GI hemorrhage (high
dog is very anemic, as all measurement of red blood cells
protein diet) or decreased blood flow to the kidneys.
mass are decreased. The RBC count is likely erroneously
Bilirubin is increased, indicating either cholestasis or
decreased, due to erythrocyte agglutination, and groups of
increased red blood cell destruction. Because the dog
red blood cells being counted as one red blood cell.
has immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, increased RBC
MCV: The mean cell volume is erroneously increased due
destruction is most likely the cause.
to agglutination. Although the anemia is regenerative, the
Serum alkaline phosphatase activity is increased, which
MCV is much higher than can be accounted for by an
 could be due to either cholestasis or previous treatment with
increase in reticulocytes. As one can see on the histogram,
corticosteroids.
erythrocytes that are agglutinated are being counted as one
      
Urinalysis
Reticulocytes are increased, indicating that the anemia
Bilirubinuria and the presence of bilirubin crystals reflect
is regenerative, suggesting either blood loss or blood destruc-
the increased serum bilirubin concentration. Conjugated
tion. The protein and RBC morphology findings indicate
bilirubin readily passes through glomeruli and is then
hemolysis. The decreased MCHC may be attributed to
excreted in the urine. Blood and protein may be present due
regeneration.
to traumatic catheterization. The animal is concentrating.
Nucleated RBCs are increased, likely due to early release
indicating that the increase in BUN is not due to renal
from bone marrow in response to marked anemia. However.
dysfunction.
it is also possible that the dog has decreased splenic function
secondary to glucocorticosteroid administration.
 Erythrocyte morphology: Presence of spherocytes and
Summary
agglutination, in the absence of a previous blood transfu-
sion, are indicative of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
This is a typical case of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
Neutrophilia, increased immature neutrophils.
and
Dog was treated with prednisone and recovered. It had been
monocytosis are indicative of a markedly inflammatory
previously treated with corticosteroids, accounting for the
leukogram. The absence of lymphocytes is suggestive of
 stress or corticosteroids. Inflammatory leukograms are com-
line phosphatase activity.
monly seen in association with immune-mediated hemolytic
anemia.
Biochemical profile
Glucose is mildly increased. Considering the lymphopenia,
this may be due to stress or steroids.
623
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment and History: 1l-year-old DsH spayed
Interpretive discussion
fermale cat presented for anorexia and lethargy
Hematology
Packed cell volume, Hemoglobin, Red blood cell count: Cat
is markedly anemic. Reticulocytes are not increased, indicat-
Hematology
 Reference
ing that the anemia is nonregenerative.
Interval 
MCV is markedly increased, in the absence of reticulocy-
PCV (%)
13
25-45
tosis or agglutination. In a cat, this should trigger testing for
1.84
5-11
feline leukemia virus, as the McV may be increased as a
RBC (x10%/μL)
Hgb (g/dL)
4.2
8-15
result of viral-induced erythrodysplasia. Macrocytosis with
MCV (fL)
71
05-6E
MCHC (g/dL)
32
anemia.
Retics (x1 03/μL)
7,360
0-60,000
 Neutrophilia, increased band neutrophils and metamyelo-
Nucleated cells (x10°/μL)
71.3
5.5-19.5
cytes, and monocytosis are indicative of inflammation.
Metas (×10²/μL)
0.7
0
 Nucleated red blood cells are increased in the absence of
Bands (x10²/μL)
2.1
E'0-0
reticulocytes. Moreover, many of these are quite immature.
 Segs (×103/μL)
33.2
2.5-12.5
indicating that the cat has leukemia involving the
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
2.8
1.5-7.0
erythrocytes.
Monos (x10°/μL)
6.9
010.8
NRBCs (×10°%/μL)
24.9
0
Blasts (x103/μL)
0.7
0
Summary
 Platelets (x103/μL)
 Adequate 
150-700
TP (P) (g/dL)
8.0
6.0-8.5
 Hemopathology: Blasts appear to be rubriblasts. Many prorubricytes 
Myeloproliferative disorder, erythremic myelosis or M6(E).
and rubricytes also present.
45
71
24
300
Cell Volume (fl)
Histogram
Solid line = patient; Dashed line = normal.
624
Case 4
Signalment and History: 17-year-old male cat
Interpretive discussion
presented for lethargy and enlarged abdomen. Liver
disease suspected, but biochemical profile normal.
Hematology
Packed cell volume: The cat is mildly anemic.
MCV: The mean cell volume is prominently decreased.
Decreased mean cell volume is almost always caused by iron
Hematology
Reference
deficiency anemia, which in adults is almost always second-
Interval
ary to chronic external blood loss. The borderline decrease
PCV (%)
24
25-45
in MCHC is not important dia gnostically.
MCV (fL)
EE
05-66
MCHC (g/dL)
32
ciated with iron deficiency anermia. Iron deficiency anemia
Retics (x10°/μL)
ND
0-60,000
is not as common in cats as in dogs. and the few cases we
Nucleated cells (x1 03/μL)
13.2
5.5-19.5
have seen did not have increased central pallor.
Bands (x10%/μL)
4.5
E'0-0
The total leukocyte count and the mature neutrophil con-
Segs (x103/μL)
6.6
2.5-12.5
centration are within the reference interval, but the increase 
Lymphs (×1 0²/μL)
0.5
1.5-7.0
in band neutrophils is indica tive of inflammation. Lympho-
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.5
0-0.8
penia is indicative of stress or previous corticosteroid
Eos (×10°/μL)
0.3
0-1.5
administration.
Ba5ophils (x10°/μL)
0.8
rare
Total protein is within the reference interval. Although
Platelets (×1 0°/μL)
 Adequate
150-700
one might expect total protein to be decreased with chronic
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.6
6.0-8.5
 blood loss, animals often compensate for this chronic loss of 
 Hermopathology: Many keratocytes, schistocyte5.
protein.
33
45
Summary
Owner declined further diagnostic evaluation. Chronic GI
most likely diagnosis in this aged patient with iron defi-
24
300
Cell Volume (fl)
ciency anemia.
Histogram Solid line = patient:; Dashed line = normal
625
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 1-year-old pointer
Interpretive discussion
History: Treated for neck or back pain with
corticosteroids by referring veterinarian. Dog was thought
Hematology
to have GI parasites due to occult blood in feces, and was
Packed cell volume, Hemoglobin: Both are decreased, indi-
treated with anthelmintics. The dog returned 1 month
cating that the dog is anemic. The red blood cell count is
later with a PCV of 15% and MCV of 40 fl. At that time
within the reference interval, suggesting erythrocytes are
the dog had an abdominal effusion.
small.
Physical Examination: Painful abdomen, pale
MCV: The mean cell volume is decreased. Decreased mean
mucous membranes
cell volume is almost always caused by iron deficiency
anemia, which in adults is almost always secondary to
chronic external blood loss.
Hematology
Reticulocytes are not increased, indica ting that the anemia
Reference
Interval 
is nonregenerative. While uncomplicated iron deficiency
anemia is usually regenerative, this anemia may be nonre-
PCV (%)
18
37-55
 generative due to the presence of inflammation (note
Hgb (g/dL)
3.76
12-18
inflammatory leukogram).
RBC (×10%μL)
5.8
5.5-8.5
Erythrocyte morphology: Keratocytes, erythrocyte frag-
MCV (fL)
47
60-72
mentation, and increased central pallor are commonly asso-
MCHC (g/dL)
82-22
ciated with iron deficiency anemia.
Retics (x10²/μL)
18
<60
Neutrophilia and increased immature neutrophils are
NCC (x10²/μL)
40.1
6-17
indicative of a marked inflammatory leukogram. The inflam-
Segs (x103/μL)
36.5
3-11.5
matory leukogram is compatible with the presence of
Bands (x10²/μL)
0.4
E'0-0
inflammation in the peritoneal cavity. although one would
Metas (x10°/μL)
0.4
1.2
usually expect to see more band neutrophils in dogs with
Mon05 (×10/μL)
0.1-1.3
 peritonitis. The presence of this inflammation may be the
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
1.2
1-4.8
Eos (×103/μL)
0.4
0.1-1.2
explanation for the lack of a regenerative response to the
Platelets (×10²/μL)
623
200-500
anemia, as an anemia of inflammatory disease may be
TP (P) (g/dL)
5.9
8-9
superimposed on the iron deficiency anemia. The noted
 Hemmopathology: Nurmerous keratocytes, few schistocytes, some RBC5
occasional granulated lymphocyte is interpreted as an inci-
appear hypochromic. Occasional lymphocyte with azurophilic
dental finding.
 granules.
Platelets are increased. Approximately half of all animals
4765
 with iron deficiency anemia have increased platelets. prob-
ably in response to cytokines and growth factors.
Total protein: Total protein is slightly decreased, probably
as a result of chronic blood loss.
Histogram confirms the presence of a population of micro-
工
cytic cells (normal histogram represented by dashed line).
24
300
Cell Volume (fl)
Abdominal fluid analysis
 Suppurative septic inflammation. The presence of different
Histogram Solid line = patient:; Dashed line = normal:
types of bacteria suggests a GI source of bacteria.
Summary
 Abdominal Fluid Analysis
The dog died, and on necropsy had an intestinal perforation
NCC (μL)
90,000
 secondary to an ulcer, chronic diffuse peritonitis, pyogranu-
TP (g/dL)
4.0
 Cytology: All cells are degenerate neutrophils. Bacteria of various
lomatous lymphadenitis and amyloidosis of the spleen, liver.
types are present.
and kidney. Presumably, the dog had been chronically bleed-
ing from this ulcer, resulting in iron deficiency anemia.
626
Case 6
 Signalment and History: 9 year-old female beagle
Interpretive discussion
  a  ra  n
Owner reported that the dog occasionally had blood
Hematology
in feces.
Packed cell volume, Hemoglobin, Red blood cell count: The
dog is markedly anemic; all measurements of red blood cell
mass are decreased.
 Hematology
Reference
MCV: The mean cell volume is markedly decreased.
Interval
 Decreased mean cell volume is almost always caused by iron
 PCV (%)
12
deficiency anemia, which in adults is almost always second-
37-55
RBC (×10%/μL)
2.76
5.5-8.5
ary to chronic external blood loss. The MCHC may be mildly
Hgb (g/dL)
3.2
12-18
decreased in iron deficiency as it is here. The reticulocytosis 
MCV (fL)
40
60-72
may also contribute to the decreased MCHC.
MCHC (g/dL)
29
34-38
 Reticulocytes are increased, indicating that the anemia is 
Retics (x10°/μL)
242,880
0-60,000
regenerative, suggesting blood loss or blood destruction. In
Nucleated cells (x1 0²/μL)
6.0-17.0
this case, the decreased MCV strongly suggests iron def-
Metas (x10°/μL)
0
ciency anemia secondary to chronic blood loss. The presence
Bands (x103/μL)
E'0-0
of nucleated red blood cells is compatible with this degree
Segs (x103/μL)
30.7
3.0-11.5
of regenerative response.
Lymphs (×10²/μL)
1.0
1.0-4.8
Erythrocyte morphology: Keratocytes and increased
Mon05 (×10²/μL)
1.0
0.2-1.4
central pallor are commonly associated with iron deficiency
E05 (×10°/μL)
0.1-1.2
NRBCs (×103/μL)
anemia.
0.7
0
 Neutrophilia is indicative of inflammation, even though
Platelets (×1 0²/μL)
Acdequate
200-500
(np/6) (d) dl
E'9
6.0-8.0
no band neutrophils are present, since the neutrophil con-
Hermopathology: Increased central pallor, occasional keratocyte, giant 
centration is greater than two fold upper reference interval.
 The lymphocyte count is in the low normal range, indicating
platelets.
that there may be a stress or steroid component to the
leukogram.
Total protein is within the reference interval. Although
 one might expect total protein to be decreased with chronic
blood loss, animals often compensate for this chronic loss of
protein.
Summary
GI barium series performed and jejunal mass seen. At
surgery, a mass in the mid-jejunum was resected and deter-
mined to be a leiomyosarcoma with clean surgical margins.
The regenerative response in this case is in contrast to the
previous case to make the point that iron deficiency anemia
may be either regenerative or nonregenerative.
627
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Case
 Signalment Five-year-old mixed breed dog
History Lethargy
 Physical examination Lethargic, pale mucous
membranes
Hematology
1/20*
1/28
 Reference
Interval
 Packed cell volume (%) (spun)
14
37-55
Hermatocrit (%) (calculated)
12.4
21.3
37-55
Hgb (g/dL)
4.4
9.0
12-18
RBC (10%/μL)
4.26
5.77
5.5-8.5
MCV (fL)
29
LE
60-77
MCHC (g/dL)
35.2
42.1
31-34
RDW
23.8
31.7
12-15
 Platelets(x1 0²/μL)
08
88
200-500
 Reticulocytes (x1 0²/μL)
102
403
09-0
Total Protein (g/dL)
5.3
6.2
6-8
* sample moderately lipemic
1/20 histogram and blood film
VetScan HM2
Sample ID:
1151
Patient
ID:
9818
Doctor:
Gillespie
Name:
Age/Sex:
5 years / Male
Test tirme:
01.28.2010 10:36 AM
S/N:
270107
Mode
Dog
Report date
01.28.2010 10:36 AM
WBC
12.41
10~9/1
17
LYM
1.90
10~9/1
1
4.8
MON
0.89
10~9/1
0.2[
1.5
GRA
9.63
10~9/1
I
112
LY%
15.3
%
12
30
MO%
7.2 + %
4
GR%
77.5
%
62
87
5.77
10~12/
43 78103
RBC
5.5[
8.5
400
HGB
9.0-
IP/6-
12
1.8
HCT
21.30 - %
3701
MCV
37-fl
MCH
15.6 -pg
19.5
MCHC
42.1 + g/dl
31
RDWc
31.7± %
PLT
883 + 10°91
200
200
PCT
0.70
%
MPV
8.0
fl
3.9
]11.1
PL7
PDWc
36.6
OC
14
0
628
Case 7
1/28 histogram and blood film
VetScan HM2
Sample ID:
1100
Patient
ID:
9818
Doctor:
Gillespie
Name:
Fluffy
Age/Sex:
5 years / Male
Test time:
01.28.2010 09:31 AM
S/N:
270107
Mode:
Dog
Report date
01.28.2010 09:31 AM
WBC
8.86
10~9/1
6
117
WB
LYM
2.03
10~9/1
1
4.8
MON
0.43
10~9/1
0.2[
11.5
GRA
6.40
10~9/1
1e
12
LY%
22.9
%
12
30
MO%
4.8 + %
2[
4
GR%
72.3
%
62 [
87
4.26 - 10~12/
5.5
8.5
48
104115
RBC
HGB
4.4
IP/6
12
118
RBC
HCT
12.39 
%
37
155
MCV
29-fl
7
MCH
10.3 - pg
19.5
24.5
MCHC
35.2 +
31 □
3
RDWc
23.8
%
PLT
803 + 10~9/1
200[
500
200
PCT
0.67
%
MPV
8.3
3.9
11.1
PLT
PDWc
36.6
%
50
Interpretive discussion
erythrocytes, as well as keratocytes and schistocytes, eryth-
rocyte shape changes and fragmentation that are very char-
Hematology
acteristic of iron deficient erythrocytes. The dog was treated
PCV and Hematocrit: Decreased, indicating anemia. Note the
with iron. Note that one week later on l/28 the MCV
marked discrepancy in the calculated hematocrit (HCT) and
increased, and the new normal-sized erythrocytes are
the spun packed cell volume (PCV). The HCT is calculated
evident in the erythrocyte histograrm on 1/28. They are
by the instrument using the following formula: (MCV x
represented by the additional curve on the right side of the
RBC)/10 = HCT(%). In the case of the sample from 1/28/10.
histogram as well as on the blood film made on l/28.
the RBC count may be under-reporting the sample's RBC
 concentration since some small RBCs are likely appearing in
MCHC
the PLT channel. The lower reported RBC count is also likely
The MCHC is miscalculated to be high on 1/28 likely as a
due to the fact that two overlapping RBC peaks are now
result of the undercounted RBCs. The MCHC is probably
present in the RBC histogram from 1/28/l0; the two over-
erroneously increased on l/20 as well. The MCHC is calcu-
lapping peaks will be underestimated since the software
expects only one RBC peak to be present and will not apply
the following formula: HGB (g/dL) divided by the HCT (%)
curve fitting algorithms here. Since the RBC count is under-
x 100 = MCHC (g/dL). It provides an index for the quantity
estimated, the HCT calculated here is lower than the reported
of hemoglobin relative to the volume of packed erythro-
PCV.
cytes. It may be erroneously increased due to lipemia, hemo-
lysis. or an erroneously low HCT. On 1/28. it is likely
RBC
erroneously high due to the erroneously low HCT. On l/20.
The RBCs are decreased as a result of anemia, but they are
it may also be erroneously high due to lipemia artifactually
likely undercounted in this patient due to their small size.
increasing the HGB.
and are likely being counted in the platelet channel (see the
platelet histogram below the erythrocyte histogram).
RDW
The increased variation in erythrocyte size (anisocytosis) is
MCV
represented by the increased red cell distribution width
The decreased MCV indicates a severe microcytic anemia.
(RDW) on 1/28, a numerical expression (coefficient of varia-
The degree of microcytosis is illustrated by the RBC histo-
tion) that correlates with the degree of anisocytosis and
gram on 1/20. The blood film contained many hypochromic
which the instrument determines by dividing the standard
629
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
deviation of the red cell size by the MCV. Both iron deficient
Outcome
The diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia was confirmed by
can also be seen on the blood film.
measuring serum iron, which was 27μg/dL (Reference
interval = 98-220 μg/dL). The source of chronic blood loss is
Platelets
usually the gastrointestinal tract. An occult blood test was
The platelet concentration is markedly increased, as is often
performed on the feces on multiple occasions, and was con-
the case in patients with iron deficiency anemia. Some of
sistently negative. An examination of feces for the eggs of
the platelets are quite large. Also, some microcytic RBC are
  o     
counted as PLT, falsely increasing the PLT concentration.
mintic two weeks prior to presentation, presumably elimi-
Reticulocytes
nating a hookworm infestation. The dog was treated with
The reticulocyte concentration is increased, indicating a
15mg/kg iron dextran IM, and the owner was instructed to
regenerative anemia.
give him 162.5mg Ferrous sulfate orally once daily for 4
weeks. The hematocrit and McV were normal at his follow-
Total protein
up examination 6 months later.
The total protein is slightly decreased on 1/20, likely due to
chronic blood loss (protein is lost as well as erythrocytes).
Summary
630
Case 8
Signalment: 10-year-old castrated male Labrador
Interpretive discussion
retriever
History: Four episodes of acute weakness over past 3
Hematology
months. At time of wellness exam 4 months ago, dog had
Packed cell volume, Hemoglobin, Red blood cell count: The
PCV of 44% and T.P. of 8.2 g/dL.
dog is anemic; all measurements of red blood cell mass are
Physical examination: Pale mucous membranes.
decreased.
abdomen slightly distended
MCV: The mean cell volume is normal. However, it is
surprising that it is not higher considering that the reticulo-
cyte count is increased.
Reticulocytes are increased, indicating that the anemia is
Hematology
Reference
 regenerative, and is thus due to blood loss or blood destruc-
Interval
tion. The borderline low plasma protein suggests blood loss 
PCV (%)
16
37-55
is likely; this will be confirmed by additional findings. Nucle-
5.3
12-18
Hgb (g/dL)
RBC (x10%/μL)
2.48
5.5-8.5
of regeneration.
MCV (fL)
E9
60-72
Erythrocyte morphology: Acanthocytes are commonly
MCHC (g/dL)
34
34-38
seen in dogs with hemangiosarcoma. The schistocytes are
Retics (x10%/μL)
342
<60
suggestive of microangiopathy, which may also be associated
NCC (x10/μL)
39.1
6-17
with hemangiosarcoma.
Segs (×10²/μL)
33.2
3-11.5
Neutrophilia, increased immature (band) neutrophils, and
Bands (x103/μL)
1.2
E'0-0
monocytosis are indicative of an inflammatory leukogram.
Monos (x10°/μL)
3.1
0.1-1.3
although a component of the mature neutrophilia is likely
Lyrmphs (×10²/μL)
0.4
1-4.8
due to stress or corticosteroids. Lymphopenia is indicative of
Eos (×10°/μL)
0.4
0.1-1.2
stress.
NRBCs (x107/μL)
0.8
0
 Platelets are slightly decreased. Considering the presence
Platelets (x10°/μL)
130
200-500
of schistocytes, the animal may have DIC.
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.2
6-8
 Hermopathology: Polychromasia increased, numerous acanthocytes 
 Total protein: Total protein is within the reference inter-
and schistocytes. Nummerous Howell-Jolly bodies
val. However, considering that it was 8.2g/dL 4 months
previously, it is likely decreased due to blood loss within the
abdominal cavity.
 Biochemical Profile
Abdominal fluid analysis
 No abnormalities
Hemoabdomen.
 Abdominal Fluid Analysis
Summary
PCV (%)
24
NCC (x10/μL)
34,000
 The signalment (large breed, older dog). history (episodes of 
Cytology: 95% nondegenerate neutrophils; 5% macrophage5, many
weakness). regenerative anemia, erythrocyte morphology.
 of which have phagocytized erythrocyte5
 and the hemoabdormen are all suggestive of hemangiosar-
coma. An exploratory was performed, and the dog had hem-
angiosarcoma of the spleen and liver, which had ruptured.
Previous episodes of weakness were likely due to previous
ruptures of the tumor, which had subsequently sealed, then
ruptured again.
631
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 15-year-old Staffordshire terrier
Interpretive discussion
History: Lethargic
Physical examination: Pale mucous membranes
Hematology
Packed cell volume, Hemoglobin, Red blood cell count: The
dog is anemic; all measurements of red blood cell mass are
Hematology
January
 October
Reference
decreased.
Interval
Reticulocytes are increased in January, indicating that the
 anemia is regenerative, suggesting either blood loss or blood
PCV (%)
OE
28
37-55
destruction. Although the PCV is further decreased in
RBC (x10%/μL)
4.70
4.44
5.5-8.5
 October, the anemia is no longer regenerative, suggesting
Hgb (g/dL)
10.1
9.5
12-18
bone marrow dysfunction.
MCV (fL)
61
64
60-72
Neutrophilic leukocytosis with left shift and monocytosis 
MCHC (g/dL)
35
34
34-38
are indicative of an inflammatory leukogram (January).
Retics (x103/μL)
178,000
13,200
0-60,000
NCC (x10²/μL)
23.4
10.2
6.0-17.0
lymphocytic leukemia or ehrlichiosis.
Bands (×10°/μL)
0.5
0.2
E'0-0
Segs (x1 0°/μL)
Platelets: The animal is markedly thrombocytopenic in
15.7
6.2
3.0-11.5
 October. The combination of thrombocytopenia and nonre-
Lymphs (x×10°/μL)
6.1
1.5
1.0-4.8
Mon0s (x10²/μL)
0.7
1.7
0.2-1.4
generative anemia should trigger a bone marrow aspirate
 Eos (x103/μL)
0.1-1.2
examination and ehrlichia titer. Common causes of throm-
NRBCs (x10°/μL)
0
bocytopenia include ehrlichiosis, immune-mediated throm-
一
 Platelets (×10²/μL)
150
12
200-500
bocytopenia, and DIC.
TP (P) (g/dL)
8.2
5.6
6.0-8.0
Total protein: Total protein is increased. In this patient, it
Alb
1.5
2.7-4.5
is due to hyperglobulinernia, which should trigger protein
Glob
6.0
1.9-3.4
electrophoresis.
 Hemopathology (January): Increased rouleaux, giant platelets, lymph5
The presence of increased rouleaux is compatible with
contain azurophilic granules.
increased globulin. The presence of large granular lympho.
 Hemopathology (October): Increased rouleaux, lyrphs contain
cytes is suggestive of certain types of antigenic stimulation,
azurophilic granules. numerous Hemobartonelfa canis (Mycoplasma 
 commonly ehrlichiosis, or a leukermia of LGL cells. The pres-
haemocanis) organisms present.
ence of Hemobartonella canis (Mycoplasma haemocanis) organ-
splenic dysfunction, since the erythrocyte parasite is rarely
seen in dogs with functional spleens. The anemia is no
longer regenerative in the face of anemia and this erythro-
 a po t  s 'sd 
and a bone marrow aspirate is indicated.
Summary
 In January, the anemia was possibly due to blood loss associ-
ated with a large hematoma of the spleen, and the dog was
presence of large granular lymphocytes should have trig-
gered an ehrlichia titer, but did not. The animal returned
in October, severely anemic and thrombocytopenic. An
ehrlichia titer was done at this time, and was strongly posi-
tive. The dog was treated for ehrlichiosis and hemobartonel-
losis, and recovered.
632
Case 10
Signalment and history: 9-year-old male castrated
Interpretive discussion
 dog presented for lethargy
Packed cell volume and hemoglobin are slightly decreased.
indicating mild anemia.
Hematology
Reference
Reticulocytes are not increased, indicating that the anemia
Interval
is nonregenerative. Considering the inflammatory leuko-
gram, this is most likely an anemia of inflammatory disease.
PCV (%)
36
37-55
Marked neutrophilia with increased immature neutro-
RBC (×10%/μL)
5.42
5.5-8.5
phils and monocytosis is indicative of a chronic inflamma-
Hgb (g/dL)
13.2
12-18
tory leukogram.
MCV (fL)
66
60-72
Lymphopenia is indicative of a stress or steroid component 
MCHC (g/dL)
37
34-38
to the leukogram.
Retics (x10%/μL)
0
0-60,000
Platelets are decreased. Thrombocytopenia is most com-
NCC (x10/μL)
96.4
6.0-17.0
monly due to ehrlichiosis, immune-mediated thrombocyto-
Metas (x10°/μL)
0
 penia or DIc. This should trigger other coagulation tests. The
Bands (×1 03/μL)
7.7
E'0-0
Segs (×10²/μL)
82.9
3.0-11.5
Lyrmphs (×10²/μL)
1.0
1.0-4.8
are being released by the bone marrow, and the thrombo-
Monos (x10/μL)
4.8
0.2-1.4
cytopenia is not due to bone marrow dysfunction.
Eos (×10°/μL)
0.1-1.2
NRBCs (×10²/μL)
0
 Platelets (×1 03/μL)
6E
200-500
Summary
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.2
6.0-8.0
 Hermopathology: Decreased platelets, giant platelets, toxic neutrophils.
Anemia of inflammatory disease. Site of inflammation was
 numerous echinocytes, occasional schistocyte.
a prostatic abscess. DIC was confirmed.
633
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 4-year-old Doberman
Biochemical
Day
Day 2
Reference
History: Acutely ill, vomiting
 Profile
1#
 Interval
Physical examination: Pendulous abdomen
2n15
26
36
75-130
BUN (mg/dL)
45
62
7-28
Hematology
Day
Day 2
 Reference
(p/) ea
0.6
1.8
0.9-1.7
1#
Interval
Ca (mg/dL)
8.2
7.6
9.0-11.2
 Phos (mgy/dL)
5.9
11.0
2.8-6.1
PCV (%)
50
20
37-55
TP (g/dL)
4.5
2.6
5.4-7.4
Hgb (g/dL)
18.3
7.5
12-18
Alb (g/dL)
1.8
1.0
2.7-4.5
RBC (x10%/μL)
7.70
3.11
5.5-8.5
 Glob (g/dL)
2.7
1.0
1.9-3.4
MCV (fL)
66
66
60-72
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.1
3.0
0-0.4
MCHC (g/dL)
36
37
34-38
Chol (mg/dL)
145
140
130-370
Retics (x103/μL)
ND
124
<60
ALT (IU/L)
20
328
10-120
NCC (x10/μL)
6.6
14.7
6-17
AST (IU/L)
77
775
16-40 
Segs (x103/μL)
0.4
4.1
3-11.5
ALP (IU/L)
208
440
35-280
Bands (×1 0²/μL)
3.1
7.9
E'0-0
155
1
1
9-0
Metas (x1 0/μL)
0.1
1.5
0
Na (mEq/L)
136
143
145-158
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.5
0.3
0.1-1.3
K (mEq/L)
4.1
5.8
4.1-5.5
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
2.1
0.4
1-4.8 
CL (mEq/L)
100
106
106-127
E05 (×103/μL)
0.1
0.1
0.1-1.2
TCO2 (mEq/L)
9.4
19.4
14-27
 Platelets (×103/μL)
193
06
200-500
An. gap (mEq/L)
31
23
8-25
TP (P) (g/dL)
5.9
4.0
6-8
 patean :l Aea jo buuana aun Auabins Auoteloldxa jeuiuopqe peH+
 Hemopathology: marked toxic neutropils on Days 1 and 2.
with fluids between Day 1 and Day 2
*Had abdominal exploratory surgery the evening of Day 1: treated 
with fluids between Day 1 and Day 2
 Abdominal Fluid Analysis
NCC (/μL)
000'66
TP (g/dL)
1.5
 Cytology: 100% degenerate neutrophils;: various types of bacteria
phagocytized and extracellular.
634
Case 1l
Interpretive discussion
prerenal azotemia or renal azotemia. A urinalysis was not
performed.
Hematology
The serum calcium is decreased on both Days l and 2, and
Packed cell volume, Hemoglobin, Red blood cell count:
is due to the hypoalbuminemia.
Within or near reference intervals on Day 1, markedly
 The serum phosphorus concentration is increased on Day
decreased on Day 2 following blood loss that occurred at the
2 and is compatible with decreased glomerular filtration
time of surgery. Dog seemed to bleed excessively during the
rate.
surgery.
The serum total protein concentration is decreased due to
Reticulocytes are increased on Day 2, indicating that the
o n  'i a  o
anemia is regenerative. This regenerative response is
and hypoglobulinemia on Day 2 (see explanation above).
earlier than is typically seen, in that reticulocytes don't
The serum bilirubin concentration is increased on Day 2.
usually increase until 24 to 72 hours following the onset of
lilkely due to cholestasis related to septicemia.
anemia.
The ALT and AST activity on Day 2 indicates hepatocel-
Neutropenia is present on Day 1, with an increase in
lular injury. possibly related to anemia, shock, surgery, or
immature neutrophils, indicating in this case that the mature
septicemia.
neutrophils are being consumed in an inflammatory process,
The ALP activity is increased on Day 2. possibly related to
and the marrow is not meeting the consumption demand
endogenous corticosteroids or cholestasis.
On Day 2, the mature neutrophils have increased, as have
Both sodium and chloride are decreased on Day l, pos-
the immature neutrophils (bands and metamyelocytes). This
sibly due to loss of electrolytes into abdominal effusion, or
indicates that the consumptive process has decreased (source
loss due to vomiting.
of inflammation) or that the marrow has increased produc-
Serum total CO, is decreased on Day 1, suggesting meta-
tion, or both.
 bolic acidosis. This has been corrected by Day 2, likely due
Lymphopenia is indicative of a stress or steroid component
to fluid therapy.
to the leukogram.
 The anion gap is increased on Day 1, likely due to lactic
Platelets are mildly decreased on Day l, and more mark-
acid.
edly decreased on Day 2. While some platelets may have
been consumed in clotting process secondary to surgery
Abdominal fluid
related blood loss, it is also possible that the animal has DIC,
The nucleated cell count is very high and all of the cells
particularly with the history of excessive bleeding during
present are neutrophils, indicating suppurative inflamma-
surgery. This should trigger additional tests such as FDPs, PT.
tion or peritonitis. The total protein may be low because the
APTT, and activated clotting time.
serum protein is decreased, or it may he diluted in the large
Total protein: Total protein is decreased on Day l and Day
volume of fluid. The presence of different types of bacteria
2. In this patient, this is likely due to loss into the abdominal
suggests that the source of bacteria is the gastrointestinal
cavity on Day 1, compounded by blood loss on Day 2. Fluid
tract.
administration may also be diluting the PCV and plasma
protein on Day 2.
Summary
Biochemical profile
The serum glucose concentration is markedly decreased,
This dog had a consumptive inflammatory leukogram and
both on Day l and Day 2. In this patient, considering the
hypoglycemia due to sepsis. On exploratory, the abdominal
leukogram, this is most likely due to sepsis. Other differen-
cavity contained 1400mL of fluid, and a toothpick was
tials should include insulinoma, although this is a relatively
found to have perforated the intestine. Dog died on the
young dog for an insulinoma.
evening of Day 2 as a result of septic peritonitis.
The BUN is increased on both Day 1 and Day 2, and the
serum creatinine is increased on Day 2. This may be either
635
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
5 1.56
 Signalment 1l-year-old female spayed border terrier
Interpretive discussion
Bop
History Owner noticed intermittent nose bleeds for a
The erythrocyte values indicate moderate anemia. The
few days
anemia is regenerative as indicated by reticulocytosis, along
Physical examination Few petechial hemorrhages
with a few nucleated red cells. While the plasma protein
noted on mucous membranes, otherwise normal
       
probability it is decreased for this patient. The reason is that
older dogs tend to have higher protein concentrations and
Hematology
Reference
6.2 is regarded as low normal; the dog may have had a
Interval
protein between 7 and 8g/dL before bleeding occurred. The
triad of anemia, regeneration, and decreasing protein is clas-
 Plasma protein g/dL
6.2
6.0-8.0
sical for blood loss.
 PCV (%)
24
40-55
The cause of the blood loss is thrombocytopenia. This
Hgb (g/dL)
8.4
12.0-18.0
magnitude of thrombocytopenia is expected to result in both
RBC (×10%/μL)
3.34
5.5-8.5
 petechial hemorrhages and blood loss that may not be physi-
MCV (fL)
72
62-73
9E-EE
cally visible.
MCHC (g/dL)
35
Examination of the data from the bone marrow perspec-
Reticulocytes (×10²/μL)
149
<60
11.5
tive indicates that the marrow is producing erythrocytes
NCC (x10²/μL)
4.5-15.0
(regeneration) and neutrophils appropriately. The thrombo-
Bands (x10²/μL)
0.1
0-0.2
Neutrophils (x103/μL)
9.0
2.6-11.0
cytopenia present is therefore a selective, specific cytopenia.
1.4
When present at this magnitude. typically less than
Lymphocytes (x10°/μL)
1.0-4.8
Monocytes (x103/μL)
0.7
0.2-1.0
 20 × 10?/μL, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia is by far
 Eosinophils (×10°/μL)
0.1
0.1-1.2
the most likely cause or diagnosis. Furthermore, the
NRBC (×103/μL)
0.2
0
increased mean platelet volume (MPV) corroborated by
Platelets (x10²/μL)
7
200-500
macroplatelets on the blood film suggests accelerated
MPV (fL)
22
7.5-14.6
marrow thrombopoiesis. This is the expected response to a
 Hemopathology noted on blood film : 
consumptive thrombocytopenia.
● Moderate polychrormasia
● No platelet clumps found 
● Few macroplatelets on scanning
Summary
The pattern present is characteristic of immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia. with bone marrow response to
hemorrhage.
636
Case 13
 Signalment Nine-year-old male castrated beagle dog
Interpretive discussion
History Owner complaint of lethargy
 Physical examination Mildly enlarged peripheral
There is marked leukocytosis with the predominant abnor-
lymph nodes, somewhat thin
mality being marked lymphocytosis. Further, the morphol-
ogy indicates the presence of large lymphocyte forms. The
- se padau aa st sisoul o ap
Hematology
Reference
phocytic leukemia, with morphologic features of a blastic
Interval
   s  yie, n p as n 
neutrophilia and monocytosis that is difficult to interpret.
 Plasmma protein g/dL
7.3
6.0-8.0
These could be related to steroid release, with neoplastic
PCV (%)
32
40-55
lymphocytosis masking the expected steroid-induced lym-
Hgb (g/dL)
11.5
13.0-20.0
phopenia. Alternatively. there may be a compensated
RBC (x10%/μL)
4.80
5.5-8.5
inflammatory stimulus. There is a disproportionate number
MCV (fL)
69
62-73
35
of NRBC that may be related to either marrow and/or splenic
MCHC (g/dL)
9E-EE
Reticulocytes (x103/μL)
49
injury associated with lymphoma /leukemia.
0-100
NCC (x10/μL)
4.5-15.0
The erythrocyte values indicate mild anemia. The anemia
 is poorly regenerative as indicated by the reticulocyte con-
Bands (x10°/μL)
0
0-0.2
Neutrophils (x10°/μL)
16.7
2.6-11.0
centration. There is mild thrombocytopenia. The presence
Lymphocytes (x103/μL)
64.4
1.0-4.8
of two cell lines that potentially have decreased production
Monocytes (x10²/μL)
1.6
0.2-1.0
along with evidence of leukemia suggests that marrow may
Eosinophils (x1 03/μL)
0.1
0.1-1.2
be involved.
NRBC (x10²/μL)
0.8
Platelets (x10°/μL)
139
200-500
MPV (fL)
11.4
7.5-14.6
Summary
 Hemopathology noted on blood film:
● Many of the lymmphoid cells are large with fine chromatin
The pattern present is characteristic of lymphocytic leuke-
 and classified as prolymphocytes and lyrmphoblasts 
● No platelet clumps found
mia. Cytometric analysis is recommended if treatment is
considered.
637
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment 14-year-old CM mixed-breed dog
Urinalysis (cystocentesis)
History Polydipsia and polyuria, bloody diarrhea.
weight loss
Color
 pale yellow 
Urine Sediment 
Physical exam Lethargic, bilateral masses in perianal
Transparency
clear
WBCs/hpf
0-1
region
 Specific Gravity 
1.012
RBCs/hpf
O-1
pH
5.0
 Epithelial cells/hpf 
0
neg
 Casts/lpf
0
 Biirubin 
neg
Crystals 
 few armorphous 
Hematology
 Reference
Blood 
1+
 Bacteria
0
Interval
 Protein 
+E
Ketones
neg
 Packed cell volume (%)
EE
37-55
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
11.1
12-18
RBC (10%/μL)
5.77
5.5-8.5
MCV (fL)
57
60-72
Serum protein electrophoresis tracing
MCHC (g/dL)
34
34-38
Total nucleated cell count (x10²/μL)
5.6
6-17
Segmented neutrophils (x10°/μL)
4.6
3-11.5
Monocytes (x10²/μL)
0.7
0.2-1.4
Lyrnphocytes (x10²/μL)
0.6
1-4.8
 Platelets (×103/μL)
190
200-500
Plasma protein (g/dL)
11.4
8-9
 Hemopathology: Marked rouleaux
 Biochemical Profile
Glucose (ng/dL)
E6
65-122
Blood Urea Nitrogen (mg/dL)
19
7-28
Creatinine (mg/dL)
1.2
0.6-1.5
Calcium (mg/dL)
14
9.0-11.2
 Phosphorus (mmg/dL)
6.0
2.8-6.1
Total Protein (g/dL)
12.0
5.4-7.4
Albumin (g/dL)
1.7
2.7-4.5
Globulin (g/dL)
10.3
1.9-3.4
Total Bilirubin (mg/dL)
0.4
0-0.4
Cholesterol
154
130-300
Alburmin
α-1
α-2
β-1
β-2
Alanine amminotransferase (IU/L)
49
10-120
 Aspartate aminotransferase (IU/L)
41
16-40
Alkaline phosphatase (IU/L)
249
18-141
 Garnma glutarnyl transferase (IU/L)
5
9-0
Interpretive discussion
Sodium (mEq/L)
144
145-158
 Potassium (mEq/L)
4.2
4.1-5.5
Hematology
Chloride (mEq/L)
117
106-127
There is a mild normochromic, microcytic anemia that
HCO: (mEq/L)
13.1
14-27
appears nonregenerative (no increased polychromasia is
 Anion gap
18
8-25
noted on the blood film). A reticulocyte count should be
done to confirm this. In a sick dog. anemia of chronic disease
should be considered; however, anemia of chronic disease is
not usually microcytic. Given that the dog has bloody diar-
rhea, iron deficiency due to GI blood loss should also be
considered as a cause of the microcytosis.
638
Case 14
The lymphopenia suggests a stress/steroid response.
action in the renal tubules, preventing adequate urine con-
although the expected neutrophilia is not observed. The 
 centration and causing polyuria with polydipsia. The pH is
slight thrombocytopenia is not clinically significant. Marked
1 acid, consistent with the metabolic acidosis. The 3+ protein
rouleaux seen on the blood film is related to the markedly
is significant given the urine specific gravity and inactive
increased plasma protein concentration (discussed further
sediment. A urine protein :creatinine ratio could have been
below).
performed, but was not in this case. Possibilities for the
proteinuria include a prerenal proteinuria due to glomerular
Biochemical profile
overload (para proteinuria associated with multiple myeloma)
The increased total protein concentration is due to marked
or renal proteinuria due to glomerular disease.
hyperglobulinemia. This degree of hyperglobulinemia is
Serum protein electrophoresis
myeloma). but can also be seen with ehrlichiosis in dogs. A
There is a distinct monoclonal peak in the gamma region,
serum protein electrophoresis is indicated to evaluate for
suggestive  of  a  neoplastic  monoclonal  gammopathy.
However, some cases of canine ehrlichiosis have apparent
later),. and evaluation for tick-borne diseases should be
monoclonal gammopathies, so further diagnostics are war-
pursued. The albumin concentration is modera tely decreased,
ranted to confirm lymphoid neoplasia.
which may be from decreased production in response to the
hyperglobulinemia. However, there is also evidence for
urinary protein loss that may be contributing to the
Summary
hypoalbuminemia.
The other significant abnormality present is hypercalce-
The hypercalcemia was consistent with the clinical suspicion
mia. Since this dog has palpable perianal masses and adeno-
of anal sac adenocarcinoma, but the hyperglobulinemia sug-
carcinoma of the anal sacis a common cause of paraneoplastic
gested a second pathologic process. Fine needle aspirates of
hypercalcemia in dogs, aspiration cytology or biopsy of those
the perianal masses were consistent with anal sac adenocar-
masses should be performed. Hypercalcemia may also
cinoma, which was later confirmed by surgical removal and
accompany lymphoid neoplasia, which is another possible
histopathology. Radiographs of the thoracic cavity showed
differential in this dog based on the hyperglobulinemia
Ionized calcium could be measured to confirm the hypercal-
fracture of the right 6th rib was identified. Pending tickborne
cemia, but was not done in this case.
disease titers, a bone marrow aspirate was performed and
 The slight increase in ALP suggests induction due to cho-
was diagnostic for plasma cell myeloma (64% of marrow
lestasis or steroids. Decreased bicarbonate concentration
cells were plasma cells). An immunoelectrophoresis identi-
with a normal anion gap is consistent with a secretional
fied the paraprotein as IgA. Ehrlichial titers were negative.
metabolic acidosis, and can be explained by the diarrhea (GI
This dog was treated with melphalan and prednisone, and
loss of bicarbonate).
did well at home for about one year.
Urinalysis
The urine is in the isosthenuric range, which can be explained
by the hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia interferes with ADH
639
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
Signalment: 8-year-old spayed female golden retriever 
Biochemical Profile
Reference
History: Presented for lethargy. anorexia, a mass over
 Interval
the humeroradial joint, and prolonged bleeding at a
biopsy site
Gluc (mg/dL)
70
65-122
 Physical examination: Fever, icterus, and an
BUN (mg/dL)
11
7-28
enlarged liver and spleen
Ca (mg/dL)
8.2
9.0-11.2
Phos (rng/dL)
4.0
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
5.0
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
2.2
2.7-4.5
Hematology
Reference
Glob (g/dL)
2.8
1.9-3.4
Interval
T. Bili (mng/dL)
7.6
0-0.4
37-55
(7p,6u) 104)
329
130-370
PCV (%)
ALT (IU/L)
58
10-120
Hgb (g/dL)
8.5
12-18
ALP (IU/L)
775
35-280
RBC (x10%/μL)
3.27
5.5-8.5
Na (mEq/L)
144
145-158
MCV (fL)
71
60-72
K (mEq/L)
4.0
4.1-5.5
MCHC(g/dL)
37
34-38
CL (mEq/L)
109
106-127
Retics (×103/μL)
130.8
<60
TCO2(mEq/L)
16.6
14-27
NCC (x10²/μL)
45.4
6-17
An. gap (rmEq/L)
22
8-25
Segs (x103/μL)
41.8
3-11.5
Bands (x1 0²/μL)
0.5
E'0-0
Monos (x10²/μL)
3.2
0.1-1.3
Lymphs (x10%/μL)
0.0
1-4.8
Urinalysis
Eos (x103/μL)
0.0
0.1-1.2
 Platelets 
25
200-500
Color
Yellow
 Urine Sediment 
(x10²/μ)
 Transparency 
Clear
WBCs/hpf
0-2
TP (P) (g/dL)
4.6
6-8
Sp. Gr.
1.012
RBCs/hpf 
0-1
 Hemopathology: Increased polychromasia and giant platelets 
 Protein
一
 Epith cells/hpf 
0
3n(5
 Casts/lpf 
0
 Biirubin 
4+
Crystals 
Blood
Trace
 Bacteria
pH
5.5
Other 
1 + fat 
 Coagulation Data
Reference
 Interval
 Activated clotting time (seconds)
00<
72-86
PT (seconds)
14.5
6.4-7.4
aPTT (seconds)
32.3
9-11
FDPs (μg/rnL)
>80
<10
640
Case 15
Interpretative discussion
Water deprivation and ensuing specific gravity would deter-
mine renal function reserve. Hyperbilirubinuria is a conse-
Hematology
quence of hyperbilirubinemia.
There is anemia that is regenerative as evidenced by the
significant reticulocytosis and polychromasia. Anemia in
Coagulation data
combination with low total protein suggests that the cause
Decreased platelets, prolonged ACT, PT, aPTT, and increased
is blood loss. There is a mixed inflammatory and stress
FDPs support disseminated intravascular coagulation. Eryth-
(steroid) leukogram evidenced by the neutrophilia with
band neutrophils, monocytosis, and absence of lymphocytes
coagulation, thus contributing to elevated total bilirubin.
and eosinophils. The thrombocytopenia in conjunction with
 the large platelets suggests increased consumption and pro-
duction of platelets.
Summary
Biochemical profile
The mass was diagnosed as malignant histiocytosis, with
Hypocalcemia corrects into the normal range. and thus is
nodules in the liver, spleen, mediastinum, and peripheral
due to hypoalbuminemia. Hypoproteinemia is due to blood
lymph nodes at necropsy. A likely scenario is that extensive
loss. The hyperbilirubinemia may result from increased
tumor mass developed necrosis and/or inflammation that
erythrocyte destruction or cholestasis. Increased alkaline
phosphatase activity supports cholestasis. Very mild hypo-
vascular coagulation. Involvement of liver likely explains
natremia and hyperkalemia are probably insignificant in
the hypoalbuminemia and other liver changes.
this case.
Urinalysis
The urine specific gravity is isosthenuric, but the urea nitro-
gen is normal, so the specific gravity may not be significant.
641
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 5-month-old female dog
Interpretative discussion
History: The puppy bleeds excessively when it loses
teeth
Hematology
Physical examination: The mucous membranes
The anemia is regenerative as the reticulocyte count is
were pale. There is moderate bleeding evident at the site
increased and there is polychromasia and anisocytosis on the
of a recent tooth loss.
blood film. The cause of anemia is not determined, but is
likely due to hemolysis or blood loss since it is regenerative.
The clinical findings of hemorrhage suggest that blood loss 
Hematology
Reference
is the cause. Thrombocytosis is common in iron deficiency
Interval
anemia. Microcytosis is evident in chronic iron deficiency.
and may contribute to anisocytosis. Size of erythrocytes is
PCV (%)
19
37-55
not known, since the McV is not provided. Serum iron and
Hgb (g/cdL)
6.1
12-18
iron binding capacity would be useful in determination of
Retics (x10°/μL)
188
<60
the cause of anemia. The neutrophilia, left shift, and mono-
NCC (x10°/μL)
35.4
6-17
cytosis indicate an inflammatory leukogram. Lymphopenia
Segs (x10²/μL)
29.7
3-11.5
is indicative of a concurrent stress/steroid mediated response.
Bands (×10²/μL)
2.5
E'0-0
Mon05 (×10²/μL)
3.2
0.1-1.3
Coagulation data
Lymphs (x×10°/μL)
0.0
1-4.8
The coagulation profile suggests a deficiency of one or mul-
 Eos (x10°/μL)
0.0
0.1-1.2
915
tiple coagulation factors in the intrinsic pathway. Platelet
 Platelets (×10²/μL)
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.5
8-9
  ou      
 Hemmopathology: Moderate polychromasia and anisocytosis is present.
are seen in peripheral blood. Bleeding time is normal, and
in the face of adequate platelet concentration, indicates that
platelet function is normal. The most common cause of a
severe coagulopathy with normal platelet concentration,
 Coagulation Data
Reference
normal hepatic enzyme activity. and a prolongation of the
Interval
aPTT with normal PT is factor 8 deficiency. The occurrence
is less common in females, and to have an affected female
Activated clotting time 
>180
72-86
requires that the sire also be affected.
PT (seconds)
6.8
6.4-7.4
aPTT (seconds)
>120
9-11
Fibrinogen (mg/dL)
200
100-400
Summary
Bleeding Tirne (rninutes)
E
1-5
This dog was tested for factor 8 plasma activity and was
found to have 21% of normal activity, which is diagnostic
for factor 8 deficiency or hemophilia A. This is compatible
with the major abnormalities in the ACT and APTT and the
clinical description of bleeding in a young dog.
642
Case 17
Signalment: 7-year-old female Walker hound
Interpretive discussion
History: The owner noticed a swelling on the right
front leg on the day of admission
Hematology
Physical examination: The mucous membranes
 The anemia is nonregenerative as the erythrocyte indices are
were pale. There was a subcutaneous swelling in the right
normal and the reticulocyte count is normal. The plasma
ventral thoracic area, with some dried blood on all four legs.
and serum protein are low, with equal deficiency of globulin
and albumin, suggesting blood loss as the cause of anemia.
Hematology
Reference
The anemia is likely too acute for there to be a regenerative
Interval
response. Aspiration of the subcutaneous mass confirmed
the presence of blood. Mild neutrophilia, monocytosis, and
PCV (%)
25
37-55
lymphopenia are indicative of a stress leukogram.
Hgb (g/dL)
8.4
12-18
RBC (×10%/μL)
4.03
5.5-8.5
Biochemical profile
MCV (fL)
62
60-72
 The protein changes discussed above indicate subacute blood
MCHC (g/dL)
34
34-38
loss, with fluid shifting and dilution of plasma protein result-
Retics (x10°/μL)
44
<60
ing in anemia and hypoproteinemia. The mild decrease in
NCC (x10²/μL)
14.4
6-17
Segs (×103/μL)
sodium and potassium are insignificant.
12.2
3-11.5
Mon05 (×10²/μL)
1.6
0.1-1.3
Lymphs (×103/μL)
0.6
1-4.8
Coagulation data
Platelets (x10²/μL)
315
200-500
The coagulation data indicates either a deficiency of multiple 
TP (P) (g/dL)
4.6
6-8
coagulation factors, or a single factor deficiency of the
Hemopathology: 1+ leptocytosis and anisocytosi5.
common pathway. Platelets are normal in number, and, no
large forms are seen in peripheral blood. Bleeding time is
normal and in the face of normal platelet concentration.
 Biochemical Profile
 Reference
indicates that platelet function is also normal. The most
Interval
common cause of a severe coagulopathy with normal plate-
lets and normal hepatic enzyme activities is vitamin K
Gluc (ng/dL)
88
65-122
anta gonism.
BUN (ng/dL)
17
7-28
Creat (mg/dL)
1.1
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
10.2
9.0-11.2
Summary
Phos (mg/dL)
3.5
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
4.1
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
2.3
2.7-4.5
This dog was exposed to diphacinone, a rodentocide that is
Glob (g/dL)
1.8
1.9-3.4
a vitamin K antagonist; coagulation times returned to
T. Bili (rng/dL)
E'0
0-0.4
normal following administration of vitamin K.
Chol (mg/dL)
188
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
35
10-120
ALP (IU/L)
40
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
144
145-158
K (mEq/L)
4.0
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
107
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
18
14-27
 Coagulation Data
 Reference
Interval
Activated clotting tirmne (sec)
>180
72-86
 PT (seconds)
>180
6.4-7.4
aPTT (seconds)
>180
9-11
Fibrinogen (mg/dL)
00E
100-400
Bleeding Time (minutes)
4
1-5
643
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
8
Signalment: 2-month-old female horse
History: Off feed
 Blood Gas Data (arterial)
Reference
Physical examination: Depressed, evidence of
 Interval
diarrhea
pH
7.282
7.38-7.46
pCO (mmHg)
20.6
35-47
pO2 (mmHg)
60.9
96-L9
Hematology
Reference
HCO: (mEq/L)
'6
22-30
Interval
 PCV (%)
14
32-52
Hgb (g/dL)
6.5
11-19
 Coagulation Profile
Reference
NCC (x10°/μL)
6.5
5.5-12.5
Interval
Segs (x103/μL)
4.7
2.7-6.7
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.1
0-0.8
PT (seconds)
14.6
9.5-11.5
Lymphs (x10°/μL)
1.6
1.5-5.5
aPTT (seconds)
8'66
24-45
NRBCs (x10°/μL)
0.1
0
Fibrinogen (mg/dL)
500
100-400
 Platelets (×103/μL)
14
100-600
FDPs (μg/mL)
>10 & <40
ND*
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.3
8-9
*ND—Not determined for foals 
Hemmopathology: mod toxic neutrophils, few reactive lyrnphs, mod 
 Howell-Jolly bodies, few echinocytes, marked anisocytosis.
 Abdominal Fluid Analysis
Color
Red
 Biochemical Profile
Reference
anbedo
Interval 
NCC (/μL)
16,000
TP (g/dL)
5.7
Gluc (mg/dL)
91
70-110
PCV
13%
BUN (mg/dL)
40
14-27
 Comments: Erythrophagia and platelets noted in film.
Creat (rng/dL)
2.1
1.1-2.0
Ca (mg/dL)
9.7
11.0-13.7
Phos (mg/dL)
6.3
1.9-4.1
TP (g/dL)
4.6
5.8-7.6
Alb (g/dL)
2.2
2.7-3.7
Interpretive discussion
Glob (g/dL)
2.4
2.6-4.6
T. Bili (mng/dL)
3.2
0.6-2.1
Hematology
AST (IU/L)
280
185-300
There is a marked anemia. While it is not unusual for neo-
GGT (IU/L)
28
7-17
natal animals to have a "congenital anemia" due to iron
SDH (IU/L)
27
0-9
deficiency, the PCV is much lower than is typically encoun-
CK (IU/L)
169
130-470
tered by this physiological change. The presence of anisocy-
Na (mEq/L)
120
133-145
tosis leads one to suspect that there may be a regenerative
K (mEq/L)
3.8
2.2-4.6
response, for which evaluation of the MCV and RBC histo-
CL (mEq/L)
84
100-111
TCO2 (mEq/L)
gram would be useful. The presence of nucleated erythro-
11.0
24-34
An. gap
28.8
5-15
cytes in the peripheral blood is uncommon in horses, but
Calc. Osmolality (mOsm/kg)
250
280-310
occasionally seen in foals with profound regenerative
Amylase (IU/L)
34
0-87
responses, or with damage to the bone marrow endothe-
Lipase (IU/L)
534
ND+
lium, as might occur with sepsis. Combined decreases in PCV
 Grossly lipemic serum
and serum proteins may indicate hemorrhage. There is a
*ND—Not determnined for foals
marked thrombocytopenia, which may be due to decreased
production or increased consumption; thrombocytopenia is
severe enough to be resulting in blood loss. Refer to the
discussion of the coagulation profile for more on this matter.
644
Case 18
Biochemical profile
ance associated with endotoxemia. One should consider
The BUN, serum creatinine, and phosphorus concentrations
other potential causes of hyperlipidemia such as pancreatitis.
are increased, but the nature of this azotemia cannot be
In this case, serum amylase activity is normal, but lipase
definitively differentiated without a urinalysis.
activity may be increased. There is evidence of recent hem-
There is hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. This com-
orrhage into the abdominal cavity, which could be related
 bina tion of mineral abnormalities may be seen in nutritional
to acute pancreatitis, but is more often due, in diseased foals.
secondary hyperparathyroidism due to excessive dietary
t0 a bleeding gastric ulcer. The low calculated osmolality
phosphorus. However, higher serum phosphorus concentra-
would be expected,
given the hyponatremia and
tions are commonly observed in growing animals, and hypo-
hypochloremia.
calcemia may also be due to uptake by widespread damaged
tissues, decreased intake with anorexia, or to an apparent
Blood gas data
decrease due to hypoalbuminemia.
There is an increased anion gap metabolic acidosis with
Serum total protein concentration is decreased, including
respiratory compensation. This is consistent with a secretory
both hypoalbuminemia and hypoglobulinemia. Low serum
diarrhea, complicated by hypovolemia and/or sepsis. If there 
albumin may be hepatocellular dysfunction or cachexia and
were gastrointestinal stasis, one might expect an alkalosis. If
decreased albumin synthesis. Alternatively. there may be
there were a ruptured urinary bladder, one might expect a
pathologic albumin loss due to gastrointestinal or renal
metabolic acidosis with hyperkalemia. The increased anion
disease. Low serum globulin in a 2-month-old foal is not
 gap may result from sepsis, with hypovolemia and lactic
due to failure of passive transfer, but may be due to decreased
acidosis due to reduced tissue perfusion and/or the meta-
production, malnutrition, or pathologic loss. Loss of all
bolic effects of endotoxemia. The decreased oxygen tension
proteins would be expected with hemorrhage, which could
may indicate respiratory compromise as well.
also account for the profound anemia. This is the most
likely cause.
Coagulation data
The serum total bilirubin concentration is increased, with
The prothrombin time is prolonged slightly. the activated
only a mild increase in serum GGT activity. This may reflect
partial thromboplastin time is normal, and the FDP concen-
hyperbilirubinemia of fasting in an equine anorexic patient.
However, SDH activity is increased, indica ting hepatocellular
cate disseminated intravascular coagulation, particularly in
damage.
light of the severe thrombocytopenia, wherein Factor VII
Serum sodium and chloride concentrations are decreased.
levels are becoming depleted, thereby prolonging the PT.
This is commonly observed in young animals with an
but other coagulation factor concentrations are adequate
enterotoxigenic or secretory diarrhea. This may also be due
to maintain a normal APTT. The concurrent observation
to gastrointestinal stasis, a third space accumulation in the
of thrombocytopenia and findings consistent with blood
abdominal cavity, as well as to decreased intake. One would
loss anemia support a diagnosis of DIC with pathologic
typically expect a hyperkalemia to occur in secretory diar-
hemorrhage.
rhea, owing to acidosis-induced
 intercompartmental
exchange. Hypokalemia may be expected in third space syn-
dromes, owing to potassium loss and renal decompensation.
Summary
It is possible to observe normokalemia with concomitant
potassium loss and metabolic acidosis, wherein redistribu-
Enterotoxigenic E. coli diarrhea, pancreatitis, hepatitis, and
tion of potassium from the intracellular to the extracellular
DIC were findings confirmed at necropsy. On necropsy, the
fluid compartment obscures the whole body potassium
pancreas was 5 to 6 times normal size and the liver was
deficit. There is evidence in support of abdominal hemor-
swollen. Histopathology showed necrosis and inflammation
rhage and third spacing due either to acute pancreatitis or a
of the pancreas, diffuse mesenteric steatitis, fat necrosis
gastric ulcer (see below).
and fat saponification, inflammation of the liver with
Marked lipemia is often seen in ponies with starvation and
thrombi in central veins and associated focal ischemic necro-
metabolic disease, but is unusual in horses. In other species.
sis. Inflammatory disease is often not reflected in equine
hyperlipidemia may occur due to impaired triglyceride clear-
leukograms.
645
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 3-year-old spayed female cocker spaniel
Blood Gas Data (arterial)
Reference
History: Left in owner's car in shopping mall parking
Interval
lot for approximately 3 hours on a hot summer afternoon
 Physical examination: Depressed and mildly
pH
7.09
7.33-7.45
dehydrated
PCO2 (rmmHg)
46
24-39
HCO: (mEq/L)
13
14-24 
Hematology
Reference
Interval 
Urinalysis
 PCV (%)
58
37-55
Color
 Dk yellow 
 Urine Sediment 
NCC (x10²/μL)
16.0
6-17
WBCs/hpf
2-3
Segs (x10°/μL)
13.4
3-11.5
Transpareney
Apno
RBCs/hpf 
4-5
Monos (x10°/μL)
1.6
0.1-1.3
Sp. Gr.
1.011
Epith cells/hpf
2-3
Lymphs (x10/μL)
1.0
1-4.8
 Protein 
1+
Casts/lpf 
 2-3 fine granular
Platelets (x10²/μL)
 Adlequate 
200-500
3n(5
Neg
 Bilirubin 
Neg
Crystals 
2+ Ca oxalate
Blood 
Neg 
Bacteria
0
pH
5.5
 Biochemical Profile
Reference
Interval 
Gluc (ng/dL)
142
65-122
BUN (mg/dL)
62
7-28
Creat (mg/dL)
3.0
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
8.4
9.0-11.2
 Phos (mng/dL)
4.9
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
9.4
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
5.4
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
4.0
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.4
0-0.4
Chol (mg/dL)
160
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
178
10-120
ALP (IU/L)
60
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
164
145-158
K (mEq/L)
5.4
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
124
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
14
14-27
An. gap (mEgq/L)
31.4
8-25
Meas. Osrmolality (rnOsm/kg)
358
290-310
Calc. Osmolality (mOsm/kg)
344
290-310
 Osmol gap (mOsm/kg)
14
0-10
646
Case 19
Interpretive discussion
of unmeasured osmotically active solutes in the blood. The
 anion gap is lilkewise increased, and given the dehydration
Hematology
and probable tissue hypoperfusion, some degree of lactic
Hemoconcentration is indicated by the increased PCV
acidosis is lilkely.
and physical signs of dehydration. Mild neutrophilia.
Blood gas data
a stress leukogram.
There is a combined metabolic (decreased bicarbonate) and
respiratory (increased pCOz) acidosis. The metabolic acidosis 
Biochemical profile
results from lactic acidosis due to tissue hypoperfusion. The
There is a mild hyperglycemia, which may be due to a cat-
echolaminergic or steroid stress response.
function.
The BUN and serum creatinine
 concentrations are
increased. See discussion of urinalysis below to explain
Urinalysis
whether the azotemia is likely prerenal,
renal,
or
The presence of l+ proteinuria with a specific gravity of
postrenal.
1.0ll indicates significant urinary protein loss. The fine
Hyperalbuminemia  with hyperproteinemia
indicates
granular casts indicate tubular epithelial damage. The isos-
dehydration. In this case, hyperglobulememia is also likely
thenuric specific gravity in the face of dehydration and azo-
caused by dehydration.
temia, yet in the absence of electrolyte depletion, suggests
There is a mild hypocalcemia in the face of hyperalbumin-
renal disease as well. This is likely a case of acute renal
emia due to dehydration. Thus, serum calcium concentra-
failure secondary to heat stress. The presence of calcium
tion is truly decreased. This is often seen in heat-stressed
oxalate crystals may have no importance, or may represent
animals, subsequent to widespread tissue damage and
one potential route of calcium loss due to renal tubular
 precipitation of calcium salts in ischemic areas.
 damage associated with the hypocalcemia.
The small increase in serum ALT activity may not be
significant, or may reflect some hepatocellular damage.
The hypernatremia, in concert with other signs of dehy-
Summary
dration, indicates a hypertonic dehydration. This is com-
monly seen in heat-stresed dogs owing to increased
Heat stress, hypertonic dehydration, and acute renal failure.
insensible losses of water, in excess of solute, due to hyper-
If one did not have the history given, or doubted its veracity.
ven tilatory evaporation.
laboratory findings like these would strongly suggest anti-
The measured and calculated osmolality values are
freeze intoxication. One could analyze serum for ethylene
increased, consistent with hypertonic dehydration. However.
 s sn     
the osmol gap is also increased, indicating the accumulation
or out.
647
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
Signalment: 4-year-old intact male dog
Biochemical
Reference Interval
History: Experiencing intermittent periods of weakness
 Profile
and lameness
Physical examination: Mild dehydration, foul
Gluc (mg/dL)
91
65-122
smelling breath, teeth covered with tartar
BUN (mg/dL)
183 (65.3)
7-28 (2.5-10.0 mmol/L)
(p/) ea
8.1 (716)
0.9-1.7 (79-150 μmoJ/L)
Ca (mg/dL)
8.2 (2.05)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.8 mmo/L)
 Phos (mgy/dL)
17.2 (5.5)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.9mmol/L)
Hematology
Reference
TP (g/dL)
5.8
5.4-7.4
Interval 
Alb (g/dL)
3.2
2.7-4.5
 Glob (g/dL)
2.6
1.9-3.4
 PCV (%)
11
37-55
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.4
0-0.4
Hgb (g/dL)
4.0
12-18
Chol (mg/dL)
180
130-370
RBC (×10%/μL)
1.64
5.5-8.5
ALT (IU/L)
19
10-120
MCV (fL)
67
60-72
AST (IU/L)
17
16-40 
MCHC (g/dL)
9E
34-38
ALP (IU/L)
40
35-280
Retics (x1 03/μL)
13.1
<60
Na (mEq/L)
146
145-158
NCC (x10/μL)
8.7
6-17
K (mEq/L)
5.0
4.1-5.5
Segs (x10²/μL)
7.7
3-11.5
CI (mEq/L)
115
106-127
Bands (x10²/μL)
0.1
E:0-0
TCO2 (mEq/L)
16
14-27
Mon05 (x10/μL)
E'0
0.1-1.3
 An. gap (mEq/L) 
20
8-25
Lymphs (x10°/μL)
0.4
1-4.8
 Eos (x10°/μL)
0.2
0.1-1.2
 Platelets (×103/μL)
370
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.8
8-9
Urinalysis (catheterized)
 Hemopathology: Slight anisocytosis and slight polychromasia.
Color
Yellow
Urine Sediment
Transparency
Clear
WBCs/hpf
3-5
Sp. Gr.
1.008
RBCs/hpf
2-3
 Protein 
Trace
Epith cells/hpf 
0
Gluc
Negative 
Casts/lpf
0
 Biirubin 
 Negative
Crystals 
0
Blood 
Negative 
Bacteria
pH
5.0
648
Case 20
Interpretive discussion
addition, chronic renal disease may result in decreased acti-
vation of vitamin D by the kidneys (i.e., conversion of
Hematology
25-hydroxycholecalciferol to l,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol) 
The nonregenerative anemia is secondary to chronic renal
Decreased activated vitamin D results in decreased absorp-
disease. Decreased erythropoietin production by the kidneys
tion of calcium from the intestinal tract.
is a major factor leading to anemia in animals with chronic
renal disease. The severity of anemia is unusual for chronic
Urinalysis
A urine specific gravity in the isosthenuric range in an azo-
 ate severity. Other causes of nonregenerative anemia should
temic animal suggests an inability to concentrate urine.
also be considered in this case.
Animals with prerenal azotemia due to decreased renal per-
The cause of the lymphopenia is increased blood steroid
fusion (e.g., dehydration, cardiac insufficiency, circulatory
concentration associated with stress. The leukocyte response
shock) should be conserving water and concentrating urine.
in not a typical steroid-mediated response in that a mature
The urine specific gravity is a key to properly interpreting
the cause of the azotemia in this case.
that the animal's resting neutrophil concentration was low
Urine sediment—Small numbers of leukocytes and eryth-
normal and it has approximately doubled due to the steroid
rocytes are normal in urine. These numbers must be inter-
influence.
preted in light of the urine concentration and the technique
lsed to concentrate the sediment. Leukocyte numbers may
Biochemical profile
be slightly increased in this case, suggesting minimal inflam-
The triad of BUN, creatinine, and phosphorus concentra-
mation in the urinary tract.
tions is markedly increased indicating decreased glomerular
filtration. These products are passively filtered by the glom-
 erulus, and any cause of decreased glomerular filtration will
Summary
result in retention of these analytes in the blood. In light of
the urine specific gravity in the isosthenuric range, primary
These data indicate chronic renal failure. Chronicity is sug-
renal azotemia is interpreted.
gested by the nonregenerative anemia, which would not be
At least two mechanisms have played a role in causing
present with acute renal failure. Postmortem diagnosis in
the hypocalcemia. The phosphorus concentration is mark-
this case was chronic interstitial nephritis or end-stage renal
edly increased, and the Ca x P product is 14l. When this
disease. No lesions suggesting suppurative inflammation in
product exceeds 70, calcium and phosphorus precipitate in
the urinary tract were found.
soft tissues, decreasing the serum calcium concentration. In
649
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
Signalment: 9-year-old intact female dog
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
History: Abscess on rear leg 2 months ago. Intermittent
 Profile
vomiting began 2 days ago.
Physical examination: Popliteal and cervical lymph
Gluc (mg/dL)
89
65-122
nodes are enlarged
 BUN (rng/dL)
114 (40.7)
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmo/L)
(p/) ea
3.2 (283)
0.9-1.7 (79-150 μmol/L)
Ca (mg/dL)
8.5 (2.12)
9.0-11.2
Hematology
(2.25-2.8mmo//L)
 Reference
Phos (rng/dL)
8.8 (2.84)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.9 mm7o/L)
Interval 
TP (g/dL)
5.2
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
1.2
2.7-4.5
PCV(%)
35
37-55
Glob (g/dL)
4.0
12-18
1.9-3.4
Hgb (g/dL)
12.1
T. Bili(mng/dL)
E'0
0-0.4
RBC (×10%μL)
5.6
5.5-8.5
Chol (mg/dL)
582 (15.1)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmmo/L)
MCV (fL)
62
60-72
ALT (IU/L)
18
10-120
MCHC (g/dL)
36
34-38
AST (IU/L)
20
16-40 
Retics (x1 03/μL)
22.4
<60
ALP (IU/L)
22
35-280
NCC (x10²/μL)
13
6-17
Na (mEq/L)
142
145-158
Segs (×1 03/μL)
9.4
3-11.5
K (mEq/L)
4.7
4.1-5.5
Bands (×10²/μL)
0.1
E'0-0
CL (mEq/L)
120
106-127
Monos (x10²/μL)
0.8
0.1-1.3
TCO2 (mEq/L)
18
14-27
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
2.4
1-4.8 
An. gap (mEq/L)
9
8-25
E05 (×103/μL)
E'0
0.1-1.2
 Armylase (IU/L)
1530
50-1250
Platelets (x103/μL)
250
200-500
Lipase (IU/L)
720
095-0E
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.2
6-8
 Hemopathology: Normal.
Urinalysis (catheterized)
Color
Urine Sediment
Transparency
Apnop
WBCs/hpf
0
Sp. Gr.
1.021
RBCs/hpf 
0
 Protein 
4+
 Epith cells/hpf 
 Negative
 Casts/lpf 
 2-3 granular
 Biirubin 
 Negative
Crystals 
0
Blood
Negative
Bacteria
0
pH 
6.0
 protein/
creatinine ratio
5.4
650
Case 21
Interpretive discussion
The cause of mild hyponatremia is not certain in this case.
Renal Na loss is a possible cause. If edema were present, it
Hematology
is possible that dilution of extracellular Na in this fluid
A mild nonregenerative anemia (reticulocyte count is in the
(third-spacing) could result in decreased serum Na concen-
normal range) is present. This should prompt an evaluation
tration. Edema was, however, not evident in this case, and.
for endocrine disease, renal disease, and chronic inflamma-
 even in animals with edema, hyponatremia is not common.
tory disease as potential causes. In this case, chronic renal
Serum amylase and lipase activities are commonly
disease is probably the underlying cause. There is no evi-
increased in animals with decreased GFR. Although other
dence of inflammatory disease in the leukogram.
causes of increased activities such as pancreatitis could be
considered in this case, the clinical presentation and other
Biochemical profile
laboratory data are more compatible with decreased GFR
The azotemia indicated by increased concentrations of BUN.
resulting in mildly increased amylase and lipase activities.
creatinine, and phosphorus should be classified as renal
since urine concentration is not adequate (i.e., <l.030), sug-
Urinalysis
gesting a loss of renal concentrating ability.
Urine concentrating ability is inadequate. If the azotemia in
The hypocalcemia is probably due to two factors. The
this dog were due to prerenal causes such as dehydration,
calcium X phosphorus product is 75. When this product
cardiac insufficiency. or circulatory shock, urine specifc
exceeds 70, precipitation of calcium and phosphorus in soft
gravity should be >l.030. The specific gravity suggests inad-
tissues can occur, and decreased serum calcium concentra-
equate concentrating ability and primary renal azotemia.
tions may result. In addition, activation of vitamin D by the
Post-renal azotemia is ruled out by the demonstration of a
kidney is decreased in chronic renal disease, resulting in
patent urethra via catheterization and by the absence of
decreased absorption of calcium from the small intestine.
evidence of urine leakage into tissues or the abdomen. Lack
The hyperphosphatemia is due to decreased glomeru-
of concentrating ability results from loss of nephrons and/or
lar filtration rate (GFR). In this case,
glomerular
tubular damage. Both of these alterations are probably
disease has caused decreased GFR and subsequent
occurring in this dog. Although the disease is primarily glo-
hyperphosphatemia.
merular, severe damage to glomeruli results in secondary
 In light of the marked proteinuria, the most likely cause
tubular damage and in loss of nephrons.
of the hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia is renal
A 4+ protein in a moderately dilute urine and a urine
protein loss, due to glomerular disease. The hyperglobulin-
protein/creatinine ratio (UPC) of 5.4 are evidence of severe
emia most lilkely resulted from chronic antigenic stimula-
proteinuria. In the absence of evidence of hemorrhage or
tion. History of a previous abscess and subsequent lymph
inflammation (i.e., increased erythrocyte or leukocyte
node enlargement are compatible with such antigenic stim-
numbers in the urine sediment). a UPC >l.0 is abnormal in
ulation (i.e., the original infection may not have been com-
the dog. and a UPC >5.0 is indicative of glomerular disease.
pletely eliminated, resulting in chronic antigenic stimulation 
A UPC of >15 is diagnostic for glomerular disease.
and hyperplasia in lymphoid tissue). Such chronic antigenic
stimulation can predispose to some forms of glomerular
disease.
Summary
Hypercholesterolemia is interpreted as a component of
nephrotic syndrome. Nephrotic syndrome, a group of abnor-
Renal biopsy revealed amyloidosis. Chronic infection result-
malities that may be associated with serious glomerular
ing in chronic antigenic stimulation probably predisposed
disease, includes hypoalbuminemia, proteinuria, hypercho-
the dog to this disease. The lymph node enlargement was
lesterolemia and edema. In this case. edema was not
observed; however, presence of the other three components
genic stimulation. The combination of hypoalbuminemia.
is still suggestive of this syndrome. Edema is not likely to
proteinuria, and hypercholesterolemia suggest imminent
occur until the albumin is below 1.0 g/dL. The mechanism
onset of nephrotic syndrome.
causing hypercholesterolemia in this syndrome has not been
identified.
651
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
.ase
Signalment: 13-year-old castrated male cat
History: Rear leg paralysis, dyspnea, vomiting 
 Physical examination: Lethargy and dyspnea. Systolic murmur detected.
Hematology
Day 1
Reference
Interval
PCV (%)
35
24-45
Hgb (g/dL)
11.3
8-15
RBC (×10%μL)
8.05
5-11
MCV (fL)
44
05-6E
MCHC (g/dL)
32
LE-EE
NCC (x103/μL)
18.1
5.5-19.5
Segs (x103/μL)
16.3
2.5-12.5
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.5
8:0-0
Lymphs (x103/μL)
0.9
1.5-7.0
Ba5ophils (x10°/μL)
0.2
Rare
NRBC (×10%/μL)
0.2
0
 Platelets (x103/μL)
 Adlequate 
TP (P) (g/dL)
7.2
8-9
 Hemopathology: Normal 
 Biochemical Profile
Day 1
Day 3
Reference Interval
Gluc (mg/dL)
153 (8.4)
360 (19.8)
67-124 (3.7-6.8mmol/L)
BUN (mg/dL)
46 (16.4)
137 (48.9)
17-32 (6.1-11.4mmol/L)
Creat (mg/dL)
2.9 (256)
9.8 (866)
0.9-2.1 (80-186mmo/L)
Ca (mg/dL)
8.4 (2.12)
4.9 (1.22)
8.5-11 (2. 12-2.75mmol/L)
Phos (rmg/dL)
8.0 (2.6)
16.1 (5.2)
3.3-7.8 (1. 1-2. 5mm0/L)
TP (g/dL)
6.9
5.4
5.9-8.1
Alb (g/dL)
2.8
2.4
2.3-3.9
Glob (g/dL)
4.1
3.0
2.9-4.4
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.2
E0
E'0-0
Chol (mg/dL)
192
151
60-220
ALT (IU/L)
158
294
30-100
AST (IU/L)
461
t9
14-38
ALP (IU/L)
54
25
6-106
GGT (IU/L)
0
1
0-1
CK (IU/L)
45,313
066058
00E-09
Na (mEq/L)
150
139
146-160
K (mEq/L)
4.9
6.6
3.7-5.4
CL (mEq/L)
119
66
112-129
TCO2(mEq/L)
19.2
15.9
14-23
An. gap (mEq/L)
17
31
10-27
652
Case 22
 Urinalysis
Day 1
Day 3
Urine Sediment 
Day 1
Day 3
(cystocentesis)
Color
 Dark yellow
Light yellow 
WBCs/hpf
15-20
0-1
Transparency
Hazy
Clear
RBCs/hpf
35-50
5-10
Sp. Gr.
1.050
1.010
Epith cells/hpf 
0
0
 Protein 
2+
1+
Casts/lpf 
 Few granular
0
3n5
4+
4+
Crystals
0
0
Ketones
2+
Negative 
 Bilirubin 
 Negative 
 Negative 
Bacteria
po0lg 
4+
4+
pH
5.5
5.0
 Fractional excretion 
Day 1
Reference Interval
Na (%)
7.2
<1.0
K (%)
165.1
5-20
P (%)
68.6
<7-21
(%) e)
10.5
<1.0
 Coagulation Data
Day 1
Day 3
Reference Interval
 PT (seconds)
10.0
8.9
7-11.5
aPTT (seconds)
8.2
16.5
10-18
 Endocrine Data
Day 1
Day 3
Reference Interval
Total T4 (μg/dL)
1.34
1.2-4.8
Interpretive discussion
the cat may have had periods with higher blood glucose
concentrations or that this cat has an abnormally low renal
Hematology
threshold for glucose.
In light of normal values for other erythrocyte measure-
The cat has an azotemia which progresses from mild to
ments. the slightly decreased MCHC is not significant.
severe. Since urine specific gravity is high on Day l, the
Mature neutrophilia and lymphopenia are typical of a stress
azotemia on that day appears to be prerenal. Urine specific
leukogram. The basophils are not significant. Occasionally.
gravity is in the isosthenuric range on Day 3 and may be of
 n     a a s 
renal origin; however, the cat had received fluid therapy.
animals. In the absence of anemia or other erythrocyte
and this, rather than renal failure, likely caused the low
abnormalities, the few nucleated RBCs noted in this cat are
urine specific gravity on this day.
not important.
Hypocalcemia progresses from mild on Day l to marked
 on Day 3. while ethylene glycol toxicosis may result in
Biochemical profile
hypocalcemia and causes severe azotemia, rear leg paralysis
The cat is hyperglycemic on Days l and 3. This abnormal-
and increased CK activity are not associared with ethylene
ity could be due to severe excitement or stress with result-
glycol toxicosis. The Ca x P product on Day 1 is 67 on Day
ing
increased
epinephrine
corticosteroid
levels,
1 and 79 by Day 3. Precipitation of Ca and P in the tissues
or
respectively. The leukogram is suggestive of stress. The
may, therefore, be occurring on Day 3 and may. in part.
 presence of ketonuria on Day l suggests that diabetes mel-
explain the decreasing Ca concentration. Massive muscle
litus should also be considered. Although this cat's blood
tissue destruction, as evidenced by increased CK activity.
glucose concentration on Day l is not above the renal
may have resulted in calcium preciptitation in damaged
threshold, detection of glucosuria on this day suggests that
tissues and subsequent hypocalcemia.
653
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Hyperphosphatemia resulted from decreased glomerular
concentration of the urine with more dilution of protein on
filtration rate. Maintenance of normal serum P concentra-
Day 3. Both pyuria and hematuria probably contributed to
tion depends on normal glomerular clearance of P.
the proteinuria. Other causes of proteinuria such as glo-
 Total serum protein concentration was normal on Day 1,
merular or tubular disease cannot be eliminated. The
but decreased by Day 3. Although both albumin and globu-
   s a s   rn 
lin concentrations remained within reference intervals, con-
and 3. but the RBC concentration decreased markedly
centrations of both of these proteins decreased due to fluid
between these days. This suggests that the positive test is
due to either hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria. In light of
of normal serum albumin and globulin concentrations, the
 the apparent muscle injury (increased CK), myoglobinuria 
significance of the hypoproteinemia is borderline.
is most likely.
 Increased serum ALT activity suggests mild hepatocyte
Glucosuria is marked on both days. On Day 3, this reflects
injury that progressed to moderate.
a blood glucose concentration which exceeds the renal
The combination of increased serum AST and CK activities
threshold. The glucosuria is more difficult to explain on
indicates muscle injury. Since CK has a short half-life (less
Day l, when the blood glucose is below the renal threshold.
 e    a   
While it is possible that this cat has a lowered renal thresh-
S   o n   a e
old, it is also possible blood glucose concentrations were
and hepatic injury is an alternate explanation for the
fluctuating on Day l with periods above the renal threshold
increased serum AST activity. but, in light of the increased
occurring.
serum CK activity, muscle origin is most likely.
 Presence of a few granular cast suggests tubular damage.
Hyponatremia on Day 3 may be due to renal loss (see
The significance of the positive urine ketone reaction is
fractional excretion results). Since hypochloremia is also
considered in the discussion of hyperglycemia.
evident, vomiting could also be a cause of Na loss. Hypo-
Fractional excretions of Na, K, P, and Ca are increased.
chloremia on Day 3 may be due to both renal loss and
 This indicates abnormal reabsorption of these electrolytes
vomiting.
 and, in this case, is probably due to acute renal damage.
Hyperkalemia on Day 3 may be due to several different
Coagulation data
excreting K normally. This cat also had a significant degree
The activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) is slightly
of tissue necrosis that could have resulted in release of K
decreased on Day l and probably reflects this cat's hyperco-
from dead or dying cells.
agulable condition. The mechanism of this change is not
 The increased anion gap suggests increased concentrations
known but may be related to this cat's cardiac problem (see
of anions such as ketones, uremic acids, phosphate, sulfate.
Summary). This cat was treated with streptokinase between
or lactate. Ketones are not present in the urine of this cat
Days l and 3, and this treatment increases APTT and PT, and
on Day 3, and a significant ketosis is, therefore, not likely.
return of APTT to within the reference interval on Day 3
Since the cat is severely azotemic, concentrations of uremic
may have resulted from this treatment; however, the absence
acids are probably increased. Serum phosphorus concentra-
of a longer PT on Day 1 as compared to Day 3 makes a sig-
tion confirms that increased phosphate is contributing to the
nificant effect of streptokinase treatment less certain.
anion gap. The final diagnosis suggested that this cat had
significant tissue damage, and this probably increased serum
sulfate concentrations. Hypoxia was also a component of
this cat's disease; therefore. lactic acidosis was also
Summary
occurring.
Clinical diagnosis was restrictive cardiomyopathy with aortic
Urinalysis
thromboemboli (saddle and renal thrombosis and pulmo-
The implications of the urine specific gravities were dis-
nary thromboembolism). Restrictive cardiomyopathy pre-
cussed in the interpretation of this cat's azotemia. The cat
disposes to thrombosis. In this case, the thrombotic disease
has proteinuria and hematuria on both days and pyuria on
involved the kidneys and resulted in acute renal failure. In
 Day 1. These abnormalities suggest urinary tract inflamma-
addition, hypoxia occurred in other tissues including the
tion. Cystitis or pyelonephritis are possible causes of this
muscles of the rear legs. This resulted in increased serum
inflammation. The protein concentration decreased between
activities of AsT and CK. Necropsy examination was not
Days l and 3, but this probably reflects the change in the
performed.
654
Case 23
Case 23
Signalment: 1l-year-old FS canine
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
History: Weight loss and polyuria
 Profile
Physical examination: Thin, slightly dehydrated 
Gluc (mg/dL)
112
65-122
BUN (mng/dL)
216 (77.1)
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmol/L)
Creat (mmg/dL)
15.6 (1379)
0.9-1.7 (79-150 μmol/L)
Ca (mg/dL)
12.1 (3.0)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.8mmo/L)
 Hematology
Reference
Phos (rng/dL)
20.9 (6.75)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.9 mmol/L)
Interval
TP (g/dL)
6.9
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
4.0
2.7-4.5
PCV (%)
36.0
37-55
Glob (g/dL)
2.9
1.9-3.4
Hgb (g/dL)
12.5
12-18
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.4
0-0.4
RBC (×10%/μL)
5.38
5.5-8.5
Chol (mg/dL)
335
130-370
MCV (fL)
67.0
60-72
ALT (IU/L)
73
10-120
MCHC (g/dL)
35.0
34-38
AST (IU/L)
25
16-40
NCC (x103/μL)
7.0
6-17
ALP (IU/L)
662
35-280
Segs (x103/μL)
6.1
3-11.5
GGT (IU/L)
8
9-0
Bands (x103/μL)
0.1
E'0-0
Na (mEq/L)
144
145-158
Mono5 (x103/μL)
0.2
0.1-1.3
K (mEq/L)
6.2
4.1-5.5
Lyrmphs (×10²/μL)
0.5
1-4.8
CL (mEq/L)
98
106-127
Eos (×10°/μL)
0.1
0.1-1.2
TCO2 (mEq/L)
13.1
14-27
400
An. gap (mEq/L)
Platelets (x1 0²/μL)
200-500
6E
8-25
TP (P) (g/dL)
8.1
6-8
 Armylase (IU/L)
866
50-1250
Lipase (IU/L)
386
095-0E
 Urinalysis
Color
Yellow
 Urine Sediment
Transparency
Apno
WBCs/hpf
1-2
Sp. Gr.
1.011
RBCs/hpf
1-2
Protein
+E
 Epith cells/hpf 
5-8
2n15
Negative
Casts/pf 
0-1 coarse
 granular
AxeMpue
Bilirubin 
1+
Crystals 
Negative 
Blood 
Trace
Bacteria
Negative 
pH 
6.0
UPC
11.1
655
SECTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
inability of the damaged renal tubules to respond appropri-
ately to mineralocorticoids or may be due to a simple loss of
Hematology
sodium and retention of potassium because of renal disease
The PCV is marginally decreased, but without reticulocyte
and oliguria. The serum total CO, is decreased, indicating a
count it is difficult to classify the regenerative response. A
metabolic acidosis, while the anion gap is increased, indicat-
marginal normocytic, normochromic anemia is observed in
ing the accumulation of organic anions. Acidosis may result 
renal failure, for which there are other indications in the
in hyperkalemia as well.
laboratory data.
The serum calculated osmolality is increased, predomi-
The lymphopenia indicates a steroid response.
nantly because of the profound azotemia. Likewise, the
increased anion gap is due to retention of urinary metabolic
Biochemical profile
products.
The serum glucose concentration is normal.
Serum amylase and lipase activities are normal, and while
The BUN, serum creatinine, and serum phosphorus values
not definitive, lessen the probability for pancreatitis.
   s s s  
decreased glomerular filtration rate. However, one cannot
differentiate the nature of the azotemia (prerenal, renal, or
Urinalysis
postrenal) based on these findings alone. Refer to the discus-
The urinary specific gravity is in the isosthenuric range, and
sion of urinalysis results for further interpretation.
there is 3+ proteinuria in the absence of significant hema-
Serum total calcium is mildly increased, for which one
turia or pyuria. The urinary protein :creatinine ratio is 1l.1.
which is significantly increased. The mild bilirubinuria is
corticism, renal failure, vitamin D toxicosis, or primary
likely significant considering the low specific gravity. The
hyperparathyroidism.
coarse granular and waxy casts also definitively indicate
A significant increase in serum ALP activity and mild
renal tubular damage. Together with the marked azotemia.
increase in GGT activity is consistent with cholestasis.
these findings support a diagnosis of renal disease.
Because AST and ALT activities are normal, there is not
likely any hepatocellular damage. ALP and GGT activities
may also be increased by corticosteroids.
Summary
Serum Na and Cl are decreased In concentration, while
serum K is increased. The Na:K ratio is 23.2, which may
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma of both kidneys identified at
indicate hypoadrenocorticism. Alternatively, renal disease
postmortem examination. This accounted for chronic renal
may result in a functional hypoadrenocorticism due to
failure.
656
Case 24
Signalment: 12-year-old Quarter horse gelding
Interpretive discussion
History: Losing weight and recently has loose stools
 Physical examination: Thin to poor body
Hematology
condition, mild dependent edema all four limbs. Horse
The PCv, hemoglobin, and total RBC count are decreased.
developed watery diarrhea during hospitalization.
indicating a moderate anemia is present. It cannot be deter-
mined if the anemia is regenerative beca use reticulocytes are 
 Hematology
Reference
not released from marrow in the horse. Given the biochem-
 Interval
istry profile the anemia is likely due to chronic renal failure
(CRF). The mild to moderate degree of anemia fits with CRF
Packed cell volume (%)
23
32-52
as severe anemia is not seen with renal failure unless there
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
7.9
11-18
is a second problem, e.g., blood loss. If this horse is dehy-
RBC (10%/μL)
4.41
6.5-10.5
drated the anemia is more severe as are the protein losses.
MCV (fL)
52
36-52
34
34-39
The plasma protein is markedly decreased, likely due to
MCHC (g/dL)
Total nucleated cel count (x103/μL)
2.5
5.5-12.5
diarrhea and GI loss. There is severe, life-threatening leuko-
Segrmented neutrophils (x103/μL)
0.10
2.7-6.7
penia, neutropenia with a left shift and toxic changes in
Band neutrophils (x10²/μL)
0.025
0-0.1
neutrophils. This is seen with acute diarrheal disease in
Monocytes (x10/μL)
0.150
0-0.8
horses due to endotoxemia and or overwhelming sepsis.
Lyrmphocytes (x103/μL)
2.20
1.5-5.5
The bone marrow cannot meet demands and a likely source
Eosinophils (x10²/μL)
0.025
6'0-0
150-500
of the problem is enteric salmonellosis with or without
Platelets (x10°/ μL)
217
Plasma protein (g/dL)
4.6
6-8
septicemia.
 Note: Toxic changes in neutrophils
Biochemistry profile
 Biochemical Profile
 Reference
This horse has GI and renal disease, both appear to be
 Interval
 severe. Marked azotemia, isosthenuria and hypercalcermia
with hypophosphatemia are diagnostic for renal failure in
Glucose (ng/dL)
153
70-110
the horse. Suspect chronic renal failure due to poor body
Blood Urea Nitrogen (rng/dL)
254
14-27
condition, history, anemia, hypoalbuminemia, electrolyte
Creatinine (mng/dL)
23
1.1-2.0
abnormalities and an inactive urine sediment. Additionally.
Calcium (mg/dL)
16.7
11-13.7
chronic renal failure is more common than acute renal
 Phosphorus (rmg/dL)
1.2
1.9-4.1
 Total Protein (g/dL)
4.1
5.8-7.6
failure in horses. UN and Ct are about as high as possible in
Albumin (g/dL)
1.7
2.7-3.7
a living patient; clearly this is not due to a prerenal cause.
Globulin (g/dL)
2.4
2.6-4.6
Isosthenuria confirms renal and postrenal is rare in an adult
Total Bilirubin (rng/dL)
5.2
0.6-2.1
horse, especially one that is urinating. perhaps even with an
Aspartate amninotransferase (IU/L)
229
185-300
increased volume of urine. Lesion in the kidneys is lilkely to
 Alkaline phosphatase (IU/L)
255
90-290
 be end-stage, small shrunken kidneys with fibrosis and little 
GGT (IU/L)
23
7-17
2341
130-470
      n   ln
CK (IU/L)
Sodium (mEq/L)
125
133-145
may have started as glomerulonephritis or amyloidosis as
Potassium (mEq/L)
8.5
2.2-4.6
hypoalbuminemia is moderate but it can also be seen in
Chloride (mEq/L)
95
100-111
severe chronic renal failure from any cause that compro-
Total CO2 (mmEq/L)
17
24-34
mises glomerular function. Peripheral edema is attributed to
Anion Gap (mEg/L)
22
5-15
hypoalbuminemia and decreased colloidal osmotic pressure.
Horses tend to develop peripheral edema rather then ascites 
 Urinalysis voided
with hypoalbuminemia.
Hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are only seen with
Color
 yellow
Urine Sediment
renal failure in equidae, all other species develop hyperhos-
Transparency
clear
WBCs/hpf
E-O
phatemia even if hypercalcemia is present. The only other
Specific Gravity
1.009
 RBCs/hpf
5-0
differentials for hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are a
 Protein 
2+
 Epithelial cells/hpf 
none
Glucose
malignancy and primary hyperparathyroidism. Hypercalce-
bau
Casts/lpf
neg
Ketones
neg
Crystals 
calcium carbonate 
Blood 
been reported in horses with gastric carcinoma and lym-
neg
phoma. Primary hyperparathyroidism is very rare in horses
657
SEcTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
 h u a l  annd aq uo pom u
The proteinuria is more severe than 2+ since the urine is
ruled out first. All three differentials are associated with
dilute. A protein to creatinine ratio could help assess the
dilute urine due to inhibition of ADH by hypercalcemia. If
degree of severity but is not needed in this case, given all
mild or moderate azotemia is present with dilute urine in a
the data. The few white and red blood cells are inconsequen-
horse with hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia it can be
tial, may be due to voided urine and the calcium carbonate
difficult to distinguish HHM and chronic renal failure. The
crystals are normal for a horse.
easiest diagnostic tests are to first search for cancer (enlarged
lymph nodes and endoscopy to look for gastric SCC), rectal
and or ultrasound examination of kidneys to determine if
Summary
they are small and shrunken. If this does not clarify then
consider protein creatinine ratio and or fractional excretion
Marked chronic renal failure and salmonellosis
of sodium, if <1% rule out renal if >1% rule in renal. Always
favor renal failure over HHM in horses.
Outcome
Hyponatremia and hypochloremia can be attributed to
Horse was euthanized and chronic renal failure and salmo-
chronic renal failure and or GI loss, the latter is more likely.
nellosis were confirmed at autopsy. Initially the horse pre-
The hyperkalemia is severe and life threatening. This is
sented primarily for weight loss, while it was being evaluated
unusual as adult horses tend to develop hypokalemia with
it developed profuse diarrhea in the hospital. The horse was
GI disease but young horses with diarrhea will have hyper-
sick and stressed and likely had a recrudescence of salmo-
kalemia. The most likely explanation is metabolic acidosis
nella. The horse may have been a carrier of salmonella.
 Both kidneys were small, knobby and looked like irregular
pattern of hyponatremia and hyperkalemia can be seen with
bovine kidneys due to marked fibrosis. Microscopically there
renal failure, urinary bladder rupture and hypoadrenocorti-
was severe glomerulonephritis, chronic interstitial nephritis
cism. Decreased bicarbonate (TCOz) is due to GI and or renal
and even oxalate crystals in many tubules. The oxalate crys-
loss. Increased anion gap is due to retained uremic acids.
tals were attributed to either being a horse or endogenous
shock and anaerobic glycolysis with accumulation of lactic
formation of oxalates which happens in chronic renal failure
acid. Horses with diarrheal diseases usually have a metabolic
in dogs and other species as well. It was not ethylene glycol
acidosis as does this horse. Hypoalbuminemia and concur-
toxicity. Glomerulonephritis was considered the primary
rent decreased serum globulin is due to GI disease, suspect
lesion but it was difficult to determine if it preceded the
salmonellosis. Hypoalbuminemia is moderate and more
interstitial nephritis. Pulmonary thrombi were present and
 a aq      an  
one large thrombus was present in the pulmonary artery.
These thrombi were likely due to hypoalbuminemia and
teinuria without blood is present in the urine and supports
decreased AT II (not measured) which lead to a state of
renal loss of albumin. Increased bilirubin is due to anorexia.
increased coagulability. Pulmonary thrombosis associated
which is the most common cause of icterus in horses.
with decreased AT III and glomerular lesions is seen most
Although hepatic disease and cholestasis are possible expla-
frequently, or documented most frequently in dogs.
nations they are too unlikely given all the clinical and bio-
Hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia are present in
chemistry data (liver enzymes WRI). The mild increase in
some horses with renal failure, empirically, perhaps about
GGT may be spurious rather than a true indicator of liver
one third. The pathogenesis is not known and multiple
issues. GGT seems to increase in horses easily and is not
theories are postulated. These electrolyte changes will even
reliable indicator of hepatic problems if increased without
occur with nephrectomy in the horse. Some horses may
any increases in other hepatic parameters.
excrete excess dietary calcium (from alfalfa-rich diet) in the
 Increase in CPK is mild for a horse and is due to recum-
urine and retain phosphorus. Hypercalcemia is then attrib-
bency, it is too low to consider a primary muscle disease.
uted to decreased excretion by the failing kidneys and hypo-
The AST is WRI so it is not a muscle problem in which the
phosphatemia to increased excretion. However, if the
CPK is decreasing while the AST is still increased. The urine
kidneys are removed it seems impossible to explain how
is yellow, no evidence of brown color or blood, rule out
they would develop hypophosphatemia. Certainly there
myoglobin induced renal damage with these values. Urine
cannot be increased renal loss as the kidneys have been
is not concentrated; a second check to confirm isosthenuria
removed so it must be increased GI loss, but this is unproven.
is usually recommended but in this case is not needed. Pro-
Many horses with chronic renal failure will have hyperphos-
teinuria with no evidence of hemorrhage or active sediment
phatemia and normo or hypocalcemia, similar to other
in an animal with hypoalbuminemia is due to renal loss.
species.
658
Case 25
Signalment: 6-year-old MC feline DSH
seg poog
Reference
History: Approximately 1 month's duration of
 Data (arterial)
Interval
intermittent weakness, exercise intolerance, poor hair coat
 Physical examination: Cat is near collapse and
pH 
7.130
7.33-7.44
 approximately 10% dehydrated. There is definite cervical
pCO2 (mmHg)
44.0
35-42
ventroflexion.
HCO: (mEq/L)
14.0
16-22
Urinalysis
Hematology
Reference
Color
 Urine Sediment
Interval
Transparency
Apno
WBCs/hpf
0-2
PCV (%)
41.0
24-45
Sp. Gr.
1.014
RBCs/hpf
0-2
Segs (x103/μL)
18.0
2.5-12.5
 Protein 
Trace
Epith cells/hpf 
0-2
Mono5 (x103/μL)
0.7
Gluc
 Negative 
Cast5/lpf
0-0.8
 Negative
 Bilirubin
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
0.5
1.5-7.0
 Negative
Crystals 
 Negative 
 Platelets 
Adequate
Blood 
Negative
Bacteria
150-700
 Negative
pH 
5.5
Other
(×10²/μL)
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
 Fractional
 Reference
Profile
excretion
Interval
Gluc (mg/dL)
98
67-124
Na (%)
0.55
<1.0
BUN (mg/dL)
68 (24.3)
17-31 (6.1-11.4 mmol/L)
K (%)
37.7
<20.0
Creat (rng/dL)
2.8 (247)
0.9-2.1 (80-186 μmol/L)
Ca (mng/dL)
10.9
8.5-11
 Phos (mg/dL)
6.8
3.3-7.8
TP (g/dL)
9.3
5.9-8.1
Alb (g/dL)
5.3
2.3-3.9
Glob (g/dL)
4.0
2.9-4.4
T. Bili (mg/dL)
0.3
E'0-0
Chol (ng/dL)
180
60-220
ALT (IU/L)
52
30-100
ALP (IU/L)
48
6-106
CK (IU/L)
2419
00E-09
Na (mEq/L)
157
146-160
K (mEq/L)
2.0
3.7-5.4
CL (mEq/L)
114
112-129
T CO2 (mEq/L)
15
14-23
An. gap (rmEq/L) 
OE
10-27
659
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
acidosis, with an increased anion gap. It would not be
unusualforthis degree of dehydra tion to lead tohypovolemia-
Hematology
induced lactic acidosis. It is also possible that this degree of
There is a mature neutrophilia and lymphopenia, indicating
hypokalemia may have caused sufficient respiratory muscle
a stress leukogram. Other components of the hemogram are
dysfunction to impair normal ventilation.
normal.
Urinalysis
Biochemical profile
The urinary specific gravity is in the isosthenuric range.
The BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are mildly
Given the azotemia and normal serum Na and Cl concentra-
increased. These findings are consistent with decreased glo-
tions, this indicates probable renal disease. However, hypo-
merular filtration rate. However, one cannot differentiate
kalemia can also impair ADH responsiveness by the kidneys.
the nature of the azotemia (prerenal, renal, or postrenal)
 so that urine concentration should be evaluated following
based on these findings alone. Refer to the discussion of
rehydration and K repletion.
urinalysis results for further interpretation. The normal
The urinary FEna is 0.55%, which speaks against a gener
serum phosphorus and total calcium concentrations do not
alized renal tubular disease. However, the FEk is 37.7%.
contribute to the characterization of renal disease.
which is markedly increased, especially for a cat with this
Serum total protein and albumin concentrations are
degree of hypokalemia.
increased;  this  documents marked  dehydration 
or
hemoconcen tra tion.
Serum CK activity is increased significantly and is indica-
Summary
tive of muscle damage.
Serum Na and Cl concentrations are normal, but serum
The combined observations of azotemia, hypokalemia, aci-
K concentration is markedly decreased. This is especially
dosis, and hyperkaluria in a cat with cervical ventroflexion
significant in light of the acidosis, which results in a shift of
and evidence of widespread muscle damage support a diag-
potassium from within cells to extracellular fluid and sug-
nosis of feline kaliopenic polymyopathy/nephropathy syn-
gests a marked potassium deficit.
drome. In this case, it was completely corrected by dietary
change (non-acidifying. higher K diet). This syndrome is no
Blood gas data
longer seen, as dietary imbalances in commercial cat food
There is prominent acidosis. This is due to a combined meta-
were corrected
bolic (decreased HCOs) and respiratory (increased pCO2)
660
Case 26
.ase
Signalment: 2-year-old male canine, West Highland
Blood Gas Data
Reference
white terrier
(arterial)
Interval
History: Polyuria. polydipsia
pH
7.349
7.33-7.45
PO2 (mmHg)
80.1
67-92
PCO2 (mmHg)
39.1
24-39
Hematology
Reference
HCO; (mEq/L)
21.0
14-24
Interval
ionized Ca++ (mEq/L)
3.44
4.5-5.6
PCV (%)
33.0
37-55
Hgb (g/dLO)
11.3
12-18
RBC (×10%/μL)
4.45
5.5-8.5
Urinalysis
MCV (fL)
74.0
60-72
MCHC (g/dL)
35.0
82-26
Color
Yellow
 Urine Sediment
NCC (x10/μL)
5.9
6-17
Transparency
Clear 
WBCs/hpf
9-E
Segs (x10°/μL)
66
3-11.5
Sp. Gr.
1.028
RBCs/hpf 
9-E
Monos (x10²/μL)
0.4
0.1-1.3
Protein
2+
 Epith cells/hpf
0-2
Lymphs (×10²/μL)
1.2
1-4.8
3n15
+E
Casts/pf 
Rare fine gran
NRBC (x10°/μL)
0.4
 Bilirubin 
1+
Crystals 
 Negative
Platelets (x10²/μL)
425
200-500
Blood 
Negative
Bacteria
 Negative
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.7
8-9
pH
5.0
Hernopathology: Few acanthocytes and schistocytes
Ketones 
Trace
osmmolality
358
(mOsm/L)
UPC
1.75
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
 Profile
Gluc (mng/dL)
108
65-122
 Fractional
Reference
BUN (ng/dL)
65 (23.2)
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmol/L)
excretion
Interval 
Creat (mg/dL)
2.0 (176.8)
0.9-1.7 (79-150 μmol/L)
(7p/6u) e)
7.2 (1.8)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.8mmo/L)
Na (%)
1.62
<1.0
Phos (ng/dL)
6.1
2.8-6.1
(%) e
7.47
<1.0
TP (g/dL)
5.8
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
3.7
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
2.1
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (rmng/dL)
0.3
0-0.4
Chol (mg/dL)
382 (9.9)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmol/L)
ALT (IU/L)
56
10-120
ALP (IU/L)
137
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
147
145-158
K (mEq/L)
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
115
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
22.3
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
12.7
8-25
Calc. osmmolality 
317
290-310
(mOsm/kg)
661
SEcTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
Urinalysis
Although the urinary specific gravity indicates some concen-
Hematology
trating ability, one would expect this to be greater if the
The packed cell volume, erythrocyte count, and hemoglobin
azotemia were pre-renal in origin. It is also possible for the
concentration are decreased, indica ting an anemia. Observed
specific gravity to be increased by the presence of solutes
red blood cell morphologic abnormalities include acantho-
which do not contribute to renal concentration capacity
cytes and schistocytes. These may be observed when there
(glucose, protein, amino acids). Concomitant determination
is erythrocytic membrane damage due to free radical or lipid
of urinary osmolality (358mOsm/L) confirms that the urine
metabolic abnormalities, or when there is microangiopathic
is not being adequately concentrated relative to the calcu-
pathology due to vascular disease or neoplasia. Although a
lated osmolality of the serum. Inability to concentrate the
reticulocyte count has not been provided, the increased
urine may be due to central diabetes insipidus (a defect in
  s   
hypothalamic/pituitary antidiuretic hormone release). or
with a regenerative responce. There are no other hemato-
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (ADH is released, but the
logic abnormalities.
kidney is unable to respond). The latter may be caused by
anatomic pathology or functional impairment of renal
tubular actions necessary to maintain a medullary concen-
Biochemical profile
tration gradient and water reabsorption. This finding may
Serum glucose concentration is normal, and its importance
indicate that the observed azotemia is renal in origin.
in the interpretation of the glucosuria is discussed below.
The presence of proteinuria on the dipstick was followed
The BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are
by a chemical determination of urinary protein concentra-
increased, while the serum phosphorus value is at the upper
tion. When indexed to the urinary creatinine value, the
limit of the reference interval. These findings are consistent
urinary protein :creatinine ratio is 1.75. while this value is
with decreased glomerular filtration rate. However, one
probably abnormal, it is not sufficiently high to indicate
cannot differentiate the nature of the azotemia (prerenal.
  i   n   5 d 
renal, or postrenal) based on these findings alone. Refer
have been associated epidemiologically with tubular or
to the discussion of urinalysis results for further
inflammatory causes of proteinuria. The absence of signifi-
interpreta tion.
cant numbers of leukocytes suggests there is no inflamma-
The serum total calcium concentration is decreased. The
tory disease. The presence of fine granular casts is indicative
ionized calcium concentration reported with the blood gas
 of renal tubular damage, and may explain the proteinuria.
panel is likewise less than normal, indicating a true hypo-
calcemia. In this case, excessive loss of calcium in the urine
by three mechanisms. (l) There is a Fanconi's-type syn-
is the likely cause (see urinalysis discussion).
drome wherein tubular malfunction leads to loss of glucose.
Serum total protein, albumin, and globulin concentrations
protein, and other solutes which would otherwise be reab-
are within the reference interval. This observation suggests
sorbed from the glomerular filtrate. This is supported by the
that there is not hemoconcentration due to dehydration,
findings of modest proteinuria and increased urinary frac-
although a concurrent protein-losing disorder might exist.
tional excretion of electrolytes. Fanconi's syndromes may be
Thus, the azotemia noted above is less likely due to dehydra-
inherited (as reported in Basenjis and Whippets) or acquired
tion, and more likely renal in origin.
Serum cholesterol is increased, whereas other indices of
ing aminoglycoside antibiotics and heavy metals). (2) There
hepatic function are normal. There are no other indicators
was an earlier episode of hyperglycemia which exceeded the
of a primary metabolic disease like diabetes mellitus, but it
renal threshold for glucose reabsorption, during which time
is possible, nevertheless, that this dog has hypothyroidism
the urine analyzed was produced. Depending on the rate
or hyperadrenocorticism.
of urine formation, a single void may represent blood
The serum sodium and chloride concentrations are
chemistry-related changes for many hours prior to specimen
normal, yet there is hypokalemia. Possible causes in this case
collection. (3) A laboratory error was made in the determi-
might include hyperadrenocorticism, chronic renal disease.
nation of either the serum glucose (improper preservation
or urinary potassium wasting associated with diuresis. Cal-
of the blood sample or analytical error) or the urinary
 n a    a s 
glucose (cross-contamination of dipstick reaction squares by
azotemia.
excess urine or operator error in interpreting the color
change).
The FEua is 1.62%. This may be indicative of renal tubular
Blood gas data
 disease or dysfunction due to mineralocorticoid deficiency
Indices of acid-base metabolism (pH, pCOz, HCOs, and anion
or transport malfunction. The FEca is 7.47%. This is particu-
gap) are normal.
larly inappropriate given the hypocalcemia, and may well
662
Case 26
be the cause of calcium loss from the body. This may be
Summary
indicative of renal tubular disease or dysfunction due to
parathyroid hormone deficiency or transport malfunction.
 This is a case of congenital Fanconi's syndrome which did
 Increased urinary excretion of both of these electrolytes may
not resolve following supportive treatment for renal failure.
be observed in renal failure (consider the azotemia and
Other tests one should perform include those that evaluate
impaired urinary concentrating ability) or in Fanconi's syn-
the parathyroid gland.
drome, wherein proximal renal tubule reabsorptive function
is impaired (consider the euglycemic glucosuria ).
663
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
.ase
Signalment: 8-year-old male canine
 Urinalysis
History: Polydipsia
Physical Examination: Slightly dehydrated
Color
 Straw
Urine Sediment
Transparency
Clear
WBCs/hpf
2-3
Sp. Gr.
1.011
RBCs/hpf 
1-2
Hematology
Reference
 Protein 
2+
 Epith cells/hpf 
 Negative
Interval 
2n15
Negative
Casts/lpf 
 Negative 
Bilirubin
2+
Crystals 
 Negative 
PCV (%)
37-55
Blood 
Negative
38.0
Bacteria 
 Negative 
Hgb (g/dL)
12.0
12-18
pH
6.5
RBC (×10%/μL)
5.51
5.5-8.5
UPC
2.6
MCV (fL)
69.0
60-72
NCC (×10/μL)
18.2
6-17
Segs (x10²/μL)
2.0
3-11.5
 Fractional
 Reference
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.6
0.1-0.3
excretion
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
Interval 
13.8
1-4.8
 Platelets (×103/μL)
298
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
Na (%)
1.73
<1.0
8.8
6-8
(%) 
3.37
<1.0
 Hemopathlogy: clumped platelets
Biochemical
 Reference Interval
 Profile 
Gluc (mg/dL)
91
65-122
BUN (rng/dL)
33 (11.8)
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmo/L)
Creat (mg/dL)
2.9 (256)
0.9-1.7 (80-150μmol/L)
Ca (mgy/dL)
15.4 (3.85)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmo/L)
Phos (mmg/dL)
7.1 (2.3)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.0mmol/L)
TP (mg/dL)
7.9
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
4.0
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (mng/dL)
1.0 (17)
0-0.4 (0-6.8 μmol/L)
Chol (rmg/dL)
291
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
152
10-120
AST (IU/L)
64
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
361
35-280
GGT (IU/L)
14
9-0
Na (mEq/L)
154
145-158
K (mEq/L)
5.8
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
109
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
12.1
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
38.7
8-25
664
Case 27
Interpretive discussion
of cholestasis. There are mild increases in the serum activi-
ties of ALT and AST, so there may be some hepatocellular
Hematology
damage as well.
The nucleated cell count is mildly increased, but there is a
The increase in serum potassium is probably due to redis-
neutropenia and marked lymphocytosis. Other hematologic
tribution of intracellular potassium to the extracellular space
parameters, including cell morphology, are normal. However.
secondary to acidosis. The serum total CO, concentration is
the concurrent observation of marked lymphocytosis and
neutropenia should alert one to the possibility of lympho-
blood gas panel is required to completely evaluate acid-base
cytic leukemia, lymphoma with bone marrow involvement.
status.
 or ehrlichiosis. The concurrent observation of marked lym-
phocytosis and hypercalcemia should likewise lead to con-
Urinalysis
sideration of lymphoma and humoral hypercalcemia of
The urine specific gravity is in the isosthenuric range. The
malignancy.
dog does not appear to be dehydrated, and it is possible for
a normal dog to produce urine with a specific gravity in this
Biochemical profile
range. However, this dog is azotemic. Dilute urine in the face
The BUN, creatinine, and phosphorus concentrations are
 of azotemia usually indicates renal disease, but hypercalce-
mildly increased. These findings are consistent with
mia interferes with concentrating ability by antagonizing the
decreased glomerular filtration rate. However, one cannot
actions of ADH. Hypercalcemia may also cause damage to
 differentiate the nature of the azotemia (pre-renal, renal, or
the kidney, especially when phosphorus is concurrently
post-renal) based on these findings alone. Refer to the dis-
increased. There is significant proteinuria of 2+ on the dip-
cussion of urinalysis results for further interpretation.
stick, and a UPC of 2.6. In the absence of significant sedi-
The serum total calcium concentration is markedly
ment changes, this is indicative of renal protein loss, probably
increased. In light of the lymphocytosis, humoral hyper-
glomerular in origin. The FEna is 1.73%, indicating tubular
calcemia of malignancy is most likely. PTHrP could be
dysfunction. Increased fractional excretion of Ca is expected
measured to support this interpretation. The Ca X P pro-
given the hypercalcemia.
duct is increased at l09. indicating likely soft tissue
mineralization.
The serum total protein and globulin concentrations are
slightly increased. Increased globulin concentration may
Summary
occur in dogs with lymphoprolifera tive disorders.
The total bilirubin concentration is increased, as are the
This is a case of lymphoma with hypercalcemia of malig-
serum ALP and GGT activities. These findings are evidence
nancy and hypercalcemic nephropathy.
665
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Case 28
Signalment: 9-year-old female dog
 Interpretive discussion
History: Polydipsia, polyuria
Physical Examination: Mass in pelvic inlet
Biochemical profile
Hyperproteinemia is due to hyperalbuminemia, indicating
dehydration. There is marked hypercalcemia and this mag-
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
nitude of increase is suggestive of hypercalcemia of malig-
 Profile 
 nancy or primary hyperparathyroidism. Hypercalcemia of
106
65-122
this magnitude may result in renal injury leading to azote-
Gluc (mg/dL)
BUN (rng/dL)
7-28
mia and loss of concentrating ability. A dehydrated animal
8
Creat (mg/dL)
1.4
0.9-1.7
should be maximally concentrating its urine, and this dog's
TP (g/dL)
7.7
5.4-7.4
urine is nearly isosthenuric. This could be consistent with
Alb (g/dL)
5.2
2.7-4.5
renal disease (early, prior to development of azotemia), but
Ca (mg/dL)
16.4 (4.5)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmo/L)
hypercalcemia alone is sufficient to explain this abnormality
Phos (mg/dL)
3.5
2.8-6.1
(due to antagonism of ADH at the renal tubules).
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.2
0-0.4
A slight increase in alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP)
ALT (IU/L)
43
10-120
suggests cholestasis or drug induction (corticosteroids, anti-
ALP (IU/L)
428
35-280
convulsants). If cholestasis is present it is not of sufficient
Na (mEqy/L)
155
145-158
magnitude to affect the serum bilirubin. A more likely expla-
K (mEq/L)
3.9
4.1-5.5
nation for the increased allkaline phosphatase is increased
CL (mEq/L)
119
106-127
bone turnover secondary to increased serum concentration
TCO (mEq/L)
21.6
14-27
of PTH or PTHrp, which could be measured.
Summary
Urinalysis
 Specific gravity
1.014
The mass in the pelvis was aspirated, and appeared neuro-
endocrine, rather than lymphoid. The mass was surgically
gland adenocarcinoma of the anal sac. Following surgery.
the calcium normalized, but later metastasis to the lungs
resulted in return of hypercalcemia. In contrast to the previ-
ous case, the hypercalcemia has not resulted in suffcient
renal injury to cause azotemia.
666
Case 29
0
Signalment: 6-month-old DsH female cat
Interpretive discussion
History: Vomiting. wealkness acute onset
 Physical examination: Tachypnea for 24 hours.
Hematology
weakness
There is a stress leukogram indicated by mature neutrophilia
and lymphopenia.
Hematology
 Reference
Biochemical profile
Interval 
Increased glucose is compatible with stress identifed in the
PCV (%)
40
24-45
WBC (×10°%/μL)
21.0
5.5-19.5
cating azotemia. The urine specific gravity is less than what one
Segs (x103/μL)
20.2
2.5-12.5
would expect in a cat with prerenal azotemia, therefore renal
Bands (x1 03/μL)
E'0-0
azotemia should be considered. However, hypercalcemia alone
Lyrmphs (x10²/μL) 
0.2
1.5-7.0
can interfere with normal concentrating ability. With a calcium
Mon05 (x10²/μL)
0.6
0-0.85
of l8mg/dL, renal dysfunction is likely occurring due to
soft tissue mineralization. The total protein and albumin are
increased, particularly for a young cat, indicating dehydration.
The calcium is markedly increased. Primary causes of this
Biochemical
 Reference Interval
 Profile 
Vitamin D toxicosis should be very high on the differential
Gluc (mmg/dL)
150 (8.2)
67-124 (3.7-6.8 mmol/L)
list, due to the age of the cat and the acute onset. Because
BUN (rng/dL)
45 (16.1)
17-32 (6.1-11.4 mmol/L)
 of acidosis, ionized calciun is likely very high. Phosphorus is
Creat (mmg/dL)
2.2 (194)
0.9-2.1 (80-186 μmol/L)
 mildly increased. This could be in part due to the young age 
(7p/6u) e)
18 (4.5)
8.5-11 (2.12-2.75 mmol/L)
Phos (rng/dL)
9.5 (3.1)
3.3-7.8 (1. 1-2.5 mmol/L)
of the cat or may be due to decreased GFR. It is also seen
TP (g/dL)
8.0
5.9-8.1
with hypervitaminosis D. The Ca x P product is markedly
Alb (g/dL)
4.2
2.3-3.9
increased at l7l, which will result in calcification of renal
Glob (g/dL)
3.8
2.9-4.4
tubules, lungs and other soft tissues.
T. Bili (rng/dL)
0.2
E:0-0
Potassium is increased. This may be due to acidosis and
Chol (mg/dL)
120
60-270
an associated shift of K out of cells or the animal may be
ALT (IU/L)
100
30-100
becoming oliguric. Increased anion gap indicates increase in
ALP (IU/L)
25
11-210
unmeasured anions. Possible unmeasured anions are lactic
Na (mEq/L)
159
146-160
acid or uremic acids. Increased phosphates are also adding
K (mEq/L)
6.4
3.7-5.4
to the anion gap.
CL (mEq/L)
112
112-129
TCO2 (mEq/L)
16.8
14-24
Blood gas data
An. gap (mEq/L)
37
10-27
The pH is extremely decreased indicating severe acidemia.
The pCO, is the major abnormality in the balance between
bicarbonate and COz. Therefore, respiratory acidosis is the
major component of the acidosis. The bicarbonate is also
Blood Gas Data
Reference
decreased indicating a component of metabolic acidosis is
(arterial)
Interval
superimposed. Hypoxemia is also present. The combined
7.33-7.44
hypoxemia and retention of COz indicate a severe ventila-
pH 
6.926
PCO2 (mmHg)
35-42
tion abnormality, probably due to calcification of lungs. The
72.1
PO2 (mmHg)
65
80-95
metabolic acidosis is probably a result of renal failure.
HCO; (mEq/L)
14.9
16-22
Summary
The cat was diagnosed with renal disease with severe acide-
 Urinalysis
mia, both metabolic and respiratory. The respiratory compo-
Sp. Gr.
1.020
nent may be due to calcification of lungs. Cholecalciferol
toxicosis was diagnosed, as the cat had an opportunity to
Gran casts/hpf
2
ingest a rodenticide containing cholecalciferol.
667
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 3-year-old male cat
Interpretive discussion
History: Acute lethargy, vomiting. and anorexia
Physical examination: Obese, almost comatose 
Hematology
PCV is slightly increased. This is lilkely due to dehydration,
considering that the albumin is also increased. The mature
Hematology
Reference
neutrophilia and lymphopenia are suggestive of a stress or
Interval 
 corti costeroid leukogram.
PCV (%)
50
24-45
NCC (x103/μL)
24.0
5.5-19.5
Biochemical profile
Segs (x103/μL)
23.0
2.5-12.5
The serum glucose concentration is increased. Differentials
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.7
88:0-0
should include stress or corticosteroids, excitement and dia-
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
'0
1.5-7.0
betes mellitus. Excitement is less likely than the others, since
Platelets (x10²/μL)
Adlequate
200-500
the cat does not have an excitement leukogram and there
is glucosuria. (See summary for further discussion of
hyperglycemia.)
Biochemical Profile
Reference
 The BUN and creatinine are increased, and considering
Interval 
that the cat is not concentrating its urine, this is most lilkely
Gluc (mg/dL)
285
67-124
a renal azotemia. Since the cat is dehydrated, a prerenal
 BUN (rng/dL)
110
17-32
component to the azotemia may be present as well. Because
Creat (mg/dL)
7.5
0.9-2.1
the cat is not anemic, is obese, and the history is acute, this
Ca (mg/dL)
6.5
8.5-11
is most likely acute renal failure. Phosphorus is increased
Phos (rmg/dL)
14
3.3-7.8
due to decreased glomerular filtration rate.
TP (g/dL)
9.0
5.9-8.1
The serum calcium is decreased. Considering that the cat
Alb (g/dL)
4.9
2.3-3.9
likely has acute renal failure, the most likely cause of the
Glob (g/dL)
4.1
2.9-4.4
hypocalcemia is formation of calcium oxalate crystals associ-
T. Bili (rng/dL)
0.3
E'0-0
ated with ethylene glycol toxicosis. Oxalate is one of the
ALT (IU/L)
35
30-100
metabolites of ethylene glycol and combines with calcium
ALP (IU/L)
45
11-210
to form calcium oxalate crystals.
Na (mmEq/L)
165
146-160
Hyperproteinemia is due to hyperalbuminemia, indicating
K (mEq/L)
6.8
3.7-5.4
CL (mEq/L)
112-129
dehydra tion.
107
TCO2 (rmEq/L)
10
14-23
The sodium is increased, likely due to dehydration. Chlo-
An. gap (mEq/L)
55
10-27
ride would be expected to increase with sodium, but is
Calc. Osrnolality (mOsmm/kg)
394
290-310
selectively decreased in this case, probably due to vomiting
Meas. Osrnolality (mOsm/kg)
440
290-310
of gastric HCl. This causes a hypochloremic alkalosis.
Osmolal Gap (mOsm/kg)
46
>10
However, TCO, is decreased and the anion gap is increased.
suggesting concurrent metabolic acidosis and a mixed acid-
base disorder. A blood gas would more fully characterize the
Urinalysis (cystocentesis)
acid-base status.
The increased anion gap indicates increased concentra-
Color
Yellow
Urine Sediment
tions of anions other than those used in the formula to
Transparency
Apno 
WBCs/hpf
2-3
calculate the anion gap (chloride and HCO,). In this case.
Sp. Gr.
1.016
RBCs/hpf 
2-3
uremic acids, phosphate, albumin, and most importantly.
 Protein 
1+
Epith cells/hpf 
1-3 transitional
metabolites of ethylene glycol are probably contributing to
3n15
1+
Casts/lpf
the anion gap and a high-gap metabolic acidosis.
 Bilirubin 
 Negative
Crystals 
 Calcium oxalate
The calculated osmolality is increased, since the substances
monohydrate
Bacteria
that are included in the formula to calculate osmolality are
Blood 
1+
0
PH
5.0
increased (glucose, urea, sodium, potassium). However, the
measured plasma osmolality is much higher than the calcu-
lated osmolality, since a substance is present in the blood
that is not used in the formula to calculate osmolality. The
most common cause of an increased osmole gap is the pres-
668
Case 30
ence of ethylene glycol, which contributes to plasma osmo-
Summary
lality due to its low molecular weight.
The cat died, and necropsy revealed renal tubular necrosis
and the presence of calcium oxalate crystals in the tubules
Urinalysis
due to ethylene glycol toxicosis. The cat had access to anti-
The urine specific gravity of 1.0l6 in an azotemic dehy-
freeze shortly before it became ill. Approximately 50% of
drated cat indicates that the cat is not capable of concentrat-
dogs and cats with ethylene glycol induced renal failure
ing urine, and that renal dysfunction is present. The presence
have hyperglycemia. probably due to a combination of stress 
 of calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals in a cat with acute
and the formation of aldehyde, a metabolite of ethylene
renal failure is very suggestive of ethylene glycol toxicosis.
glycol that interferes with glucose metabolism. While diabe-
The renal threshold for glucose has been exceeded, resulting
tes mellitus could cause hyperglycemia and metabolic aci-
in glucosuria. The l+ proteinuria is probably significant in
dosis, the presence of acute renal failure and calcium oxalate
light of the low urine specific gravity and probably resulted
crystalluria should prompt consideration of ethylene glycol
from tubular damage.
toxicosis.
669
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
Signalment: 3-month-old Saint Bernard
The BUN and creatinine are normal in this dog that has a
History: Stumbling for 4 hours
Physical examination: Cannot stand, in a stupor
begins between 24 and 36 hours following ingestion. The
Hematology: No abnormalities
history suggests that this dog ingested antifreeze approxi-
mately 5 hours prior to the time of these laboratory data.
 Biochemical Profile
Reference
 Phosphorus is markedly increased. Hyperphosphatermia
Interval 
may be due to the young age of the dog. but is somewhat
high for this. In this case the serum phosphorus increase was
Gluc (mg/dL)
129
65-122
likely due to phosphate rust inhibitors present in most com-
BUN (rng/dL)
20
7-28
mercial antifreeze.
Creat (mg/dL)
1.6
0.9-1.7
Serum alkaline phosphatase activity is mildly increased,
Ca (mg/dL)
11.2
9.0-11.2
lonized calcium (mg/dL)
4.5-5.6
likely due to the bone isoform that is increased in growing
5.6
dogs.
 Phos (mg/dL)
10.2
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
5.8
5.4-7.4
The anion gap is increased, likely due to either phosphates
Alb (g/dL)
2.9
2.7-4.5
or metabolites of ethylene glycol, which are anions. The
Glob (g/dL)
2.4
1.9-3.4
calculated osmolality is slightly increased. However, the
T. Bili (rng/dL)
0.2
0-0.4
actual (measured) plasma osmolality is much higher than
Chol (mg/dL) 
220
130-37
the calculated osmolality, resulting in a large osmole gap.
ALT (IU/L)
60
10-120
since a substance is present in the blood that is not used in
AST (IU/L)
30
16-40
the formula to calculate osmolality. The most common cause
ALP (IU/L)
000
35-280
 of an increased osmole gap is the presence of ethylene
GGT (IU/L)
2
9-0
glycol, which contributes to plasma osmolality due to its low
Na (mmEq/L)
148
145-158
molecular weight. This was confirmed by measuring serum
K (mEq/L)
5.2
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
ethylene glycol concentration.
105
106-127
HCO: (mEq/L)
15.1
14-27
Blood gas data
An. gap (mEq/L)
EE
8-25
The blood pH is slightly low and HCO, is decreased, indicat-
Meas. Osrnolality (mOsmm/kg)
442
290-310
ing metabolic acidosis. Metabolites of ethylene glycol are
Calc. Osrnolality (mOsm/kg)
290-310
acids. Decreased pCO, is consistent with a compensatory
 Osmole gap (rmOsm/kg)
112
0-10
respiratory alkalosis. The blood gases were determined about
Serum ethylene glycol 
>250
0
 concentration (mg/dL)
one hour following the biochemical profile, which probably
accounts for the discrepancy between the HCO, determined
 on the biochemical panel, and that from the blood gas
seg poog
Reference
machine.
 Data (arterial)
Interval 
Urinalysis
 Blood pH
7.305
7.33-7.44
 The urine specifc gravity of 1.012 in this patient is likely
HCO: (mEq/L) 
13.7
16-22
 due to ethylene glycol causing osmotic diuresis. It is also
PCO2 (mm/Hg)
29
35-42
possible that concentrating ability has been impaired, but
the animal is not yet azotemic.
 Urinalysis
Summary
 Urine specific gravity
1.012
 Urine pH
5
The dog was treated with fomepizole, an alcohol dehydro-
genase inhibitor, approximately 7 to 8 hours following anti-
freeze ingestion, and did not become azotemic. In contrast
Interpretive discussion
to the previous case, the biochemical profile is often not 
 Biochemical profile
diagnostic in acute ethylene glycol poisoning. and other
The serum glucose concentration is slightly increased. This
tests, such as serum ethylene glycol concentration or mea-
may be due to stress, although the leukogram is normal.
sured osmolality must be used to confirm the diagnosis. The
Aldehydes, a metabolite of ethylene glycol (see later discus-
acute onset of stumbling and stupor triggered suspicion of
sion). are reported to interfere with glucose metabolism.
ethylene glycol toxicosis.
670
Case 32
case 32
Signalment: Five-day-old male foal
Interpretive discussion
History: Foal was fine at birth, now will not eat
Physical examination: Acts colicky, seems
Hematology
constipated
There is a mild decrease in plasma proteins; concerned about
failure of passive transfer of colostrum but globulins on
chemistry panel are adequate.
 Hematology
Reference Interval
Biochemical profile
PCV (%)
32
28-46
Azotemia is present but there is no urine specific gravity to
Hgb (g/dL)
11
11-16
help determine if this is prerenal or renal azotemia. Recom-
TP (P) (g/dL)
5.6
8-9
mend catheterization to collect urine and determine if the
foal can urinate on its own. UN is mildly increased but cre-
atinine (Ct) is moderately increased, the ratio of UN/Ct is 6.
 This can happen with recent fluid therapy and a more rapid
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
decrease in UN than Ct, but no fluids have been adminis-
 Profile
tered. It could happen with a hepatic shunt and decreased
synthesis of UN and with noncreatinine chromogens in
Gluc (mmg/dL)
80
70-110
horses and cattle. The latter is more lilkely but confuses the
UN (mg/dL)
32
7-27
interpretation of the severity of the azotemia. The increase
Creat (mmg/dL)
4.8
1.1-2.0
in phosphorus is consistent with a decreased GFR; prerenal.
Ca (mng/dL)
9.6
11-13.7
renal, or postrenal causes can do this.
Phos (rng/dL)
10
1.9-3.6
 The key abnormalities are the hyponatremia, hyperkale-
TP (g/dL)
5.9
5.8-7.6
Alb (g/dL)
3.0
2.7-3.7
mia and hypochloremia. The Na:K ratio is low at l6 (see
Glob (g/dL)
2.9
2.6-4.6
comments section). In a foal the most likely differentials are
T. Bili(mng/dL)
3.8
0.6-2.5
diarrhea, ruptured urinary bladder, renal failure and hypo-
AST (IU/L)
229
185-300
adrenocorticism due to a septicemia. There is no evidence
ALP (IU/L)
340
66-180
of diarrhea at this time; renal failure is a possible explana-
CK (IU/L)
237
130-470
tion. To evaluate uroabdomen recommend abdominocente-
Na (mEq/L)
118
133-145
sis and determination of Ct (and or UN) on the abdominal
K (mEq/L)
7.1
2.2-4.6
fluid and in a concurrent serum sample to compare Ct in
CL (mEq/L)
92
98-103
abdominal fluid to serum; they should be equal if the bladder
TCO2 (mEq/L)
18
24-29
wall is intact. Ct (and or UN) will be higher in abdominal
An. gap (rmEq/L) 
10-15
fluid than serum if bladder has ruptured. Hypoadrenocorti-
cism is unlikely: only pursue if other differentials are ruled
out. Bicarbonate (TCOz) is decreased, AG is high end of
reference interval, and there likely is a metabolic acidosis.
possibly due to dehydration and decreased tissue perfusion.
ALP is mildly increased probably due to bone (growth) or
 liver source; does not seem important to pursue at this time.
The bilirubin is increased which could be due to a liver
problem but anorexia is the more likely cause (anorexia is
number one reason for hyperbilirubinemia in horses).
Abdominocentesis
Clear, slight yellow color
TNCC 8500/μL 50:50 neutrophils and mononuclear cells
Total protein (refractive index) 2.8 g/dL
Creatinine (mg/dL)
Abdominal fluid 
9.2
Serum
4.8
671
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Summary and comment: Uroa bdomen
mg/dL higher than the serum Ct. If the bladder wall is intact
the serum and abdominal Ct will be similar or identical. If
There was a hole in the dorsal aspect of the urinary bladder.
the patient is not azotemic then both samples will have Ct
It was surgically repaired and the bladder wall appeared
concentrations WRI, if the bladder wall is intact. If the
healthy at surgery. The foal recovered.
patient has renal failure and is azotemic than the abdominal
 q pas as si ra eun aul jo ad
Ct concentration will be increased to a comparable value, if
obstruction (calculi) in males or excessive trauma (hit by
the bladder wall is intact.
The serum electrolytes and Na :K ratio of less than 20 are
in male foals that appeared fine at birth but gradually
key to consider this differential diagnosis. In dogs the fol-
develop anorexia and other problems. The male urethral
lowing are the four most lilkely differentials and the tests to
lumen is small and apparently does not allow expulsion of
rule in or rule out each differential for this electrolyte
urine easily enough during birth, and the back pressure
pattern:
caused by the mare's strong contractions during parturition
causes the bladder to rupture. There are no calculi obstruct-
ing outflow. Usually there is a history of dribbling urine or
that the foal was seen to urinate. The hole is almost always
 Diagnosis
Test of choice
located dorsally due to the musculature of the bladder wall
and therefore patients may still urinate. If contrast dyes are
 Hypoadrenocorticism 
Basal cortisol; ACTH stimn 
 Renal failure 
Fluid therapy: complete UA;
used to determine bladder integrity the dye may still be
 fractional excretion of Na
retained for the same reason. Comparison of abdominal Ct
Uroabdomen
Compare abdominal and serum Ct 
concentration to serum Ct is the diagnostic test of choice.
concentrations
Abdominal Ct does not have to be twice as great as serum
 Gl - whipworms, Saimonella
 Fecal floatation; fecal culture
Ct to rule in a ruptured bladder, it just needs to be several
672
Case 33
case 33
Signalment 10-year-old castrated male domestic short
Interpretive discussion
hair cat
History Anorexia, lethargy
There is moderate hyperglycemia that exceeds the renal
Physical examination Dehydrated
glucose threshold. There is resultant glucosuria. Ketonuria
indicates impaired glucose utilization by tissues suggesting
insulin deficiency. This establishes a working diagnosis of
 Miscellaneous tests
Reference Interval
diabetes mellitus.
There is marked hypokalemia in the face of acidosis (see
 Plasma glucose (mg/dL)
328
67-124
blood gas discussion), which would be expected to increase 
Urinalysis dipstick
 glucosuria and ketonuria 
potassium due to an intracellular to extracellular shift. It
abnormalities 
would be suspected that total body potassium is depleted
Na (mEq/L)
130
146-160
and there should be caution in insulin administration that
K (mEq/L)
2.2
3.7-5.4
would drive potassium into cells, resulting in weakness due
CL (mEq/L)
74
112-129
to even more severe hypokalemia. There is also hyponatre-
pH
7.28
7.33-7.44
mia and disproportionate hypochloremia. The hyponatre-
HCO; (mEq/L)
9.2
16-20
pCO2 (mmHg)
20
28-34
mia may be due to a combination of urinary and
gastrointestinal loss. The disproportionate hypochloremia is
of a magnitude that suggests upper gastrointestinal chloride 
loss due to vomiting.
The acid-base data show a low pH and decreased bicar-
bonate, consistent with a metabolic acidosis. The decreased
pCO, is a compensatory response (respiratory alkalosis).
There is also a likely hidden component of metabolic
alkalosis (hypochloremic allkalosis), resulting in a mixed
acid-base disorder. The loss of HCl in gastric fluid will meta-
bolically generate bicarbonate. The generation of ketoacids
that require buffering by bicarbonate is judged to be more
severe in the balance between bicarbonate utilization and
production.
Summary
Diabetic ketoacidosis pattern, largely compensated.
673
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 5-year-old spayed female Manx cat
 Urinalysis
History: Decreased appetite of approximately 2 weeks
duration. Fluid draining from a fistula over the terminal
Color
Straw
coccygeal vertebrae of 8 months' duration.
Transparency
Clear
Physical examination: Approximately 6%
Sp. Gr.
1.015
dehydrated. Coccygeal vertebrae were noted to terminate
 Protein 
 Negative
cranial to the anal sphincter. The fistula was noninflamed
2n15
 Negative 
and draining a clear, colorless fluid.
Biirubin
 Negative
Blood
 Negative 
pH
6.5
Hematology
 Reference
Interval
 Fractional
Reference
 PCV (%)
49
24-45
excretion
Interval
NCC (x10²/μL)
11.6
5.5-19.5
Na (%)
E00
<1.0
 Segs (x10°/μL)
9.6
2.5-12.5
(%) 7)
0.08
<1.0
Mono5 (×10/μL)
0.6
010.8
Lymphs (x1 0°/μL)
1.4
1.5-7.0
Platelets (x10²/μL)
 Adequate 
200-500
 Biochemical
Reference
 Profile
Interval
Gluc (mg/dL)
91
67-124
BUN (rng/dL)
82
17-32
Creat (mgy/dL)
2.2
0.9-2.1
Ca (mg/dL)
7.3
8.5-11
 Phos (mg/dL)
5.2
3.3-7.8
TP (g/dL)
8.4
5.9-8.1
Alb (g/dL)
4.1
2.3-3.9
Glob (g/dL)
4.3
2.9-4.4
T. Bili (rng/dL)
0.1
E:0-0
Chol (mg/dL)
153
60-220
ALT (IU/L)
40
30-100
Na (mEq/L)
131
146-160
K (mEq/L)
4.6
3.7-5.4
CL (mEq/L)
101
112-129
TCO2 (mEq/L)
16
14-23
An. gap (mEq/L)
18.6
10-27
674
Case 34
Interpretive discussion
erwise classic scenario for hypotonic dehydration. Although
this cat had been losing CSF for some time, the development
Hematology
of anorexia probably precipitated an imbalance between
The increased PCV is consistent with hemoconcentration
these pathologic losses and replacement of the electrolytes.
due to dehydration. Other data are unremarkable.
resulting in the clinical presentation.
Biochemical profile
Urinalysis
The azotemia (increased BUN and serum creatinine concen-
The urinary fractional excretion values for sodium and chlo-
trations) may be prerenal and/or renal. Refer to the discus-
ride were well within the normal reference interval, thereby
sion of urinalysis below.
ruling out renal loss as a cause for the electrolyte depletion.
There is hypocalcemia, despite hyperproteinemia due to
The only significant abnormality is a urine specific gravity
 hermoconcen tration, suggesting that serum calcium concen-
 of 1.0l5. Dehydration should stimulate antidiuretic hormone
tration may be truly decreased. An ionized calcium could be
release from the hypothalamus, and increased water recla-
measured for confirmation. Hypocalcemia could have
mation by the renal tubules. However, electrolyte loss in this
occurred secondary to chloride depletion and loss of the
type of hypotonic dehydration often leads to medullary
electrochemical gradient needed to support calcium absorp-
solute depletion and a loss of the renal concentration gradi-
tion from the glomerular filtrate in the Loop of Henle of the
ent. Another alternative is that there is renal disease, due to
renal tubules.
renal hypoperfusion, sepsis, etc., resulting in both azotemia
Serum sodium and chloride are decreased in concentra-
and loss of concentrating ability.
tion. This usually reflects increased loss, compounded by
reduced intake in sick, anorexic patients. In this case, there
is physical evidence of cerebrospinal fluid loss from a drain-
Summary
ing meningomyelocele. Cerebrospinal fluid contains higher
sodium and chloride concentrations than the blood, owing
Sodium chloride depletion in a manx cat with a fistulated
to the active chloride transport mechanism employed by the
meningomyelocele (Hall JA, MJ Fettman, JT Ingram. Sodium 
choroid plexus for secretion. Draining CSF from the body
chloride depletion in a cat with fistulated meningomyelo-
will create electrolyte depletion in excess of water, an oth-
cele. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1988;192:1445-1448).
675
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
'ase
35
Signalment: 10-year-old female horse
 Abdominal Fluid Analysis
History: Abdominal pain
Physical examination: Tense abdomen, slight fever
Straw
 Fluid clarity 
Hazy
Hematology
Supernatant color
 Straw
Reference
 Supernatant clarity
Clear
Interval
TP (g/dL)
1.3
PCV (%)
52.0
32-52
NCC (/μL)
300
Hgb (g/dL)
18.1
11-19
 Cytology: There are approximately equal numbers of neutrophils and
RBC (x10%μL)
11.15
6.5-12.5
large mononuclear cells. Although the overall cellularity and protein 
MCV (fL)
46.0
36-52
are low, some of the neutrophils are degenerate and bacteria are
MCHC (g/dL)
34.0
34-39
 seen extracellularly, predominantly rods. Some of the macrophages 
NCC (×10/μL)
14.2
5.5-12.5
 and neutrophils contain cytoplasmic material suggestive of bacterial
Segs (×1 03/μL)
11.8
2.7-6.7
rermnants. There are moderate numbers of lyrmphocytes and rare mast 
Monos (x10²/μL)
E'0
0-0.8
 cells seen. There is debris present in the background.
Lyrmphs (x10/μL)
2.1
1.5-5.5
 Platelets (x1 03/μL)
162
100-600
TP (P) (g/dL)
7.0
6-8
rate. Creatinine is a more sensitive marker for decreased
 Fibrinogen (rng/dL)
200
100-400
GFR in horses because of their ability to excrete urea into
the GI tract. A urinalysis might help differentiate prerenal
from renal azotemia, but the low chloride (discussed later)
 Biochemical
Reference
might affect urinary concentrating ability. There may be a
 Profile
Interval 
prerenal component (dehydration) to the azotemia since the
PCV is at the top of the reference interval. However, the
Gluc (mg/dL)
166
70-110
14-27
normal albumin does not support dehydration, and there
BUN (mng/dL)
23
Creat (mgy/dL)
4.2
1.1-2.0
[uuopqe aui oiui ssof uiaiond yonu aq oi ieadde nou saop
Ca (mg/dL)
10.5
11.0-13.7
effusion (which would lower the serum albumin).
Phos (mg/dL)
4.5
1.9-4.1
There is a slight hypocalcemia, which may be due to
TP (g/dL)
7.1
5.8-7.6
 deposition in injured tissue.
Alb (g/dL)
3.2
2.7-3.7
 Increased CK activity indicates muscle cell damage. The
Glob (g/dL)
3.9
2.6-4.6
T. Bili (rng/dL)
1.4
0.6-2.1
increased SDH activity is specific for hepatocellular injury.
AST (IU/L)
430
185-300
The slight increase in AST activity could be from muscle or
GGT (IU/L)
8
7-17
hepa tocellular injury.
SDH (IU/L)
66
6-0
There is a selective hypochloremia, indicating a hypochlo-
CK (IU/L)
8422
130-470
remic alkalosis. Selective chloride loss can result from upper
Na (mmEq/L)
140
133-145
K (mEq/L)
3.5
2.2-4.6
GI loss or sequestration of CL and excessive sweating in
CL (mEq/L)
86
100-111
horses. In addition, the decreased TCO, and increased anion
TCO2 (mEq/L)
22.6
24-34
gap indicates a high-gap metabolic acidosis; thus there is a
An. gap
35
5-15
mixed acid-base disorder. Uremic acids and lactic acid, sec-
ondary to hypoperfusion, are likely contributors to the
anion gap. A blood gas profile is needed to fully assess acid-
Interpretive discussion
base status in this horse.
Hematology
Abdominal fluid analysis
There is a neutrophilic leukocytosis with low normal lym-
Although the quantitative indices are all within normal
phocyte numbers, which most likely reflects stress, rather
limits, the presence of degenerate inflammatory cells, bac-
than inflammation. The fibrinogen is within normal limits.
teria, and debris are all consistent with an acute rupture of
The PCV is at the top of the reference interval and serum
the intestinal tract.
Summary
Biochemical profile
There is a mild hyperglycemia, which is consistent with
 This mare experienced intestinal colic, followed by acute
stress. The increases in serum creatinine and serum phos-
rupture of the involved strangulated intestine. There had
phorus are likely the result of decreased glomerular filtration
 not been time for an inflammatory leukogram to develop.
676
Case 36
Signalment: 1l-year-old intact male miniature
 Biochemical Profile
Reference Interval
schna uzer
(serum was lipemic)
History: Intermittent vomiting and diarrhea for last two
weeks
Gluc (mg/dL)
124 (6.8)
65-122 (3.5-6.7 mmol/L)
 Physical examination: Tense, painful abdomen.
BUN (mng/dL)
42 (15)
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmol/L)
Very fat.
Creat (mg/dL)
1.2
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
9.8
9.0-11.2
 Phos (mngy/dL)
5.8
2.8-6.1
Hematology
Reference
TP (g/dL)
7.7
5.4-7.4
Interval
Alb (g/dL)
3.7
2.7-4.5
 Glob (gy/dL)
4.0
1.9-3.4
PCV (%)
38
37-55
T. Bili (rng/dL)
10.8 (184.7)
0-0.4 (0-6.8 μmol/L)
Hgb (g/dL)
13.2
12-18
Chol (mg/dL)
1230 (32)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmol/L)
RBC (×10%/μL)
5.7
5.5-8.5
ALT (IU/L)
600
10-120
MCV (fL)
67
60-72
AST (IU/L)
540
16-40
MCHC (g/dL)
35
82-26
ALP (IU/L)
660
35-280
NCC (x103/μL)
17.9
6-17
Na (mEq/L)
148
145-158
Segs (x103/μL)
14.2
3-11.5
K (mEq/L)
4.3
4.1-5.5
Bands (x103/μL)
0.5
E'0-0
CL (mEq/L)
110
106-127
Mon05 (x10°/μL)
0.7
0.1-1.3
TCO2 (mEq/L)
24
14-27
Lymphs (×1 0²/μL)
2.5
1-4.8
An. gap (rmEq/L)
18
8-25
Platelets (x10°/μL)
250
200-500
Armylase (IU/L)
510
50-1250
TP (P) (g/dL)
9.0
8-9
Lipase (IU/L)
120
095-0E
 Hermopathology: Moderate polychromasia 
Urinalysis (voided)
Color
Yellow
Urine Sediment
 Transparency 
Apnop
WBCs/hpf
>50
Sp. Gr.
1.022
RBC s/hpf
0-1
 Protein 
+E
 Epith cells/hpf
0
n5
 Negative
 Casts/lpf
0
 Bilirubin 
2+
 Crystals 
0
Blood 
 Negative
Bacteria
Many bacilli
pH 
7.0
677
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
The combination of hyperbilirubinemia and increased
serum ALP activity is typical of cholestasis. The increased
Hematology
bilirubin concentration in the urine reflects the hyperbiliru-
The PCV, hemoglobin concentration, and RBC count are at
binemia; conjugated bilirubin is cleared by the glomerulus
the lower end of the reference interval, and it is possible that
and excreted in the urine. Although hypercholesterolemia
an anemia has been masked by dehydration. With a history
is a nonspecific problem, cholestasis is a common cause of
of vomiting and diarrhea and an increased plasma protein
this abnormality and may be an explanation in this case.
concentration, it is possible that this animal is dehydrated.
The magnitude of the hypercholesterolemia is unusual for
However, we have no additional support for dehydration in
cholestasis alone. Since this dog is a miniature schnauzer.
these data. Because the serum is lipemic, a likely explana-
 and the serum is lipermic, suggesting hypertriglyceridemia
tion for the high total plasma protein as measured by refrac-
tometry is the presence of lipids, which interfere with the
likely.
reading. The presence of moderate polychromasia suggests
Increased serum AST and ALT activities indicate hepato-
a regenerative response. Blood loss may have caused a
cyte injury. Both of these enzymes are leakage enzymes and
regenerative anemia in this dog (see summary).
are present in significant concentrations in hepatocytes. AST
Neutrophilia with a left shift indicates an inflammatory
is also present in high concentrations and ALT in low con-
leukogram.
centrations in muscle, but muscle is an unlikely source of
these enzymes in this case. In light of the evidence for cho-
Biochemical profile
lestasis, hepatic origin is most likely for these enzymes in
The BUN concentration is only mildly increased and the
this dog.
serum creatinine concentration is normal. Urine specific
gravity indicates inadequate urine concentrating ability in
Urinalysis
the face of possible dehydration (if present) and azotemia.
 Proteinuria, pyuria and bacteruria suggest inflammation in
suggesting possible renal disease. Increased BUN with
the urinary tract. Since these are found in a voided urine
normal creatinine also prompts consideration of prerenal
 sample, reproductive tract origin must also be considered.
azotemia secondary to GI tract hemorrhage (which acts as a
Bacteria in a voided urine sample may be contaminants but
high protein meal).
are more significant when accompanied by pyuria. Culture
Both plasma and serum protein concentrations are
of this urine sample is indicated.
increased, but the plasma protein concentration is much
higher than the serum protein concentration. Because
fibrinogen is present in plasma but not in serum, one
Summary
would expect the plasma protein concentration to be 0.2 t0
0.4 g/dL higher than that of serum. However, the difference
This dog had a suppurative cholangiohepatitis, a duodenal
is often greater because plasma protein concentration is
ulcer, and pyelonephritis. The cholangiohepatitis resulted in
estimated using a refractometer, while serum protein is mea-
the cholestasis and damage to hepatocytes. The chronic anti-
sured spectrophotometrically. Increased plasma concentra-
genic stimulation caused by both cholangiohepatitis and
tion of lipids may falsely increase the protein estimate
pyelonephritis resulted in hyperglobulinemia. The mild azo-
determined by a refractometer. The increased difference
temia could have resulted from pyelonephritis or GI hemor-
between these protein concentrations in this case is likely
rhage secondary to the duodenal ulcer.
due to lipemia.
The hyperglobulinemia may be the result of chronic anti-
genic stimulation with subsequent increase in antibody
production.
678
Case 37
Yase!
人
Signalment: Six-year-old CM German shepherd
Interpretive discussion
History: Receiving prednisone for inflammatory bowel
disease. Losing weight for 6 months.
Hematology
Physical examination: Thin, with multiple hairless
There is a moderate leukocytosis characterized by a mature
scaly skin lesions. Hepatomegaly.
neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and monocytosis. This is most
consistent with a steroid /stress leukogram, which is expected
given the history of prednisone administration. The magni-
 Hematology
 Reference Interval
tude of the mature neutrophilia is slightly greater than that
usually seen with a stress response alone, so chronic inflam-
PCV (%)
8E
09-9E
13.1
mation should also be considered.
Hgb (g/dL)
12-18
RBC (x10%/μL)
4.9
4.8-9.3
Although there is no anemia present there are significant
MCV (fL)
79
58-79
erythrocyte membrane changes observed. Acanthocytes
MCHC (g/dL)
34
82-26
may be seen with liver disease and hemangiosarcoma. Kera-
NCC (x103/μL)
27.8
4-15.5
Segs (×103/μL)
25.5
2-10.5
mentation occurring.
Bands (x10%/μL)
0
E:0-0
Monos (x103/μL)
2.0
0-0.9
Biochemical profile
Lymphs (×10²/μL)
E'0
1-4.5
Eos (×10°/μL)
0
0.1-1.2
The most significant abnormalities relate to the liver.
Platelets (×1 0²/μL)
374
200-500
Increased activities of the leakage enzymes ALT and AST
Hermopathology: Moderate acanthocytes, few echinocytes.
indicate there has been hepatocellular injury. Increased
keratocytes, schistocytes.
activities of the inducible enzymes ALP and GGT may be due 
to cholestasis and/or drug induction, given the history of
steroid administration. The increased total bilirubin concen-
tration supports cholestasis, since there is no indication of
 Biochemical Profile
 Reference Interval
hemolysis, and indicates that hepatic function has been
compromised.
Gluc (mg/dL)
103
70-138
Albumin is slightly decreased, most likely due to the
BUN (mg/dL)
11
6-25
 ongoing inflammatory bowel disease. Decreased production
Creat (mmg/dL)
0.5
0.5-1.6
due to liver failure is less likely since glucose, BUN, and
Ca (mng/dL)
8.4
8.9-11.4
2.5-6.0
 cholesterol are normal. The mild decrease in calcium is lilkely
 Phos (mg/dL)
4.4
TP (g/dL)
5.3
5.0-7.4
due to a decrease in protein-bound calcium secondary to
Alb (g/dL)
2.3
2.7-4.4
hypoalbuminemia. An ionizd calcium could be measured to
Glob (g/dL)
3.0
1.6-3.6
confirm this.
T. Bili(mng/dL)
1.6
0.1-0.3
Chol (mg/dL)
121
92-324
Trig (rng/dL)
102
29-291
Summary
ALT (IU/L)
1041
12-128
AST (IU/L)
101
15-66
There is laboratory evidence for hepatocellular injury and
ALP (IU/L)
640
5-131
cholestasis severe enough to affect hepatic function. Given
GGT (IU/L)
237
1-12
the history of prednisone administration, a steroid hepa-
CK (IU/L)
174
59-895
topathy is most lilkely. Red cell membrane changes may be
Na (mEq/L)
149
139-154
 due to hepatic disease or potentially hemangiosarcoma. A
K (mEq/L)
4.9
3.6-5.5
liver aspirate was performed and revealed marked indistinct 
CL (mmEq/L)
108
102-120
TCOz (mEq/L)
23
15-25
hepatic vacuolization consistent with glycogen, and numer-
ous bile casts indicating cholestasis. These findings were
confirmed on a liver biopsy: there was no evidence of neo-
plasia or inflammation. Biopsies of the skin lesions revealed
 Coagulation Profile
 Reference Interval
 pyogranulomatous dermatitis with intralesional pigmented
 PT (seconds)
7.0
6-12
fungal hyphae. Presumably immune suppression due to the 
aPTT (seconds)
15.9
10-25
prolonged steroid administration predisposed to the fungal
infection.
679
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
-156
Signalment: 5-year-old FS canine
Urinalysis
History: On phenobarbital to control seizures for 2.5
years. Vomiting daily and lethargic for about l month.
Color
Orange
 Urine Sediment
Physical examination: Lethargic, icteric, pendulous
Transparency
Apnop
WBCs/hpf
8-10
abdomen; arthritic and appears older than stated age
Sp. Gr.
1.015
RBCs/hpf
0-2
 Protein 
2+
 Epith cells/hpf
80-100
n5
 Negative 
 Casts/lpf
 Negative 
 Biirubin 
4+
Crystals
 Negative 
Hematology
Reference
Blood 
+E
Bacteria
4+ rods
Interval 
pH 
6.0
Ketones
+E
 PCV (%)
40.0
37-55
Hgb (g/dL)
13.6
12-18
RBC (x10%μL)
5.53
5.5-8.5
MCV (fL)
72.0
60-72
MCHC (g/dL)
82-26
 Coag ulation
Reference
34.0
47.2
6-17
Data
Interval
NCC (x10²/μL)
Segs (x103/μL)
40.1
3-11.5
PT (seconds)
9.8
Bands (x10²/μL)
0.9
E'0-0
7.5-10.5
Monos (x10°/μL)
4.7
aPTT (seconds)
14.0
0.1-1.3
10.5-16.5
Lymphs (x1 07/μL)
0.9
1-4.8 
 Eos (x103/μL)
0.5
0.1-1.2
Platelets (x103/μL)
299
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
5.5
6-8
Interpretive discussion
Hematology
There is a moderate neutrophilia with a mild left shift,
monocytosis, and slightly toxic neutrophils were observed
in the blood film. This is an inflammatory leukogram, but
Biochemical
 Reference Interval
 Profile
the lymphopenia indicates a concurrent steroid-induced
component. Monocytosis is consistent with the combined
Gluc (mng/dL) 
69
65-122
leukocyte response.
BUN (mng/dL)
5 (1.78)
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmo 1/L)
Creat (rg/d1)
0.6
0.9-1.7
Biochemical profile
Ca (mg/dL)
8.1 (2.02)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmol/L)
The serum glucose concentration is at the low end of the
Phos (mg/dL)
5.1
2.8-6.1
reference interval and the BUN is decreased. These findings
TP (g/dL)
4.8
5.4-7.4
may indicate hepatic functional impairment, particularly in
Alb (g/dL)
2.0
2.7-4.5
light of the observation of a potential stress leukogram
Glob (g/dL)
2.8
1.9-3.4
(stress would be expected to increase the glucose concentra-
T. Bili (rng/dL)
4.5 (77)
0-0.4 (0-6.8μmol/L)
tion). See discussion of serum protein below. Decreased cre-
Chol (mg/dL)
126 (3.28)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmo/L)
 atinine likely reflects decreased muscle mass.
ALT (IU/L)
348
10-120
The serum total protein and albumin concentrations are
AST (IU/L)
176
16-40
decreased. Considerations in this case include renal loss (see
ALP (IU/L)
4503
35-280
GGT (IU/L)
426
9-0
urinalysis discussion) and, more likely, decreased production
Na (mmEq/L)
142
145-158
secondary to hepatic disease (discussed more later).
K (mEq/L)
3.3
4.1-5.5
There is a mild hypocalcemia that is likely secondary to
CL (mEq/L)
114
106-127
hypoalbuminemia, and therefore not clinically significant.
TCO2 (mEq/L)
14.8
14-27
An ionized calcium could be measured to confirm this.
An. gap (mEq/L)
16.5
8-25
Serum cholesterol is decreased. While one should not
Lipase (IU/L)
575
095-0E
overinterpret decreases in some analytes, this is commonly
observed in end-stage liver disease, owing to impaired
hepatic lipid synthesis. This is particularly notable given the
 degree of hyperbilirubinemia and increases in enzyme activ-
680
Case 38
ities indicative of cholestasis (ALP and GGT). The magnitude
by the urinary tract inflammation/infection as indicated by
 i aa   e d  i ai 
the significant pyuria, bacteriuria, and presence of marked
consideration of corticosteroid induction. Likewise, the
occult blood. The presence of bilirubin is not surprising given
degree of increase in GGT activity may be related to steroid
the degree of hyperbilirubinemia. The presence of ketonuria
induction rather than cholestasis alone. The serum ALT and
in the absence of glucosuria is unusual. Ketosis is a possible
AST activities are moderately increased, indicating hepato-
sequela to impaired oxidative lipid metabolism by the dis-
cellular damage. Phenobarbital may induce increased pro-
eased liver, especially when triglyceride absorption from the
 duction of several liver enzymes.
The serum sodium and potassium are decreased, and one
hepatic functional capacity for processing.
should consider typical causes for electrolyte depletion,
including pathologic losses from the gastrointestinal and
Summary
lemia is a frequent observation in hepatic disease, often due
to anorexia and vomiting.
There is biochemical evidence of chronic liver failure, cho-
lestasis, and hepatocellular injury. Phenobarbital-induced
hepatopathy was considered. Ultrasound of the liver showed
Coagulation data
an enlarged liver with numerous well-defined hypoechoic
 The APTT and PT are normal. If hepatic disease or end-stage
foci throughout. Masses throughout the cranial mid-
liver failure has progressed sufficiently, as suggested by even
  sss s a   
lower values for glucose, BUN, albumin, and cholesterol.
one might expect these indices of coagulation factor synthe-
Cytology of a liver aspirate showed vacuolated hepatocytes.
bile stasis, and a population of nonhepatic cells with a high
sis to become abnormal as well.
nucleus:cytoplasm ratio, most of which were broken.
Numerous cells in mitosis were observed, and neoplasia was
Urinalysis
The urinary specific gravity indicates the urine is poorly
effaced and replaced hepatic parenchyma, and glucocorti-
This may be due to the decreased BUN, since urea also plays 
a role in urine concentration. The concentrations of protein.
possibly causing the steroid hepatopathy. Endocrine panel
ketones, bilirubin, and blood are particularly notable given 
 was not performed. Dog was euthanized; necropsy was not
this weak urine concentration. The proteinuria is explained
allowed.
681
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
case 39
Signalment: 6-year-old spayed female dog 
Urinalysis (catheterized)
History: Struck by car 1 month ago. Not taken to
veterinarian. Dyspnea since accident. Anorexia.
Color
Yellow
Urine Sediment
Physicalexamination: Emaciated andlethargic.
Transparency
Clear 
WBCs/hpf
0
Intestinal sounds auscultated in thorax.
Sp. Gr.
1.035
RBCs/hpf 
0
 Protein 
 Negative 
 Epith cells/hpf 
0
 Negative
 Casts/lpf
0
Hematology
Reference
 Bilirubin 
1+
 Crystals 
Bilirubin
Interval
Blood
Negative
 Bacteria
0
pH
5.5
 PCV (%)
37
37-55
Hgb (g/dL)
12.3
12-18
RBC (×10%/μL)
6.1
5.5-8.5
MCV (fL)
61
60-72
Interpretive discussion
MCHC (g/dL)
EE
82-26
NCC (x103/μL)
16.1
6-17
Hematology
Segs (x10²/μL)
13.5
3-11.5
 This dog's erythrocyte measurements are near the lower end
Bands (×10²/μL)
0.2
E'0-0
of their reference intervals, and there is no evidence of a
Mono5 (x10/μL)
1.0
0.1-1.3
regenerative response. This may be normal for this dog. or
Lymphs (x10°/μL)
0.6
1-4.8
it is possible that this dog is developing a nonregenerative
Eos (×103/μL)
0.8
0.1-1.2
anemia secondary to chronic disease.
 Platelets (×103/μL)
0EE
200-500
 Leukocyte abnormalities are a mature neutrophilia and
TP (P) (g/dL)
3.3
8-9
lymphopenia, typical of a corticosteroid-mediated leuko-
 Hemopathology: Normal 
gram.
Biochemical profile
Decreased BUN concentration can be caused by hepatic
 Biochemical Profile
Reference Interval
failure, diuresis, decreased protein intake, or treatment with
anabolic steroids. BUN concentration below the reference
Gluc (mg/dL)
77
65-122
interval can also occur in normal animals. In light of other
BUN (mg/dL)
(20')
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmol/L)
Creat (mgy/dL)
1.5
0.9-1.7
laboratory findings in this case, the decreased BUN concen-
Ca (mg/dL)
6.3
9.0-11.2
tration is probably due to hepatic failure and resulting failure
 Phos (mg/dL)
4.4
2.8-6.1
of hepatocytes to synthesize urea. Anorexia resulting in
TP (g/dL)
2.9
5.4-7.4
decreased protein intake may have also contributed to this
Alb (g/dL)
0.6
2.7-4.5
abnormality.
Glob (g/dL)
2.3
1.9-3.4
This dog has hypocalcemia:F
however, it also has
T. Bili (rmng/dL)
3.0 (51.3)
0-0.4 (0-6.8 μmo/L)
severe hypoalbuminemia. Hypoalbuminemia, and resultant
Chol (mg/dL)
102 (2.65)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmmo/L)
decreased protein-bound calcium, may be the cause for the
ALT (IU/L)
170
10-120
hypocalcemia, in which case it is not clinically significant.
AST (IU/L)
72
16-40
Ionized calcium could be measured to confirm this. While
ALP (IU/L)
540
35-280
not always necessary. determining the ionized calcium
Na (mEq/L)
146
145-158
would be recommended in this case because of the magni-
K (rmEq/L)
6.0
4.1-5.5
tude of the hypocalcemia and the critical condition of the
CL (mEq/L)
118
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
11
14-27
patient.
An. gap (mEq/L)
23
8-25
Both plasma and serum protein concentrations are
 Plasma ammonia
150
0-90
 decreased. These decreases are a result of hypoalbuminemia.
(ng/dL)
When interpreted in combination with other laboratory
data, this abnormality is probably due to decreased albumin
synthesis by the liver. Decreased protein intake can result in
hypoalbuminemia and may also have played a role in this
case. The albumin concentration is low enough to lead to
ascites; however, ascites was not noted in this animal.
682
Case 39
In dogs. hyperbilirubinemia can result from hemolysis.
markedly low albumin may be masking an increase in
failure of hepatocyte uptake and metabolism of bilirubin, or
unmeasured anions, thus there could be a hidden high-gap
failure to excrete bilirubin due to cholestasis or other disrup-
acidosis. Abnormal renal regulation of acid-base balance is
tion of bile flow. In this case, failure of hepatic uptake and
another possible cause of decreased total COz, but there is
metabolism of bilirubin is probably the major abnormality
no evidence of renal dysfunction in this case. A blood gas
leading to hyperbilirubinemia. It is also probable the bile
analysis would be helpful to further evaluate this dog's acid-
duct is partially blocked and cholestasis is playing a role in
base status.
producing this abnormality. The increased serum ALP activ-
The hyperammonemia is a result of hepatic failure.
ity suggests cholestasis is present in this dog.
Ammonia is normally absorbed from the digestive tract and
 Hypocholesterolemia is probably another result of hepatic
transported to the liver by the portal circulation. The liver
failure. The liver is a major site of cholesterol synthesis and
is responsible for removing and metabolizing this ammonia.
excretion. Abnormalities of these two processes have oppo-
Alterations in blood flow to the liver and/or markedly
site effects on serum cholesterol concentrations. In this case.
decreased numbers of functional hepatocytes can result in
synthetic failure is apparently more severe than failure to
increased blood ammonia concentrations.
excrete cholesterol.
Both serum ALT and AST activities are mildly increased.
Urinalysis
These enzymes leak from injured hepatocytes, and liver
Bilirubinuria and the presence of bilirubin crystals are the
injury is the appropriate interpretation in this case. AST is
only abnormalities in the urine. These changes reflect the 
also present in muscle cells, and muscle injury cannot be
increased serum bilirubin concentration. Conjugated biliru-
ruled out, but the mild increase of AST activity in conjunc-
bin readily passes through glomeruli and is then excreted in
tion with the increased ALT activity suggests the AST has
the urine. The very mild increase in urine bilirubin suggests
leaked from the liver in this case.
that most of the serum bilirubin is unconjugated. Interest-
Increased ALP activity most often results from either cho-
ingly. this dog is concentrating urine in the face of a very
lestasis or increased blood corticosteroid concentrations. In
low bun.
combination with other laboratory data suggesting hepatic
disease. cholestasis is the most important cause of the
increased ALP in this case. This dog probably had an
Summary
increased blood corticosteroid concentration as suggested by
the leukogram, and this may have also played a role in
Exploratory surgery revealed a diaphragmatic hernia
increasing the serum ALP activity.
through which the liver and a portion of the GI tract had
Hyperkalemia may be a result of metabolic acidosis-
passed. The liver was decreased in size and firm. Many
induced shifting of potassium from within cells to extracel-
fibrous adhesions were present. On the surgeon's recom-
lular fluid. In animals with metabolic acidosis, hydrogen
mendation, the dog was euthanized.
-  ai n ie  u sn  so
This dog had hepatic failure due to chronically decreased
tions in the intracellular and extracellular compartments. In
blood supply to the liver. Decreased BUN, albumin, and
order to maintain electrical neutrality. potassium ions must
cholesterol concentrations suggested decreased synthetic
leave the cells. The net result is increased extracellular and,
function by the liver. Increased bilirubin and ammonia con-
therefore, serum potassium concentrations.
- se r a    
The cause of the decreased total CO, is not certain. Since
stances to the liver and, therefore, decreased removal from
this animal has a comprormised respiratory system, it is rea-
the blood as well as due to decreased functional hepatic
sonable to assume that it has a respiratory acidosis. However.
mass. Cholestasis resulting from partial occlusion of the bile
the total CO, concentration would be expected to increase
duct also contributed to hyperbilirubinemia. Since this was
in compensation for the respiratory acidosis. Since this
an end-stage liver disease, leakage of ALT and AST from
concentration decreased rather than increased, it is reason-
hepatocytes was minimal due to the small number of hepa-
able to assume the dog has another abnormality causing
tocytes remaining, and serum activities of ALT and AST
metabolic acidosis. Although the anion gap is normal, the
were, therefore, only slightly increased.
683
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: Ten-year-old spayed female Doberman dog
se5 po0lg
 Reference Interval
History: Lethargy, weight loss diarrhea, and poor appetite
 Analysis-venous
Physical examination: Depressed, dehydrated.
hypotensive, and icteric
pH
6.92
7.33-7.45
pCO2 (mmHg)
57.3
24-39
pO2 (mmHg)
75.9
67-92
HCO: (mEq/L)
11.3
15-24
Hematology
 Reference Interval
Lactate (mmol/L)
8.4
0.2-1.4
TP (P) (g/dL)
4.7
6.0-8.0
 PCV (%)
41
40-55
Hgb (g/dL)
14.6
13.0-20.0
Interpretive discussion
RBC (x10%/μL)
6.07
5.5-8.5
MCV (fL)
67
62-73
Hematology
MCHC (g/dL)
9E
9E-EE
The hematocrit is low normal, but some degree of anemia
NCC (x10²/μL)
26.6
4.5-15.0
is probable given physical dehydration; the baseline hema-
Bands (x10²/μL)
1.3
0-0.2
tocrit is not known.
Segs (x103/μL)
12.2
2.6-11.0
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
11.9
1.0-4.8
There is moderate hypoproteinemia, to be considered in
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.2-1.0
chemistry interpreta tion.
1.1
 Eos (x103/μL)
0.1-1.2
The leukogram indicates moderate lymphocytosis. The
Platelets (x10²/μL)
06
200-500
presence of mostly abnormal lymphocyte forms indicates
MPV (fL)
13.9
7.5-14.6
lymphproliferative disease that is leukemic. The left shift
 Hemopathology noted on blood film:
with mild neutrophilia indicates concurrent inflammatory
● Most lyrmphoid cells are large with fine granular chromatin;
stimulus. Minimal monocytosis accompanies the inflamma-
interpreted as mostly prolyrmphocytes with some blasts.
tory pattern.
● No platelet clumps found, occasional giant platelets.
There is thrombocytopenia with some giant platelets, indi-
cating active thrombopoiesis. A consumptive process should
be considered.
Chemistry
 Biochemical Profile
 Reference Interval
Renal analytes
The following processes are identified:
Gluc (mg/dL)
65
75-130
BUN (mg/dL)
· Moderate azotemia indicated by BUN and prominent
69
7-32
Creat (mg/dL)
1.5
0.4-1.5
hyperphosphatemia. The creatinine has likely increased in
 this individual, within the reference interval. Increased mag-
 Phos (mng/dL)
13.2
2.1-6.0
Ca (mg/dL)
9.4
9.2-11.7
nesium is due to decreased GFR.
Mg (mg/dL)
3.4
1.8-2.5
TP (g/dL)
3.9
5.3-7.2
evidence of poor perfusion such as lactic acidosis (later). A
Alb (g/dL)
2.4
2.5-4.0
urinalysis, especially specific gravity, would be helpful.
Glob (g/dL)
1.5
2.0-3.8
● Possible renal component requires urinalysis for further
Chol (mg/dL) 
102
130-300
characterization.
T. Bili (rng/dL)
12.6
E'0-0
● The Ca × P is 124 indicating calcification will be occurring.
ALP (IU/L)
1717
20-142
ALT (IU/L)
590
10-110
AST (IU/L)
401
16-50
Liver
GGT (IU/L)
8-0
The following processes are identified:
Na (mEq/L)
138
142-152
· There is hepatocellular injury indicated by increased
K (mEq/L)
4.3
3.5-5.2
CL (mEq/L)
100
activities of ALT/AST.
108-120
 Bicarbonate (mEq/L)
10.5
16-25
● There is evidence of liver function failure in the form of
An. gap (mEgq/L)
32
13-22
probable decreased cholesterol synthesis and marked hyper-
bilirubinemia in the face of near normal HCT.
684
Case 40
· Cholestasis and/or steroid induced ALP are considerations
Summary
 given the ALP magnitude; cholestasis is a likely contributing
factor to the hyperbilirubinemia.
· Biochemical evidence of liver function failure, with hepa-
· Mild hypoglycemia and hypoalbuminemia may also be
tocellular injury and cholestasis. Hepatic infiltrate with
related in part to function failure.
lymphoma should be considered given that there is blood
evidence of lymphoprolifera tive disease.
Protein
● Azotemia likely prerenal; kidneys should be investigated
 There is marked hypoproteinemia due to panhypoprotein-
further.
emia. All potential causes of loss should be evaluated, par-
· Severe mixed acidemia compatible with multiple causes
ticularly GI given the observation of diarrhea.
of metabolic acid and respiratory acid formation.
· Lymphoproliferative disorder.
Acid-base/electrolyte
· Marked panhypoproteinemia.
The following processes are identified:
Recommendations for further characterization would
● There is severe, life-threatening acidemia. This is a mixed
include:
acidosis of two processes.
· Urinalysis.
· There is metabolic acidosis indicated by decreased bicar-
· Evaluation of liver and kidney size with sampling for pos-
bonate. This is most likely related to poor tissue perfusion
sible infiltrative disease (lymphoma).
and development of lactate acidemia, as well as uremic
· Bone marrow for possible infiltrate.
acids.
· Cytometric analysis of blood leukocytes if treatment is
● There is also a component of respiratory acidosis indicated
contemplated.
by the prominent increase in pCO. The respiratory compo-
 As follow-up, the dog was euthanized. Necropsy findings 
nent is likely related to terminal respiratory failure; this
would prompt evaluation of cardiopulmonary function
with marked involvement with lymphoma. The severity of
● Both the pCO, and bicarbonate are counter to any detect-
this change in liver would explain the biochemical evidence
able compensation.
of function failure.
· The increased anion gap is attributable to retention of
renal-excreted anions such as phosphate and sulfate, and
lactate is a contributing factor.
685
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 9-month-old intact female dog
Urinalysis (voided)
History: Struck by car 3 weeks ago. Treated for shock
and released. Listless since then.
Color
 Dark yell ow 
Urine Sediment
 Physical examination: Abdomen distended and
Transparency
Clear
WBCs/hpf
0
fluid-filled
Sp. Gr.
1.030
 RBCs/hpf 
0
 Protein 
 Negative
 Epith cells/hpf 
0
2n15
Negative
 Casts/lpf
0
Biirubin
+E
 Crystals 
Bilirubin
Hematology
Reference
Blood 
 Negative
 Bacteria
0
Interval 
6.0
PCV (%)
OE
37-55
Hgb (g/dL)
10.3
12-18
RBC (×10%μL)
5.45
5.5-8.5
 Body Fluid Analysis
MCV (fL)
55
60-72
MCHC (g/dL)
34
82-26
Color
Red-brown
 Differential
Retics (/μL)
42
≤60
Transparency
Hazy
 Neutrophils 
74%
NCC (x10/μL)
16
6-17
TP (g/dL)
3.8
Lymphs 
5 %
Segs (x103/μL)
12.8
3-11.5
NCC (/μL)
0088
 Macrophages
21 %
Bands (x10²/μL)
0.5
E'0-0
 Other observations: Neutrophils are nondegenerate. Lyrmphocytes are 
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
2.7
1-4.8
uniformly small. Large mmononuclear cells are a mixture of reactive
 Platelets (x10²/μL)
270
200-500
mesothelial cels and macrophages. Macrophages contain large
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.5
6-8
anounts of blue-green pigment, suggestive of bile. No micro-
 Hemopathology: Slight hypochromasia, moderate number of 
 organisms are evident. Moderate nummbers of erythrocytes are present.
keratocytes
Biochernical
 Reference Interval
 Profile 
Gluc (mg/dL)
65
65-122
 BUN (rng/dL)
25
7-28
Creat (mgy/dL)
1.2
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
8.4 (2.1)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmol/L)
 Phos (mng/dL)
6.0
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
5.8
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
2.5
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
3.3
1.9-3.4
T. Bili
0.5 (8.5)
0-0.4 (0-6.8μmol/L)
Chol (mg/dL)
170
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
23
10-120
AST (IU/L)
28
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
51
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
139
145-158
K (mEq/L)
5.2
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
105
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
15
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
24
8-25
686
Case 41
Interpretive discussion
marked increase in urine bilirubin concentration. Dogs have
a low renal threshold for bilirubin, and, in dogs with abnor-
Hematology
malities of hepatic conjugated bilirubin excretion, urine bili-
This dog has a nonregenerative anemia. The indices reveal
that this anemia is microcytic and borderline hypochromic.
biliruhin concentration, or urine bilirubin concentration
These abnormalities, in combination with the presence of
may be markedly increased while serum bilirubin concen-
hypochromasia and keratocytes observed on the blood film,
tration is only mildly increased.
indicate iron deficiency. Serum iron concentration should be
Hyponatremia and hypochloremia were probably caused
measured in this dog. Although the most common cause of
by dilution of these electrolytes in an increased volume of
iron deficiency is chronic blood loss, there is no history of
extracellular fluid. This increased fluid volume is a result of
 such blood loss in this case. In most such cases, examination
accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity. This "third-
of feces will reveal the presence of blood. GI parasites such
spacing" phenomenon commonly results in hyponatremia
as hookworms, should also be considered.
and hypochloremia.
Borderline neutrophilia with a slight left shift suggests a
mild tissue demand for neutrophils, and, therefore, a mild
Urinalysis
inflammatory process. It is likely that the anemia is non-
Marked bilirubinuria and presence of bilirubin crystals are
regenerative due to the presence of inflammation (anemia
the only abnormalities in the urinalysis. These changes prob-
of inflammatory disease).
ably resulted from increased passage of conjugated bilirubin
into the blood with subsequent renal excretion. Either cho-
Biochemical profile
lestasis or rupture of the bile duct or gall bladder could be
The blood glucose concentration is at the bottom of the refer-
an underlying cause.
ence interval. Decreased carbohydrate intake or decreased
hepatic production are possible causes. Since there is little
evidence of hepatic failure in this case, decreased intake
Abdominal fluid analysis
appears to be the most lilkely explanation. Alternatively. it
Based on the total nucleated cell count and on the predomi-
may be normal for this dog.
nance of neutrophils, the peritoneal fluid should be classi-
The hypocalcemia may be a result of hypoalbuminemia.
fied as an exudate. Since neutrophils are nondegenerate and
         
bacteria are absent, this is probably a nonseptic exudate. The
calcium could be measured to confirm this.
pigment noted in macrophages is suggestive of bile and.
The mild hypoalbuminemia is probably due to decreased
therefore, gall bladder or bile duct rupture are likely.
protein intake or decreased amino acid absorption from the
GI tract. Evidence of hepatic failure is not present, and urine
protein concentration is normal; therefore, decreased
Summary
albumin production by the liver and increased albumin loss
Exploratory surgery revealed a ruptured gall bladder. Due to
the evidence of iron deficiency, chronic blood loss should be
severe adhesions throughout the peritoneal cavity. the
considered as a cause of hypoalbuminemia in this case;
 owner was offered a guarded prognosis. The owner opted
however globulin concentration usually decreases propor-
for euthanasia.
tionally with albumin concentration during blood loss. The
Bilirubin leaking with bile into this dog's peritoneal cavity
globulin concentration may. however, have been increased
was reabsorbed through the peritoneal wall. The bilirubin
in this dog due to chronic antigenic stimulation, and this
entered the blood and was efficiently excreted by the
would explain a normal globulin concentration despite
kidneys. As a result, serum bilirubin concentration increased
blood loss severe enough to result in hypoalbuminemia.
only slightly while urine bilirubin concentration increased
The combination of increased serum and urine bilirubin
markedly. Serum activities of the hepatic leakage enzymes.
  ae   s 
ALT and AST, did not increase since there was no direct liver
of conjugated bilirubin. The serum bilirubin concentration,
injury. Serum activity of ALP did not increase since there
while increased, appears inappropriately low in light of the
was no cholestasis.
687
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 2-year-old male mixed breed dog
Interpretive discussion
History: Weight loss, lethargy
 Physical examination: Thin dog, pendulous
Biochemical profile
abdomen
A number of factors in the profle suggest liver failure. These
Hematology: Unremarkable
include a borderline low glucose, low BUN, hypoprotein-
emia characterized by severe hypoalbuminemia, and a
markedly low cholesterol concentration. Hepatic enzymes
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
are often normal with end-stage liver disease. An alterna-
Profile
tive, but less likely, possibility for this pattern is severe star-
vation. The increased bile acids indicate decreased liver
Gluc (mg/dL)
64 (3.5)
65-122 (3.5-6.7mmol/L)
function and help confirm end-stage liver disease.
BUN (rng/dL)
6 (2.1)
7-28 (2.5-10.0 mmol/L)
Hypocalcemia may be due to hypoalbuminemia, in which
Creat (mg/dL)
1.0
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
7.4 (1.85)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmo/L)
case it is clinically insignificant. An ionized calcium could be
measured to confirm this.
Phos (mmg/dL)
2.8
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
4.2
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
1.2
2.7-4.5
Body fluid analysis
Glob (g/dL)
3.0
1.9-3.4
The abdominal fluid has the typical features of a transudate.
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.4
0-0.4
With end-stage liver disease this is due to a combination of
Chol (mg/dL)
65 (1.7)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmo/L)
hypoalbuminemia and increased portal blood pressure
ALT (IU/L)
30
10-120
resulting in transudation of fluid into the cavity.
ALP (IU/L)
260
35-280
Bile Acids (μmol/L)
OE
0'6-0'6
Na (mEq/L)
146
145-158
Summary
K (mEq/L)
4.1
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
115
106-127
Hepatic cirrhosis; end-stage liver disease.
 Abdominal Fluid Analysis
TP (g/dL)
1.0
NCC (/μL)
1500
Segs (%)
60
Lynphs (%)
22
Macrophages (%)
18
 Morphology: neutrophils nondegenerate
688
Case 43
.ase
Signalment: 3-month-old intact female dog
Biochemical
Reference Interval 
History: Anorexia, depression, and diarrhea of one
 Profile
week duration. Poor growth rate.
 Physical examination: Severe, diffuse dermatitis 
Gluc (mg/dL)
40 (2.2)
65-122 (3.5-6.7mmol/L)
with multifocal ulcerative lesions
BUN (mg/dL)
4 (1.43)
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmol/L)
Creat (rngy/dL)
E'0
0.9-1.7
Hematology
Ca (mg/dL)
7.8 (1.95)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmol/L)
Reference
 Phos (mgy/dL)
2.0 (0.65)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2. 0mmol/L)
Interval
TP (g/dL)
2.9
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
1.7
2.7-4.5
PCV (%)
13
37-55
Glob (g/dL)
1.2
1.9-3.4
Hgb (g/dL)
4.5
12-18
T. Bili (rng/dL)
5.5-8.5
0.2
RBC (x10%/μL)
0-0.4
2.5
(7p/6u) 104)
142
MCV (fL)
52
60-72
130-370
8E-EE
ALT (IU/L)
15
MCHC (g/dL)
10-120
35
AST (IU/L)
22
16-40 
Retic (x10°/μL)
2.5
<60
ALP (IU/L)
E9
35-280
NCC (x10²/μL)
1.6
6-17
GGT (IU/L)
6
9-0
Segs (×103/μL)
0.5
3-11.5
Na (mEq/L)
141
145-158
Bands (x10%/μL)
0.1
E'0-0
K (mEq/L)
3.7
4.1-5.5
Mono5 (x103/μL)
0.1
0.1-1.3
CL (mEq/L)
114
0.9
1-4.8
106-127
Lymphs (×10²/μL)
TCO2 (mEq/L)
17
14-27
Platelets (x10²/μL)
340
200-500
An. gap (mEq/L)
14
8-25
TP (P) (g/dL)
3.4
8-9
Fasting Bile acids 
88
<10
 Hermopathology: Markedly toxic neutrophils, few RBC fragment5.
(μmol/L)
Iron (μg/dL)
50 (8.95)
60-110 (10.7-19.7 μmo/L)
Urinalysis (cystocentesis)
Color
 Urine Sediment
Transparency
Clear
WBCs/hpf
0-2
Sp. Gr.
1.029
RBC5/hpf
0
 Protein 
 Negative
Epith cells/hpf 
0
2+
Casts/lpf
0
 Bilirubin 
 Negative
Crystals 
Blood 
Negative
Bacteria
pH 
5.0
689
SEcTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
Hypophosphatemia occurs most commonly in hypercalce-
 mic disorders such as primary hyperparathyroidism and
Hematology
pseudohyperparathyroidism, but these are unlikely in a
This dog has a severe nonregenerative anemia. The anemia
3-month-old dog. Other causes include dietary phosphate or
in this dog is microcytic, and the serum iron concentration
vitamin D deficiency. malabsorption syndrome, diabetes
is decreased, suggesting iron deficiency secondary to chronic 
mellitus, and canine Fanconi-like syndrome. This dog
blood loss. Alternately, microcytic anemia is also seen in
appears to have a renal tubular defect (see discussion of
dogs with portosystemic shunt, in which case serum iron
glucosuria). and it is possible that this defect is part of a
may or may not be decreased, and anemia may be secondary
canine Fanconi-like syndrome. In such a syndrome, inade-
t0 other abnormalities in iron metabolism. Red blood cell
quate tubular reabsorption of phosphate results in excessive
fragmentation is a typical finding in iron deficiency anemia.
loss of phosphate in the urine.
While iron deficiency anemia may be regenerative, this dog's
The hypoproteinemia is the result of both hypoalbumin-
bone marrow is not adequately responding. perhaps due to
emia and hypoglobulinemia. These abnormalities, in combi-
viral damage or concurrent anemia of chronic disease.
nation with anemia, indicate that blood loss should be
Severe leukopenia has resulted from a combination of
considered. In this case, it is likely that chronic liver disease
neutropenia and lymphopenia. In a young dog with diar-
is also contributing to hypoalbuminemia.
rhea as well as neutropenia and lymphopenia, parvovirus
This dog's serum bilirubin concentration, serum alkaline
infection with virus-induced bone marrow damage should
phosphatase (ALP) activity, and gamma glutamyltransferase
be a strong consideration. Acute bacterial enteritis resulting
(GGT) activity are normal, suggesting that cholestasis is not
in endotoxemia may result in a similar leukogram. The pres-
occurring. While most forms of liver failure result in some
ence of toxic neutrophils suggests that the bone marrow is
degree of cholestasis, liver failure resulting from a portosys-
rapidly producing neutrophils, and this may signal early
temic shunt usually does not. These normal values, in com-
recovery of previously suppressed neutrophil production, or
bination with the history and other laboratory abnormalities.
may be a response to loss of neutrophils due to rapid.
suggest that a portosystemic shunt is likely. Since this is a
destruction or emigration into tissues as would occur with
young dog. a slight increase in ALP of bone origin would
endotoxemia or overwhelming tissue demand for neutro-
not have been unusual. Despite evidence of hepatic disease.
phils, respectively.
serum ALT and AST activities are normal. Serum activities
Platelets are adequate, indicating chronic marrow failure
of hepatic leakage enzymes such as ALT and AST may be
is not present.
normal to increased in dogs with portosystemic shunts.
The hyponatremia and hypokalemia may have resulted
from diuresis induced by glucosuria, or losses associated
Biochemical profile
with diarrhea. It is also possible this dog's tubular function
Hypoglycemia probably resulted from decreased hepatic
defect includes abnormal reabsorption of Na and K.
glucose production. Numerous diseases can result in hypo-
Decreased intake likely contributed to the hypokalemia.
glycemia, but, in light of other laboratory data, hepatic
Markedly increased fasting bile acid concentration can
failure is the most likely cause of hypoglycemia in this dog.
result from decreased hepatic blood flow, hepatic failure.
or cholestasis. In this case, decreased hepatic blood flow
portosystemic shunts can result in liver atrophy. Such a liver
and subsequent hepatic failure are the most likely
cannot play its normal role in maintenance of blood glucose
explanations.
concentra tions. A second possibility, in light of the decreased
 Blood loss is the most common cause of decreased serum
neutrophil concentration, is that the dog has bacteremia or
iron concentration in animals, although nursing animals
endotoxemia which may result in hypoglycemia. A third
have low serum iron due to inadequate dietary intake. In
possibility is that glucose is being lost through the urinary
this case, however, the decreased serum iron concentration
tract (see discussion of glucosuria).
is probably due to the presence of a portosystemic shunt.
Both the BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are
 Decreased serum iron concentration does not always occur
decreased. Since there is evidence of hepatic failure, it is
in dogs with portosystemic shunts and the cause is not
likely that the decreased BUN concentration resulted from
known, but it appears to he related to iron sequestration in
decreased liver production of urea. Decreased creatinine
tissues such as liver and/or defects in the transport of iron.
reflects decreased muscle mass.
Some cases also have intermittent gastrointestinal bleeding
This dog has both hypocalcemia and hypoalbuminemia.
associated with pica.
d       
 bound calcium secondary to the hypoalbuminemia, in which
Urinalysis
case it is clinically insignificant. An ionized calcium could be
Moderate glucosuria in an animal with a low or normal
measured to confirm this.
 blood glucose suggests a lowered renal threshold for glucose 
069
Case 43
and, therefore, a renal tubular absorption defect. Such a
bile acid concentrations resulted from decreased hepatic
defect may be confined to glucose absorption only, or may
 blood flow and subsequent hepatic failure. Microcytosis has
include defective absorption of several substances. As previ-
been reported as common in dogs with portosystemic shunts.
ously noted, this dog may also have defective absorption of
 This dog also has a renal tubular defect. Glucosuria in the
phosphate, sodium, and potassium. If this is the case, this is 
presence of hypoglycemia, hypophosphatemia, hyponatre-
probably a form of canine Fanconi-like syndrome. Measure-
mia, and hypokalemia are probably a result of defective
ment of the fractional excretion of phosphate, sodium, and
tubular reabsorption of these substances. This defect is
 potassium would have helped in assessing this possibility.
probably a canine Fanconi-like syndrome. Neutropenia
 does not typically occur in either portosystemic shunts or
canine Fanconi-like syndrome, and this dog may have a
Summary
concurrent enteric infection, most likely caused by parvovi-
rus or endotoxin-producing bacteria, resulting in this
This dog had a portosystemic shunt. Hypoglycemia, decreased
abnormality.
BUN concentration, hypoalbuminemia, and increased serum
691
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
Signalment: 6-month-old intact male dog 
Physical examination: Pale mucous membranes.
History: Struck by a car on Day 1
Day 1 blood sample obtained 12 hours after accident.
Hematology
Day 1
Day 6
Reference
Interval 
PCV (%)
29
35
37-55
Hgb (g/dL)
9.6
11.5
12-18
RBC (x10%/μL)
4.7
5.1
55-8.5
MCV (fL)
62
69
60-72
MCHC (g/dL)
EE
8E-EE
Retics (x103/μL)
47
304
<60
NCC (x103/μL)
22.7
20.0
6-17
Segs (x103/μL)
22.0
12.0
3-11.5
Bands (x10²/μL)
0
2.0
E:0-0
Mon05 (x10²/μL)
0
1.0
0.1-1.3
Lyrmphs (x10²/μL)
0.7
5.0
1-4.8
 Platelets (x1 0²/μL)
340
460
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
5.4
6.5
6-8
 Hermopathology: No abnormalities on Day 1. Moderate anisocytosis and polychromasia on Day 6.
 Biochemical Profile
Day 1
Day 6
Reference Interval
Gluc (mg/dL)
125 (6.9)
105
65-122 (3.5-6.7 mmo/L)
BUN (rng/dL)
9
13
7-28
Creat (mg/dL)
1.1
1.3
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
8.9 (2.22)
E6
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80 mmo/L)
 Phos (mng/dL)
5.5
5.6
2.8-6.1
TP (gy/dL)
5.0
6.0
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
3.4
4.0
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
1.6
2.0
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (mng/dL)
E'0
0.4
0-0.4
Chol (mg/dL)
210
180
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
1098
150
10-120
AST (IU/L)
948
80
16-40 
ALP (IU/L)
302
295
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
150
147
145-158
K (mEq/L)
4.8
4.7
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
120
121
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
12
21
14-27
An. gap (rmEq/L)
23
10
8-25
 Urinalysis (catheterized)obtained on Day 1
Color
Urine Sediment
 Transparency
Clear
WBCs/hpf 
1-2
Sp. Gr.
1.019
RBC s/hpf 
3-5
 Protein 
Trace
Epith cells/hpf
0
Glucose
 Negative
Casts/lpf 
 Bilirubin 
 Negative 
Crystals 
0
Blood
Negative 
Bacteria 
0
pH 
6.5
692
Case 44
Interpretive discussion
Both serum ALT and AST activities are markedly increased
on Day 1, but decrease to nearly normal by Day 6. These
Hematology
increases suggest liver and/or muscle injury. High concen-
This dog is anemic on both days. The anemia is more severe
trations of ALT are present in the liver and lower concentra-
on Day l and is nonregenerative. Since the Day l blood
tions are present in muscle. The marked increase in ALT in
sample was obtained 12 hours after the accident, it is likely
this case, therefore, probably resulted from liver injury, but
that the anemia is due to acute blood loss. The concurrent
muscle injury may have also contributed. Aspartate amino-
hypoproteinemia (see discussion below) also supports blood
loss as the cause of this anemia. Increased polychromasia
liver and muscle, and both tissues may be sources of AST in
and reticulocyte count are not evident in blood until 2 to 4
this case. Liver and muscle trauma may explain these
days following acute blood loss. While the anemia appears
increased enzyme activities on Day l. Shock with subse-
quent hypoxia and tissue injury can also result in leakage
rocyte values have increased, and there is evidence of
and increased serum activities of both enzymes. Regardless
increased erythrocyte production (increased polychromasia
of the underlying cause of their leakage. the decreasing
and reticulocyte count). This dog is, therefore, responding
activities of both enzymes by Day 6 imply the damage was
appropriately to the blood loss.
acute, and it is no longer active.
Although normal on both days. the MCV increased
Increased allkaline phosphatase (ALP) activities are likely
between Day 1 and Day 6. probably due to increased eryth-
normal for this dog. Young. growing animals commonly
 n  a u s nd 
have slightly to moderately increased serum ALP activity
immature erythrocytes.
since, due to active bone growth, increased amounts of ALP
The dog has a mature neutrophilia and lymphopenia on
are released from osteoblasts.
Day 1. This is compatible with a corticosteroid-mediated
There is a slight decrease in the total CO, on Day l, sug-
leukogram, resulting from stress associated with pain or
gesting metabolic acidosis. Hypovolemic shock leading to
tra uma.
tissue hypoxia may have resulted in production of acid
Neutrophilia and a left shift on Day 6 are typical of an
metabolites, and decreased renal blood flow may have inter-
inflammatory leukogram. Tissue injury associated with the
fered with renal acid-base regulation. The anion gap. while
accident probably incited an inflammatory response. An
still within the reference interval, is higher on Day l as
infectious etiology cannot be excluded, however.
compared to Day 6. and this may have resulted from
increased blood concentrations of anions such as lactate.
Biochemical profile
Mild hyperglycemia on Day l resulted from stress. The pres-
ence of a stress leukogram supports this explanation.
Urinalysis
Slight hypocalcemia may be normal in this dog since
       
the urine concentration of erythrocytes may be slightly
concentrations than adults. However, the serum Ca concen-
  s     
tration returned to within the reference interval on Day 6.
suggesting that this is the more normal value for this
dog. It is possible that the hypocalcemia on day l resulted
Summary
from loss of albumin and albumin-bound Ca during
hemorrhage.
This dog had a dislocated hip and broken femur. Surgery
Hypoproteinemia and hypoglobulinemia on Day l prob-
was performed between Days 1 and 6. The dog's recovery
ably resulted from loss of protein during hemorrhage.
was uneventful. This case demonstrates a normal response
Although the serum albumin concentration is in the refer-
to acute blood loss. It also demonstrates the importance of
ence interval, this might actually be low for this animal. The
serial measurement of serum enzyme activities in animals
serum albumin concentration increased by Day 6, implying
with increases of these activities. Steady or increasing activi-
that this is the more normal concentration for this dog. All
ties of these enzymes indicates active and continuing
protein concentrations returned to within the reference
damage to the tissue(s) of origin. Decreasing activities
intervals by Day 6, indicating that compensatory mecha-
usually indicate that the injury has ceased and/or is
nisms had replaced the protein lost through hemorrhage.
resolving.
693
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 5-year-old cocker spaniel
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
History: Presented for anorexia and dark orange urine
Profile
and feces. Dog had ITP 2 years previously. and has been
given phenobarbital (l00mg bid) for epilepsy for several
Gluc (mg/dL)
56 (3. 1)
65-122 (3.5-6.7 mmo/L)
years.
BUN (mg/dL)
56 (19.9)
7-28 (2.5-10mmol/L)
Creat (mg/dL)
0.6
0.6-1.5
Ca (mg/dL)
8.5 (2.1)
9.0-1.12 (2.25-2.80 mmol/L)
 Hematology
 Reference Interval
Phos (mg/dL)
6.4 (2.1)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.0mmol/L)
TP (g/dL)
3.8
5.4-7.4
 PCV (%)
13
37-55
Alb (g/dL)
1.5
2.7-4.5
RBC (×10%/μf)
1.95
5.5-8.5
 Glob (g/dL)
2.3
1.9-3.4
Hgb (g/dL)
4.6
12-18
T. Bili (mng/dL)
35.8 (612.2)
0-0.4 (0-6.84 μmol/L)
MCV (fL)
67
60-72
Chol (mg/dL)
64 (1.6)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmmo/L)
MCHC (g/dL)
35
8E-26
ALT (IU/L)
70
16-40
Retics (/μL)
0
0-60,000
ALP (IU/L)
566
18-141
NCC (x10²/μL)
54.9
6.0-17.0
GGT (IU/L)
15
9-0
Metas (x10°/μL)
1.1
0
Na (mEq/L)
160
145-158
Bands (x10²/μL)
6.0
E'0-0
K (mEq/L)
3.2
4.1-5.5
Segs (x103/μL)
43.4
3.0-11.5
CL (mEq/L)
135
106-127
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
1.1
1.0-4.8
TCOz (mEq/L)
9.5
14-27
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.2-1.4
An. gap (mEq/L)
2.2
16
8-26
E05 (×10²/μL)
0.5
0.1-1.2
NRBCs (x10°/μL)
0.5
0
 Platelets (×103/μL)
260
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.3
6.0-8.0
 Urinalysis
Hemmopathology: occasional irmperfect spheres, slight agglutination.
 Coommbs test: positive
Color
brown
Transparency
Apnop
Sp. Gr.
1.022
 Biirubin 
+#
 No other abnormal finding5.
 Bone marrow aspirate
Megakaryocytes present. Myeloid and erythroid hyperplasia, with
paseaap oen 3 : W aeis agneiau ot dn uoeneu jeou
 slightly Rare erythrophagocytosi5.
694
Case 45
Interpretive discussion
fusing. The mild increase in serum phosphorus suggests
decreased glomerular filtration rate.
Hematology
The serum calcium is decreased, likely due to hypoalbu-
The dog is markedly anemic. Reticulocytes are not increased.
minemia. An ionized calcium could be measured to confirm
indicating that the anemia is not regenerative. The presence
this.
of the imperfect spherocytes and agglutination is suggestive
The serum total protein concentration is decreased due to
 of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, possibly very acute.
hypoalbuminemia. Since the globulin is within the reference
or with destruction of precursors. An unexplained nonre-
interval, liver failure would be the best differential, since the
generative anemia. when platelets and neutrophils are
animal is not proteinuric. Another consideration would be
normal and increased, respectively, triggered a bone marrow
that blood loss is causing the anemia and hypoproteinemia,
aspirate. The bone marrow aspirate findings further substan-
but there is no clinical evidence of blood loss.
tiated immune-mediated hemolytic anemia with destruction
The serum bilirubin concentration is markedly increased
of polychromatophilic cells.
and may be due to hemolysis, liver failure, or cholestasis or
Neutrophilia, increased immature neutrophils, and mono-
some combination of the three. The ALT is only slightly
cytosis are indicative of inflammation.
increased, indicating mild hepatocellular damage. The ALP
If the animal has not received a previous transfusion.
activity is increased, as is GGT activity, indicating cholestasis.
a positive Coombs’ test is suggestive of immune-mediated
Alternatively, enzymes may be induced by phenobarbital.
hemolytic anemia.
 Serum total CO, is decreased, suggesting metabolic acido-
sis. This may be secondary to lactic acidosis associated with
Bone marrow
marked anemia. Increased sodium and chloride suggest
In light of marked erythroid response in marrow, anemia is
hypertonic dehydration or administration of hypertonic
either very acute, and will respond, or precursors are being
fluid. The hypokalemia in conjunction with metabolic aci-
destroyed. Because imperfect spherocytes are present on
dosis (which should have caused an increased potassium)
blood film, the latter is more likely.
 suggests whole body potassium depletion.
Biochemical profile
Urinalysis
The serum glucose concentration is decreased. Differentials
 The marked bilirubinuria reflects conjugated hyperbilirubi-
should include insulinoma and, in this patient, end-stage
nemia. Specific gravity is discussed above.
liver disease, since the animal is also hypoalbuminemic and
hypocholesterolemic.
The BUN is increased, and although the creatinine is
Summary
within the reference interval, one would expect the animal
to be concentrating greater than 1.022 if the azotemia is
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, liver failure. and
prerenal. One should consider if the animal is bleeding into
renal dysfunction. The dog died, and necropsy showed
the GI tract, increasing the BUN, or since IMHA is suspected
severe chronic micronodular cirrhosis and cholestasis, pos-
based on the hematology. if the animal has hemolysis with
sibly related to phenobarbital. Bone marrow showed myeloid
subsequent hemoglobinuric nephrosis. If the animal does
and erythroid hyperplasia. Examination of the kidneys
have end-stage liver disease, one would expect the BUN to
     
be decreased as well, so the increase in BUN is slightly con-
chronic interstitial nephritis.
695
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 8-month-old German shepherd
Interpretive discussion
History: Lethargic. "poor doer," weight loss
Hematology
The dog has mild anemia that is not characterized by a
Hematology
Reference
reticulocyte count. The anemia is microcytic suggesting iron
Interval 
deficiency. Microcytosis should also prompt consideration of
a portosystemic shunt in a young dog. Although some dogs
 PCV (%)
34
37-55
52
60-72
with portosystemic shunt will have low serum iron concen-
MCV (fL)
NCC (×10/μL)
44.6
6-17
trations, marked hypoferremia suggests iron deficiency is
Segs (x10°/μL)
38.0
3-11.5
the cause of the microcytosis. There is a marked leukocytosis
Bands (x10°/μL)
2.2
E:0-0
characterized by neutrophilia with a left shift; this is inter-
Lymphs (x10°/μL)
3.1
1.0-4.8
preted as an inflammatory leukogram.
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.9
0.2-1.4
Eos (×10²/μL)
0.4
0.1-1.2
Biochemical profile
 Platelets (x1 0²/μL)
Adequate
200-500
The decreased BUN suggests reduced biosynthesis of urea by
the liver. The same may be interpreted for cholesterol and
 albumin. There is a slight increase in ALT suggesting a mild
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
degree of hepatocellular injury. The markedly increased bile
Profile
acid concentration confirms a defect in hepatic function. The
bilirubin and ALP do not indicate cholestasis. The slight
Gluc (mg/dL)
87
65-122
increase in GGT is of questionable significance.
BUN (rng/dL)
6 (2.1)
7-28 (2.5-10.0 mmol/L)
Hypocalcemia may be due to hypoalbuminemia, in which
Creat (mg/dL)
0.5
0.9-1.7
case it is clinically insignificant. An ionized calcium could be 
(p/6) e)
8.6 (2.15)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmol/L)
measured to confirm this.
Phos (mg/dL)
5.6
2.8-6.1
Decreased creatinine reflects decreased muscle mass.
TP (g/dL)
4.3
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
2.4
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
1.9
1.9-3.4
Summary
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.4
0-0.4
Chol (mg/dL)
75 (1.95)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmo/L)
The findings of reduced hepatic biosynthesis with retention
ALT (IU)
250
10-120
ALP (IU)
129
35-280
of bile acids in a young dog are highly suggestive of porto-
GGT (IU)
7
9-0
systemic shunt.
Na (mmEq/L)
154
145-158
K (mEq/L)
4.1
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
126
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
22.3
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
10
8-26
 Bile acids, fasting 
88.5
<10
(μmol/L)
Serum iron (μg/dL)
22
60-100
696
Case 47
Signalment: 8-year-old male Samoyed
Interpretive discussion
History: Diarrhea
Hematology
Physical examination: Recumbent, arrested prior
to treatment
proteinemia, hemorrhage is the most lilkely cause. The nucleated
RBC are interpreted as part of the regenerative response. There
 Hematology
Reference
is a marked leukocytosis characterized by prominent neutro-
Interval
philia with toxic change and a left shift to myelocytes indicating
inflammation. The mild thrombocytopenia may be caused by
PCV (%)
18
37-55
hemorrhage, and giant platelets indicate active thrombopoiesis.
Retics (x10/μL)
197,830 (7.3%)
<60,000
Biochemical profile and urinalysis
MCV (fL)
66
60-72
NCC (x10/μL)
 There is marked hyperglycermia. This is associated with an
78.0
6-17
Segs (×103/μL)
44.5
3-11.5
expected glucosuria. The magnitude of hyperglycemia
Bands (x10°/μL)
14.8
E'0-0
should prompt consideration of diabetes mellitus. The lack 
Metas (×10²/μL)
3.9
0
of urine ketones makes the diagnosis more difficult.
Myelocytes (x10°/μL)
0.8
0
Moderate azotemia is indicated by increased concentra-
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.8
0.1-1.3
tions of BUN and creatinine. The specific gravity indicates
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
3.1
1-4.8
minimal concentrating ability in the face of azotemia. This
NRBC (x10²/μL)
9.4
0
suggests an element of primary renal disease. However, elec-
Platelets (×10²/μL)
158
200-500
trolyte depletion (see later) may be contributing to the
Hernopathology: Increased polychromasia, target cells, giant platelets.
decreased concentra ting ability. The increased phosphorus is
toxic neutrophils.
compatible with decreased glomerular filtration.
The hypoproteinemia along with regenerative anemia is
compatible with blood loss.
There is a marked increase in ALT activity indicating hepa-
Biochemical
 Reference Interval
tocellular injury. Diabetes is associated with fat mobilization
 Profile
to the liver; this may result in modest ALT activity increases.
Gluc (mg/dL)
580 (31.9)
65-122 (3.5-6.7 mmmol/L)
The magnitude of this ALT suggests more severe injury. There
BUN (ng/dL)
98 (35)
7-28 (2.5-10.0mmol/L)
 n   i r ra  o s
Creat (ng/dL)
3.1 (274)
0.9-1.7 (80-150 μmol/L)
increase in ALP and a minimal increase in bilirubin.
(7p/6u) e)
9.6
9.0-11.2
The hyponatremia is likely due to urinary sodium loss sec-
Phos (rng/dL)
13.1 (4.2)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.0 mmo/L)
ondary to glucosuria (osmotic diuresis). Losses associated with
TP (g/dL)
4.7
5.4-7.4
diarrhea may have contributed. Additionally, cellular water
Alb (g/dL)
2.4
2.7-4.5
may move from the intracellular compartment into the extra-
T. Bili(mng/dL)
0.6 (10.3)
0-0.4 (0-6.8μmol/L)
cellular fluid compartment, diluting serum sodium (expect
Chol (mg/dL)
246
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
1031
10-120
glucose). The hyperkalemia is probably due to a shift of potas-
ALP (IU/L)
2500
35-280
sium ions out of cells in exchange for hydrogen ions, which
Na (mEq/L)
130
145-158
enter cells during metabolic acidosis. Another possibility is that 
K (mEq/L)
6.5
4.1-5.5
CL (mEg/L)
87
106-127
 the animal is becoming oliguric and retaining potassium.
TCO2 (mEq/L)
10.6
14-27
Increased anion gap is due to the presence of "unmeasured"
An. gap (mEq/L)
6E
8-26
anions. In this dog. these likely include phosphates, as well as
lactate, since the dog is markedly anemic. In addition, because
this dog is diabetic, ketones may contribute to unmeasured
anions. Since beta hydroxybutyrate is not detected by routine
Urinalysis
urine dipstick methods, ketonuria may actually be present.
Sp. Gr.
1.017
Summary
35
2+
 Protein 
Further evaluation led to the findings of diabetes mellitus 
0
 Ketones 
and hepatic lipidosis. The enlarged, fragile liver had led to a
0
 No other abnormalities present.
 ii    i  a 
magnitude of the ALT increase.
697
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
48
Signalment: 4-year-old DsH cat
Interpretive discussion
History: Anorexia, weight loss, depression
Physical examination: Thin, icteric mucous
Hematology
membranes
The leukogram shows a lymphopenia with a high normal
concentration of mature neutrophils; this is interpreted as a
stress or steroid leukogram. There are acanthocyte-like or
Hematology
Reference
spiculated cells present. These are commonly observed in
Interval 
cats with liver disease or hepatic lipidosis.
PCV (%)
29
24-45
13.7
Biochemical profile
NCC (x10/μL)
5.5-19.5
NRBC (x10%/μL)
0.1
The mildly decreased BUN may be insignificant or may be
0
Segs (x103/μL)
11.6
2.5-12.5
due to decreased hepatic urea production or decreased
Bands (x10²/μL)
0.1
E:0-0
protein intake. The combination of hyperbilirubinemia and
Monos (x10°/μL)
0.4
010.8
increased ALT and ALP activities is characteristic of hepatic
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
0.7
1.5-7
lipidosis in cats. The combination of the hepatocellular
 E05 (×10/μL)
0.8
0-1.5
injury (indicated by increased ALT) and cholestasis (indi-
 Platelets (×103/μL)
304
200-500
cated by increased ALP) lead to failure of bilirubin clearance
 Morphology: Many acanthocyte-like RBCs, occasional fragrnented 
and hyperbilirubinemia. This degree of increase in ALP
RBC
activity is unusual in cats, other than in association with
hepatic lipidosis. Lipidosis is thought to occur as a result of
 massive fat mobilization from adipocytes in association with
anorexia of several days duration or acute diabetes
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
mellitus.
Profile
Gluc (mg/dL)
67
67-124
Summary
BUN (mg/dL)
14
17-32
Creat (mg/dL)
1.2
0.9-2.1
Ca (mg/dL)
9.0
8.5-11
The biochemical findings are characteristic of hepatic lipido-
Phos (rmg/dL)
5.1
3.3-7.8
sis, which was confirmed by liver aspiration cytology.
TP (g/dL)
6.2
5.9-8.1
Alb (g/dL)
3.0
2.3-3.9
T. Bili (rmng/dL)
6.3 (108)
0-0.3 (0-5. 1 μmol/L)
ALT (IU/L)
30-100
ALP (IU/L)
2185
11-210
Na (mEq/L)
149
146-160
K (mEq/L)
5.2
3.7-5.4
CL (mEq/L)
109
112-129
TCO2 (mEq/L)
19
14-23
698
Case 49
 Signalment Five-year-old female alpaca in the late
 Biochemical Profile
Reference
 stage of gestation
 Interval
History Lethargy. anorexia
Physical Thin, depressed
Gluc (mng/dL)
129
100-132
BUN (mg/dL)
14
12-33
Creat (rngy/dL)
1.7
1.3-2.7
Ca (mg/dL)
8.9
8.0-10.4
Hematology
 Phos (mngy/dL)
3.9
2.5-8.6
Reference
TP (g/dL)
E'9
5.3-7.6
Interval 
Alb (g/dL)
3.6
2.6-4.7
Glob (g/dL)
PCV (%)
28
24-35
2.7
2.7-2.9
Hgb (g/dL)
T. Bili (mng/dL)
12.7
11-19
0.1
0-0.2
RBC (×10%/μL)
12.1
8.8-15.4
(7p,6u) 104
364
12-58
MCV (fL)
23
21-30
(7p/6u) 6u1
4,330
5-30
MCHC (g/dL)
39.2-46.1
β-hydroxybutyrate (mmol/)
26.0
0.2-1.1
45.9
8.4
5.2-15.7
AST (IU/L)
NCC (x103/μL)
474
110-250
Segs (×103/μL)
2.1-9.5
SDH (IU/L)
6.0
17.6
3-10
GGT (IU/L)
76
Monos (x103/μL)
0.6
0-0.6
10-42
Lyrmphs (×10²/μL)
0.9-4.4
ALP (IU/L)
105
20-150
1.3
Eos (×10°/μL)
0.4
E'E-0
CK (IU/L)
45
40-500
Platelets (x10°/μL)
206-3,600
Na (mEq/L)
146
142-156
2.141
TP (P) (g/dL)
9.0
5.4-7.2
K (mEq/L)
3.8
3.6-6.5
 Hernopathology: few reactive lynphocytes, rmild anisocytosis. Grosly
CL (mEq/L)
112
108-122
lipenic plasrna.
TCO2 (mEq/L)
13
19-29
An. Gap (mEq/L)
25
12-25
 Grossly lipemmic serum 
Urinalysis (catheter)
Color
Light yellow 
Urine Sediment 
Transparency
Clear
WBCs/hpf
Rare
Specific Gravity
1.006
RBCs/hpf 
 None seen 
 Protein 
Negative 
 Epithelial cells/hpf
0-1
Negative 
Casts/lpf
0
 Bilirubin 
 Negative
Crystals 
0
Blood 
Negative
Bacteria
0
pH 
9.0
Ketones
1+
669
SEcTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
Urinalysis
The hyposthenuria is of unknown significance at this time.
Hematology
Camelids with hepatic lipidosis are at risk for developing
The plasma protein determined by refractometer is signiff-
renal failure secondary to accumulation of lipid in the renal
cantly higher than the total protein determined on the bio-
parenchyma. Although her BUN and creatinine are normal.
chemistry panel. This is due to the marked lipemia of the
her renal function should be carefully monitored. The alka-
sample. Lipemia occurs when triglyceride concentrations are
line urine pH is normal for herbivores. However, this is
increased. The refractometer estimates plasma proteins by
somewhat surprising in the face of metabolic acidosis and
the bending of light in relation to the concentration of
ketonuria.
solutes in the sample. Hyperlipidemia will cause an artifac-
tual increase in the plasma protein measurement. Although
hypercholesterolemia does not cause visible lipemia, if
Summary
markedly increased it can artifactually increase the refracto-
metric plasma protein measurement.
Increased activities of AST, SDH and GGT along with hyper-
triglyceridemia and hypercholesterolemia are common find-
Biochemical profile
ings in camelids with hepatic lipidosis. Ketosis and metabolic
There is a marked increase in triglycerides and cholesterol.
acidosis also can develop in these patients. Although not
compatible with hyperlipidemia that may develop in sick
measured in this case, nonesterifed fatty acids (NEFA) are
camelids. In this case, negative energy balance accompany-
expected to be increased as a result of mobilization of fat.
ing late term pregnancy likely precipitated this condition.
Hepatic lipidosis can be precipitated by severe negative
The glucose in this case is still normal.
 energy balance associated with late term pregnancy, stress.
 Increased activity of AsT in combination with a normal
 or anorexia. Fat is mobilized to supply fatty acids for energy
   o   
production. However, the supply of fatty acids exceeds the
rather than muscle origin of the AST. Increased activity of
ability to utilize them in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle.
   ia s ria sss oe 
 Fatty acids in the liver are incorporated into triglycerides and
indicator of cholestasis. Increased AST, SDH, GGT, triglycer-
ides and cholesterol are common findings in camelids with
in the hypertriglyceridemia. However, hepatic production of
hepatic lipidosis. Neither ALP nor bilirubin are increased and
have been shown to be less reliable indicators of hepatic
triglycerides accumulate in the cells. Fatty acids also will be
lipidosis in camelids.
 shunted into ketogenesis, resulting in the observed increase
The alpaca is ketotic as evidenced by the increase in serum
in β-hydroxybutyrate and ketonuria.
β-hydroxybutyrate and the presence of ketones in the urine.
The low Tco2 indicates a decrease in bicarbonate and a
metabolic acidosis. A blood gas profile is needed to com-
pletely assess acid/base status.
700
Case 50
Case 50
Signalment: 7-year-old female border collie
Biochemical
Reference
History: Depression, anorexia
 Profile 
Interval
 Physical examination: Ascites, dermatitis of face
and genital area
Gluc (rng/dL)
45
65-122
BUN (mg/dL)
16
7-28
Creat (rg/dL)
1.0
0.9-1.7
 Hematology
Reference
Ca (mg/dL)
9.2
9.0-11.2
Interval
 Phos (mngy/dL)
3.8
2.8-6.1
TP (gy/dL)
4.5
5.4-7.4
PCV (%)
15
37-55
Alb (g/dL)
1.7
2.7-4.5
MCV (fL)
57
60-72
Glob (g/dL)
2.8
1.9-3.4
Retics (x10/μL)
118
<60
T. Bili (mg/dL)
E'E
010.4
NCC (x10/μL)
9.5
6-17
(7p/6u) 104)
86
130-370
Segs (×103/μL)
4.3
3-11.5
ALP (IU/L)
1391
35-280
Bands (x10%/μL)
2.2
E'0-0
ALT (IU/L)
239
10-120
Metas (×10²/μL)
0.6
Na (mEq/L)
147
145-158
Monos (x10%/μL)
0.8
0.1-1.3
K (mEq/L)
2.6
4.1-5.5
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
0.7
1-4.8
CL (mmEq/L)
122
106-127
NRBC (x103/μL)
0.9
0
TCO2 (mEq/L)
8.5
14-27
Platelets (×10°/μL)
20
200-500
 Hermopathology: target cells, acanthocytes, schistocytes, toxic 
neutrophils. giant platelets.
Fluid Analysis (abdominal)
Color
 Straw
Transparency
Clear
NCC (/μL)
1300
 TP (g/dL)
1.5
 Coagulation Data
PT (sec)
20
6.5-9.0
aPTT (sec)
36
12-16
701
SEcTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
due to cholestasis or hepatocellular dysfunction. Increased
 alkaline phosphatase activity suggests cholestasis.
Hematology
Cholesterol is decreased, lilkely due to end-stage liver
PCV is decreased, indicating anemia. Reticulocytes are
disease (see hypoalbuminemia discussion).
increased, indicating that the anemia is somewhat regenera-
Hypokalemia may be due to decreased intake. In face of
tive. MCV is decreased, particularly in light of increased
acidosis, it indicates total body depletion of potassium.
reticulocytes, suggesting iron deficiency anemia secondary
Decreased total CO, indicates metabolic acidosis. The
to chronic blood loss.
decrease is likely due to lactic acidosis in this patient, since
 Inflammatory leukogram is present, as evidenced by the
the dog is not uremic and there is no evidence of diabetic
marked left shift and toxic change in neutrophils. In light of
ketoacidosis.
low normal number of segmented neutrophils, sepsis or
endotoxemia may be present. Lymphopenia suggests a con-
Abdominal fluid analysis
current stress response.
Transudate, l
likely due to liver disease and hypo-
The combination of thrombocytopenia, schistocytes, and
 albuminemia.
prolonged PT and APTT suggests disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy (DIC). Alternatively, this degree of thrombo-
cytopenia may be seen with immune-mediated destruction
Coagulation data
or ehrlichiosis.
While prolonged PT and APPT may be due to lack of syn-
thesis of coagulation factors by the liver, another explana-
Biochemical profile
tion is DIC, in light of the decreased platelets.
Hypoglycemia may be due to sepsis (leukogram is suggestive
of sepsis or endotoxemia). end-stage liver disease, insulino-
nia, or other type of neoplasia, such as a large hepatoma.
Summary
Hypoalbuminemia, in conjunction with low cholesterol.
is indicative of GI disease (malabsorption, maldigestion,
End-stage liver disease; cholestasis
    oa  
DIC
Another possible cause of low total protein is blood loss.
 Inflammation, possibly sepsis
since Mcv indicates iron deficiency anemia. However.
 Iron deficiency anemia
albumin is relatively lower than globulin.
 Dermatitis was determined to be necrolytic migratory ery-
Total bilirubin is increased. While the animal is anemic.
thema (superficial necrolytic dermatitis), which is associated
and blood destruction is a possible cause, the MCV suggests
with hyperglucagonemia, often seen with severe hepatic
blood loss. Therefore the bilirubin is probably increased
disease (hepatocutaneous syndrome).
702
Case 51
 Signalment: 10-year-old spayed female miniature 
 Urinalysis
schnauzer
History: Polydipsia, polyuria, weight loss, abdominal
Color
Yellow
"cramping" for 1 month
Transparency
Clear
 Physical Examination: Tense abdomen, thin with
Sp. Gr.
1.035
mild truncal alopecia and comedones on dorsal midline
 Protein 
Neg
2n15
2+
Ketones
SaN
Hematology
 Reference lnterval
 Bilirubin 
Blood 
Neg
PCV (%)
48
37-55
pH 
6.0
NCC (x10/μL)
34.4
6-17
Segs (x103/μL)
29.0
3-11.5
Bands (x1 03/μL)
2.0
E'0-0
Monos (x10/μL)
3.4
0.1-1.3
Endocrine Data
Reference Interval
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
0
1-4.8
Platelets (x1 0²/μL)
 Adlequate
200-500
 ACTH stimulation:
TP+ (g/dL))
9.0*
8-9
serum cortisol 
4.5 (124)
1-4 (25-110 nmol/L)
* although dog fasted, plasa is markedly lipemic, so refractometric
(μg/dL)-(pre)
measurement of total protein may be falsely increased
serum cortisol
14.6
<20
(μg/dL)-(post)
Low dose dexamethasone suppression test:
serum cortisol
3.5
1-4
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
(μg/dL)-(pre)
 Profile 
serum cortisol
1.5
<1.5
1no4-8)-{(7p/5m)
Gluc (mg/dL)
353 (19.4)
65-122 (3.7-6.8 mmol/L)
post)
BUN (mg/dL)
35 (12.5)
7-28 (6.1-11.4 mmol/L)
Creat (mmg/dL)
1.2
0.9-1.7
Ca (mng/dL)
11.0
9.0-11.2
 Phos (mg/dL)
6.0
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
6.0
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
2.7
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
3.3
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (rmng/dL)
1.2 (26.5)
0-0.4 (0-6.8 μmol/L)
Chol (ng/dL)
900 (23.4)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmol/L)
ALT (IU/L)
86
10-120
ALP (IU/L)
1200
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
139
145-158
K (mEq/L)
3.1
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
100
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
12.2
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
OE
8-25
Lipase (IU/L)
3500
095-0E
703
SEcTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
ketone tests that use the nitroprusside reaction do not
detect β-hydroxybutyric acid; therefore, the presence of this
Hematology
ketone cannot be ruled out. Other possibilities include lactic
Lymphopenia is indicative of increased endogenous (stress
acidosis.
or hyperadrenocorticism)  or  exogenous corticosteroids.
Serum lipase activity is increased. In this patient, this
Increased immature neutrophil concentration is indicative
increase could partially be due to decreased GFR, as indi
of inflammation. Neutrophilia may be due to inflammation
cated by azotemia. However, the inflammatory leukogram,
or stress. In summary, an inflammatory and stress (steroid)
increased bilirubin, increased alkaline phosphatase activity.
leukogram is present.
hyperglycemia, and lipernia are also suggestive of pancreati-
tis. This magnitude of lipase increase is highly supportive
Biochemical profile
of pancreatitis. Prerenal azoternia due to hemoconcentra-
Hyperglycemia is of the magnitude that diabetes mellitus
tion and poor renal perfusion is a common complication
should be suspected. Hyperglycemia may also be secondary
of pancreatitis. Likewise, so is hepatocellular injury and
to hyperadrenocorticism; therefore, adrenocorticotropic
cholestasis.
hormone (ACTH) stimulation and low dose dexamethasone
suppression tests (LDDS) are indicated.
Urinalysis
 a   a    s
Urine specific gravity of 1.035 indicates the dog is capable
interval. Urine specific gravity indicates kidneys are capable
of concentrating. thus the increase in BUN is prerenal
of concentrating. thus the azotemia is prerenal, perhaps clue
(perhaps dehydration). Glucosuria and bilirubinuria are to
to dehydration. However, albumin is within reference inter-
he expected in light of the serum concentrations.
val. The PCV is normal, suggesting that GI bleeding is not 
the cause of the increased BUN.
Total bilirubin is increased suggesting cholestasis, because
Endocrine data
anemia is not present. Alkaline phosphatase activity is
ACTH stimulation test: Baseline cortisol is slightly above
increased, which is also suggestive of cholestasis. Another
normal. Normal animals stimulate to around 10 to l6 μg/dL.
consideration is hyperadrenocorticism, with an increase in
Low dose dexamethasone suppression test: Baseline cortisol
the corticosteroid-induced alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme.
is normal. Dog suppressed marginally at 8 hours. The endo-
Increased cholesterol of this magnitude is probably due to
crine data are not supportive of hyper-adrenocorticism.
lipidemia, although some component of the increase could
also be due to cholestasis. ALT activity is increased, which is
indicative of hepa tocellular damage.
Summary
Sodium and chloride concentrations are decreased.
Sodium may be lost through the kidney, although this
This dog has primary hyperlipidemia, which has been shown
animal is capable of concentrating. Although it is not men-
to be familial in miniature schnauzers (Rogers WA, EF
tioned in the history, abdominal pain may have been associ-
Donovan, GJ Kociba. Idiopathic hyperlipoproteinenia in
ated with vomiting. which would result in electrolyte loss.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Ass0c 1975;166:1087-1091), and pan-
Hyperglycemia results in increased serum osmolality with a
creatitis with secondary diabetes mellitus. Dogs with hyper-
shift of intracellular fluid to extracellular fluid in an attempt
lipidemia are predisposed to development of pancreatitis.
to decrease extracellular fluid solute concentration. Sodium
While diabetes mellitus may be transitory, treatment is indi-
can be expected to decrease by 1.6 mEq/L for every 100 mg/
cated. Some abnormalities (hyperglycemia, stress leuko
dL increase in glucose.
gram, increased alkaline phosphatase activity. lipemia.
 Total CO, is decreased, indicating metabolic acidosis. The
 history, and physical appearance) were suggestive of hyper-
anion gap is increased, indicating increased unmeasured
adrenocorticism. This possibility was ruled out by the ACTH
anions are present. In this case, unmeasured anions might
 stimulation and LDDS test. Imaging revealed evidence of
be ketones, although they are not present in the urine. Urine
swelling in the area of the pancreas.
704
Case 52
.ase
Signalment: 9-year-old SF canine, miniature
Urinalysis
schnauzer
History: Not eating, vomited a few times
Color
Golden 
Urine Sediment
 Physical examination: Tense abdomen
Transparency
Apnol
WBCs/hpf
2-3
Sp. Gr.
1.034
RBCs/hpf 
3-5
 Protein 
2+
 Epith cells/hpf 
 Negative
n5
4+
Casts/lpf
Hematology
2
Reference
Bilirubin
+E
Crystals 
 Negative
Interval
Blood 
2+
Bacteria 
 Negative
pH
8.0
PCV (%)
32.0
37-55
ketones
Negative 
MCV (fL)
68.0
60-72
NCC (x103/μL)
5.2
6-17
Segs (×103/μL)
2.7
3-11.5
Bands (x1 03/μL)
1.4
E'0-0
 Coagulation 
Reference
Mon05 (x10²/μL)
0.2
0.1-1.3
Data
Lyrmphs (x10²/μL)
Interval
0.6
1-4.8
Ba5ophils (x10²/μL)
0.1
rare
PT (seconds)
9.3
7.5-10.5
Platelets (x10°/μL)
111
200-500
aPTT (seconds)
19.5
10.5-16.5
Hermopathology: marked toxic neutrophils. glant platelets, hemolyzed 
and lipemic
 Abdominal Fluid Analysis
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
Color
Red
 Profile
Supernatant 
 Light yellow
Refractommetric protein (g/dL)
7.2
Gluc (mg/dL)
226 (12.4)
65-122 (3.5-6.7 mmol/L)
NCC (x10°/μL)
2.0
BUN (mng/dL)
20
7-28
Triglycericde (mg/dL)
257
Creat (mng/dL)
1.2
0.9-1.7
Chol (mg/dL)
728
Ca (mg/dL)
8.2 (2.0)
9.0-11.2 (2.2-2.8 mmol/L)
Phos (mg/dL)
5.1
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
5.0
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
1.8
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
3.2
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (rng/dL)
1.4 (23.9)
0-0.4 (0.6-8.4 μmol/L)
Chol (ng/dL)
666 (17.3)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmol/L)
ALT (IU/L)
EE
10-120
AST (IU/L)
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
1282
35-280
GGT (IU/L)
5
9-0
Na (mmEq/L)
152
145-158
K (mEq/L)
3.7
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
116
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
14
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
25
8-25
Armylase (IU/L)
2421
50-1250
Lipase (IU/L)
2256
095-0E
Triglycerides (rng/dL)
2884
ND *
*Not Determined 
705
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
longed hypertipidemia. The concurrent findings of
hyperlipidemia and pancreatitis in a miniature schnauzer
Hematology
should alert one to the potential diagnosis of a primary
The PCV is mildly decreased, no polychromasia was noted
dyslipidemia.
in the blood film, and the McV is normal, indicating a mild
nonregenerative anemia. Marked lipemia and hemolysis
Coagulation data
 n  '      
The coagulation profile includes a normal PT, but prolonged
does not result in an important decrease in the PCV. There
APTT. While it is more common for the PT to become pro-
is a neutropenia with increased bands and marked numbers
-  n  si aun a ir 
of toxic neutrophils. This suggests consumption as a result
thesis by the liver, incipient DIC (note the thrombocytopenia)
of severe inflammatory disease. Lymphopenia indicates a
  s u ls  ad an n a 
stress component. The thrombocytopenia is discussed with
APTT alone.
the coagulation data.
Abdominal fluid analysis
Biochemical profile
Abdominal fluid chemical analysis similarly indicates accu-
The serum glucose concentration is moderately increased.
mulation of excess lipids in the peritoneal cavity. It is likely
In this range, it is possible that this is a stress hyperglycemia.
that the increased total protein by refractometry is spuri-
but is more likely due to some metabolic or endocrine
 ously elevated by this lipid. The cell concentration suggests
abnormality
a modified transudate.
The BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are normal.
The serum phosphorus is normal, but there is a mild decrease
in serum total calcium concentration. Given the degree of
Urinalysis
hypoalbuminemia, it is wise to attempt to correct the total
 The urine specific gravity indicates that the kidneys are
 capable of concentrating. and the number of leukocytes and
value is 9.9 mg/dL (8.2-1.8 + 3.5), which is normal.
erythrocytes are not significant. However, there is 2+ pro-
The serum cholesterol concentration is markedly increased.
teinuria, some occult blood, and some hyaline and fine
While this may be associated with cholestasis, given the
granular casts. Thus, there may be mild tubular and/or glo-
degree of increase in cholesterol one should also consider
merular disease. In addition, there is significant glucosuria,
other metabolic abnormalities including hepatic disease, dis-
which is explained by the hyperglycemia, It would be useful
orders of lipoprotein metabolism, or endocrinopathies. The
to evaluate the UPC in order to determine the magnitude of
serum triglyceride concentration is markedly increased, and
the proteinuria. Given the hypoalbuminemia and hypercho-
further supports a diagnosis of a metabolic and/or endocri-
lesterolemia, one should consider, the possibility of nephrotic
nologic disorder. Cholestasis is indicated by the increased
syndrome; there may be a protein-losing glomerulopathy
total bilirubin and ALP activity. The serum ALT, AST, and
without azotemia.
GGT activities are normal or near normal, reducing the
likelyhood of hepatocellular injury.
The serum amylase and lipase activities are significantly
Summary
increased, and in the absence of azotemia suggest acute
pancreatitis. This is a frequent complication of severe pro-
Minature schnauzer hyperlipidemia and acute pancreatitis.
706
Case 53
Signalment: 1l-year-old castrated male cat
Urinalysis (cystocentesis)
History: Polyuria and polydipsia for 2 months, anorexia
and lethargy more recently
Color
Yellow
 Urine Sediment
Physical examination: Presented in lateral
Transparency
Apno
WBCs/hpf
6-8
recumbency, 10% dehydrated
Sp. Gr.
1.034
RBCs/hpf 
2-3
 Protein 
2+
Epith cells/hpf 
1-3 transitional
Hematology
Reference
n5
2+
Casts/lpf 
0
 Bilirubin 
Negative
Interval
Crystals
0
4+
Bacteria 
0
PCV (%)
40
24-45
pH 
5.0
Ketones 
Negative
Hgb (g/dL)
12.8
8-15
Other
Small amnt of fat 
RBC (x10%/μ1)
8.64
5-11
MCV (fL)
46
05-66
MCHC (g/dL)
34
33-37
Interpretive discussion
NCC (x10²/μ1)
18.7
5.5-19.5
Segs (x10²/μ1)
15.0
2.5-12.5
Hematology
Bands (x10%/μ1)
2.4
E'0-0
Leukogram abnormalities include neutrophilia, a left shift,
Monos (x103/μ1)
0.2
0-0.8
lymphopenia, and slightly toxic neutrophils. This is an
Lyrmphs (x10²/μ1)
0.9
1.5-7.0
inflammatory leukogram indicating a tissue demand for
E05 (x103/μ1)
0.2
0-1.5
neutrophils. The lymphopenia suggests concurrent increase
Platelets (x10°/μ1)
375
200-500
in corticosteroid concentrations due to stress. Toxic neutro-
TP (P) (g/dL)
11.7
6-8
phils indicate a rapid rate of neutrophil production.
Hernopathology: Slightly toxic neutrophils, many echinocyte5.
Echinocyte formation can be an artifact, but in this case.
it may have resulted from the marked hyperosmolality and
electrolyte abnormalities. These may have caused move-
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
ment of water from the cytoplasm of erythrocytes to the
 Profile
plasma with
 resulting shrinkage and crenation
of
erythrocytes.
Gluc (mg/dL)
766 (42.7)
67-124 (3.7-6.8 mmol/L)
BUN (ng/dL)
127 (45.3)
17-32 (6. 1-11.4 mmol/L)
Creat (rng/dL)
Biochemical profile
6.4 (566)
0.9-2.1 (78-186 μmol/L)
Ca (mg/dL)
10.1
8.5-11
The serum glucose concentration is markedly increased. The
Phos (mg/dL)
7.9 (10.0)
3.3-7.8 (1.1-2.5 mmol/L)
 most likely cause of hyperglycemia of this magnitude is
TP (g/dL)
9.7
5.9-8.1
diabetes mellitus. Severe, acute excitement with release of
Alb (g/dL)
4.4
2.3-3.9
catecholamines can cause marked hyperglycemia in cats, but 
Glob (g/dL)
5.3
2.9-4.4
serum glucose concentration is seldom greater than 400 mg/
T. Bili (mg/dL)
0.3
E'0-0
dL in such cats. This cat is azotemic, and decreased renal
Chol (ng/dL)
388 (10.1)
60-220 (1.6-5.7 mmo/L)
excretion of glucose, secondary to decreased glomerular fil-
ALT (IU/L)
124
30-100
tration rate, may have augmented the magnitude of the
AST (IU/L)
354
14-38
hyperglycemia. Moreover, the cat does not have an excite-
ALP (IU/L)
65
6-106
ment leukogram (lymphocytosis).
GGT (IU/L)
0-1
Both BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are
Na (mmEq/L)
172
146-160
K (mEq/L)
5.1
increased. Since the urine specific gravity suggests adequate
3.7-5.4
CL (mEq/L)
132
112-129
renal concentrating ability (i.e., the specific gravity is greater
TCO2 (mEq/L)
than 1.030), this appears to be a prerenal ozotemia. However.
10.9
14-23
An. gap (mEq/L)
34
10-27
the marked hyperproteinemia and hypernatremia suggest 
Calc. Osmolarity
417
290-310
severe dehydration, and an even higher urine specific gravity
(mmOsm/L)
would be expected in this situation. It is, therefore, possible 
that this cat has some loss of urine concentration ability.
Alternatively, osmotic diuresis due to glucosuria may have
The hyperphosphatermia is a result of a decreased glomerular
filtration rate. Maintenance of normal serum phosphorus
707
SECTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
concentrations depends on phosphorus excretion through
cause of this abnormality. In this cat, which is apparently
the kidney.
not ketotic, increased blood lactate concentration is probably
Hyperproteinemia (both plasma and serum protein) with
contributing to this gap.
concurrent hyperalbuminemia and hyperglobulinemai is
The calculated osmolarity is increased and, in combination
typical of dehydration. Contraction of plasma water volume
with other laboratory changes, suggests this cat has diabetic
results in proportional increases in concentrations of both
nonketotic hyperosmolar syndrome (see summary).
albumin and globulin. Although other abnormalities can
cause hyperglobulinemia, dehydration is the only cause of
Urinalysis
hyperalbuminemia. Diuresis secondary to glucosuria is
 This cat has a proteinuria with a mild pyuria. It is possible
common in
1diabetes mellitus and
can
result
that the protein exuded into the urine as part of the inflam-
dehydration.
matory process; however, the degree of proteinuria appears
The serum cholesterol concentration is increased. In this
to be excessive compared to the degree of pyuria. Other
 case, this abnormality is probably secondary to diabetes mel-
causes of proteinuria such as glomerular and tubular disease
litus and related abnormalities in lipid metabolism.
should be considered in this case. Although glomerular
Serum activities of both ALT and AST are increased. The
 disease has been associated with diabetes mellitus in humans.
increased serum ALT activity is due to hepatocyte injury and
this has not been documented in animals.
subsequent leakage of this enzyme. This injury was probably
The strongly positive reaction on the chemical test for
caused by fatty change which developed secondary to the
blood in combination with normal numbers of erythrocytes
metabolic abnormalities of diabetes mellitus. The increased
Suggests that the positive reaction is due to either free hemo-
serum AST activity may also be due to leakage of AST from
globin or myoglobin. It is unlikely that this represents a
injured hepatocytes, but the higher activity of AST as com-
hematuria with subsequent lysis of erythrocytes since such
pared to ALT suggests that there is also an extrahepatic
lysis is unlikely in urine with a high specific gravity. Absence
source. This source may be muscle, and may have resulted
 of anemia suggests a significant hemolytic problerm is not
from muscle injury secondary to hypoperfusion, since the
occurring in this cat. Myoglobinuria is a possible explana-
cat is very dehydrated.
tion, and severe muscle hynoxia secondary to hypovolemia
Hypernatremia and hyperchloremia are probably due to
may have occurred in this cat. However, the serum AST
severe dehydration. Glucosuria causes diuresis resulting in
activity, while increased, does not suggest such massive
Na and Cl loss through the kidneys in nondehydrated or
muscle injury.
mildly dehydrated, diabetic animals. This can lead to hypo
Glucosuria is a result of the serum glucose concentration
natremia and hypochloremia. When such animals become
exceeding the renal threshold.
severely dehydrated, however, diuresis no longer occurs.
and hypernatremia and hyperchloremia develop. These
changes, in combination with hyperglycemia and azotemia.
Summary
result in severe hyperosmolality.
Decreased serum total CO, concentration probably rep-
The clinical diagnosis was diabetic nonketotic hyperosmolar
resents a primary metabolic acidosis. Serum total CO, con-
syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by marked hyper-
centration may also decrease as a compensatory reaction
glycemia (blood glucose concentration >600 mg/dL), hyper-
in animals with primary respiratory alkalosis. but in
   o    o 
animals with diabetes mellitus, metabolic acidosis is more
diabetic animal. Such animals commonly have prerenal or
likely to be the primary alteration. Increased serum con-
renal azotemia. The hyperosmolarity results in dehydration
centrations of ketones are a common cause of acidosis in
of neurons and subsequent neurologic signs. This syndrome
diabetic animals, but the absence of urine ketones suggests
is associated with a high fatality rate.
that this cat is probably not ketotic. Urine ketone tests
After a brief, unsuccessful attempt to decrease serum
that use the nitroprusside reaction do not detect β-
glucose concentrations with insulin therapy and to improve
hydroxybutyric acid, therefore, the presence of this ketone
 the cat's electrolyte and fluid balance by administration of
cannot be ruled out. Increased serum lactate concentration
fluids, the owner elected euthanasia. Necropsy revealed
may be contributing to the acidosis in this cat. The cat is
severs islet cell degeneration and amyloidosis and severe
markedly dehydrated and is, therefore, probably experi-
hepatocytic vacuolar degeneration. A few mineralized casts
  n    o s 
were present in renal tubules, but the kidneys were other-
production.
wise normal, and the azotemia was probably prerenal in this
The anion gap is increased. In most diabetic animals.
case. The cause of the inflammatory leukogram was not
increased ketoacid concentration in the blood is the major
determined.
708
Case 54
ase
54
Signalment: 10-year-old MC feline DSH
Blood Gas Data
Reference
History: Not eating well, lethargic
(arterial)
Interval
Physical examination: Slightly dehydrated
pH 
7.280
7.33-7.44
PCO2 (rmmHg)
20.0
35-42
Hematology
Day1
Reference
PO2 (mmHg)
85.5
73-92
Interval
HCO: (mEq/L)
9.2
16-22
ionized Ca++ (mng/dL)
4.64
PCV (%)
4.8-5.3
38.0*
24-45
Hgb (gy/dL)
12.8
8-15
RBC (x10°/μL)
9.25
5-11
MCV (fL)
44.0
05-66
 Urinalysis
MCHC (g/dL)
35.0
33-37
Retics (x10°/μL)
80,000
0-60,000
Color
 Urine Sediment 
NCC (x103/μL)
12.9
5.5-19.5
 Transparency
Clear 
WBCs/hpf
0-1
Segs (×10²/μL)
12.5
2.5-12.5
Sp. Gr.
1.033
RBCs/hpf 
0-1
Lyrmphs (×10²/μL)
E'0
1.5-7.0
 Protein 
1+
 Epith cells/hpf 
0-1
Platelets (×1 0°/μL)
Adequate
200-500
4+
Casts/lpf 
TP (P) (g/dL)
9.0
6-8
Bilirubin 
1+
 Crystals 
 Negative 
Hermopathology: giant platelets, slight increase in polychromasia.
Blood
1+
Bacteria
Negative 
 slightly toxic neutrophils, 2+ Heinz bodies
pH 
6.0
Other
*PCV was 27% on Day 5. and 17% on Day 7
Ketones 
+E
 Biochemical
Day 1
 Reference Interval
 Profile
Gluc (mg/dL)
328 (18.0)
67-124 (3.7-6.8 mmol/L)
BUN (rng/dL)
29
17-32
Creat (mng/dL)
1.5
0.9-2.1
Ca (mg/dL)
9.4
8.5-11
Phos (rng/dL)
1.9 (0.6)
3.3-7.8 (1.1-2.5 mmol/L)
TP (g/dL)
8.0
5.9-8.1
Alb (g/dL)
4.3
2.3-3.9
Glob (g/dL)
3.7
2.9-4.4
T. Bili (rng/dL)
2.1 (35.9)
0-0.3 (0-5.1 mmo/L)
Chol (ng/dL)
512 (13.3)
60-220 (1.6-5.7 mmol/L)
ALT (IU/L)
282
30-100
ALP (IU/L)
99
6-106
Na (mEq/L)
130
146-160
K (mEq/L)
2.2
3.7-5.4
CL (mEq/L)
74
112-129
TCO2 (mEq/L)
10.5
14-23
An. gap (mEq/L)
47.7
10-27
Lipase (IU/L)
161
3-125
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
induced by steroids in cats, thus, hyperadrenocorticism is a
 i o     
Hematology
possibly reducing the probability for concurrent pancreatitis:
The packed cell volume, hemoglobin, and total RBC count
however, increased lipase activity is not a reliable marker for
are normal, but given the degree of hemoconcentration
feline pancrea titis.
represented by the hyperproteinemia, it is possible that the
Serum Na, K, and Cl concentration are decreased signifi-
PCV is actually lower. There is a slight increase in polychro-
cantly. One should consider typical causes for electrolyte
masia and mild reticulocytosis. The anemia is rapidly pro-
depletion, including pathologic losses from the gastrointes-
gressive over a l week period of time. The presence of 2+
tinal and urinary systems, as well as a shift to third space.
Heinz bodies indicates significant oxidative damage to the
The marked hyperglycemia should initiate consideration of
red blood cells, and is commonly observed in cats with dia-
diabetic ketoacidosis with subsequent urinary electrolyte
betic ketoacidosis; however, the owner should be questioned
loss. There is a marlked decrease in serum total CO, suggest-
as to whether the cat has received acetaminophen or other
ing metabolic acidosis. The increase in the anion gap is likely
oxidant drugs or chemicals. Another potential cause of
due to the presence of ketones. which are unmeasured
hemolytic anemia in this patient is hypophosphatemia.
anions.
There is a stress leukogram, as indicated by the high normal
neutrophil count and lymphopenia.
Blood gas data
The blood gas panel indicates a metabolic acidosis (decreased
Biochemical profile
pH and HCO,) with respiratory compensation (decreased
The serum glucose concentration is moderately increased.
pCOz). Ionized calcium is marginally decreased.
While a glucose concentration of this magnitude may be
encountered due to extreme excitement (sympathetic acti
vation) or stress (glucocorticoid release), diabetes mellitus is
Urinalysis
The urinary specific gravity is normal. However, with marked
   '   ae  s
sis). The BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are
not pertinent to urinary concentration capacity. one might
normal.
question the accuracy of this measure, and consider deter-
The serum phosphorus concentration is decreased, and
mining urinary osmolality to address urinary concentration
given the degree of hyperglycemia, one should consider
capacity specifically. The presence of l+ protein and coarse
diabetic ketoacidosis-induced urinary phosphate loss. The
granular casts is consistent with renal tubular disease. The
serum total calcium concentration is normal, reducing the
possibility of an endocrine abnormality causing the change
   s   o 
in serum phosphorus. The serum total protein concentration
protein:creatinine ratio should be determined to confirm
is at the upper end of the reference interval, and serum
this. In either case, urinary tract inflammation is not a likely
albumin is increased, indicating hemoconcentration due to
cause of the observed changes, as there is only a small
dehydration.
amount of occult blood and no pyuria. The presence of sig-
The serum cholesterol concentration  is moderately
 nificant amounts of glucose and ketones supports a diagnosis
increased. while this may be associated with cholestasis, as
of diabetic ketoacidosis. The mild bilirubinuria is a result of
indicated by the increased total bilirubin, the ALP activity is
the increased serum bilirubin and subsequent renal
normal. Given the degree of increase in cholesterol, one
excretion.
should consider metabolic abnormalities including hepatic
disease, disorders of lipoprotein metabolism, or endocrinop-
athies. If not due to cholestasis, then the increase in bilirubin
Summary
may be due to hemolysis. The serum ALT activity is increased
modestly which indicates hepatocellular damage. ALP is not
Diabetic ketoacidosis; Heinz body anemia
710
Case 55
 Signalment Eight-year-old CM Labrador retriever
Interpretive discussion
History Two months of decreased activity. progressing to
muscle fasciculations and mild intermittent seizures.
Hematology
Referring DVM prescribed phenobarbital and prednisone 5
The only abnormalities are a mild mature neutrophilia and
days previously.
lymphopenia, consistent with a stress/steroid leukogram.
Physical examination Obese, reluctant to move.
This is not surprising given the history of prednisone
Normal body temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate.
administration.
Normal chest radiographs and abdominal ultrasound.
 Biochemical profile
Increased ALP and GGT activities are most likely due to
Reference
steroid induction given the history of prednisone adminis-
 Hematology
tration. There is no other evidence to support cholestasis or
Interval
liver disease.
Packed cell volurme (%)
40
37-55
Hypoglycemia is pronounced. Appropriate sample han-
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
14
12-18
 dling procedures were followed, ruling-out artifactual hypo-
RBC (x10%/μL)
5.75
5.5-8.5
glycemia due to delayed removal of serum from the red cells.
MCV (fL)
69
60-72
and episodic hypoglycemia fits the clinical signs. There is no
MCHC (g/dL)
35
34-38
    o i  
Total nucleated cell count (x10°/μL)
14.5
6-17
failure (BUN, cholesterol, albumin are normal).
 Segrnented neutrophils (x103/μL)
12.5
3-11.5
Serum insulin concentration is increased at the same time
Band neutrophils (x103/μL)
E:0-0
this dog is hypoglycemic, which is an inappropriate response.
Monocytes (x10°/μL)
1.3
0.1-1.3
Normally, feedback mechanisms result in low serum insulin
Lymphocytes (x10²/μL)
0.7
1-4.8
concentrations when hypoglycemia exists. Uncontrolled
Eosinophils (x1 03/μL)
0
0.1-1.2
Platelets (x10°/μL)
463
200-500
insulin production from a neoplasm is most lilkely. The most
 common tumor associated with hypoglycemia in dogs is
 Plasma protein (g/dL)
7.0
6-8
insulinoma, a neoplasm of pancreatic β-cells.
 Biochemical Profile
Reference
Summary
Interval
An exploratory laparotomy was performed and a small pan-
Glucose (mmg/dL)
24
65-122
creatic mass was identifed and removed. Small nodules
 Blood Urea Nitrogen (mg/dL)
16
7-28
Creatinine (mmg/dL)
1.2
0.9-1.7
enlarged. Aspirates from an enlarged node were taken intra-
Calcium (mg/dL)
10.5
9.0-11.2
operatively, and a metastatic endocrine tumor was diag-
 Phosphorus (mg/dL)
4.5
2.8-6.1
nosed by cytology. Histopathology confirmed a β-cell
Total Protein (g/dL)
6.8
5.4-7.4
Albumin (g/dL)
3.5
2.7-4.5
carcinoma in the pancreas with metastases to liver and
Globulin (g/dL)
3.3
1.9-3.4
lymph node. It is important to measure serum insulin
Total Biliubin (mng/dL)
0.3
0-0.4
concentrations at the same time the dog is hypoglycemic.
Cholesterol (rng/dL)
256
130-370
preferably when the blood glucose is <50mg/dL. Under
Alanine arminotransferase (IU/L)
110
10-120
these conditions, a serum insulin concentration that is
Aspartate amminotransferase (IU/L)
32
16-40
increased or in the upper half of the reference interval indi-
Alkaline phosphatase (IU/L)
602
13-141
cates a relative insulin excess, suggesting uncontrolled
Garnma glutamyl transferase (IU/L)
9
9-0
insulin production.
Sodium (mEq/L)
151
145-158
 Potassiurm (mEq/L)
4.1
4.1-5.5
Chloride (mEq/L)
116
106-127
Total CO2 (mmEq/L)
17
14-27
Anion Gap 
22
8-25
Other
Serumm insulin (μU/mL)
46.2
5-25
711
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
.ase
56
Signalment: 6-day-old female Holstein
seg poog
Reference
History: Scours
 Data (venous)
 Interval
Physical examination: Severe dehydration
pH
7.140
7.32-7.45
pCO (mmHg)
45.7
34-44
HCO: (mEq/L)
15.3
23-31
Hematology
Reference
Interval 
PCV (%)
58.0
24-46
Urinalysis
Hgb (g/dL)
19.0
8-15
RBC (x10%/μL)
17.1
5.0-10.0
Color
Yellow
 Urine Sediment 
MCV (fL)
34.0
37-53
 Transparency 
Clear
WBCs/hpf
0-1
MCHC (g/dL)
33.0
86-26
Sp. Gr.
1.014
RBCs/hpf 
0-1
NCC (x10²/μL)
5.0
4.0-12.0
 Protein 
Negative
 Epith cells/hpf 
1-2
Segs (x103/μL)
3.2
0.6-4.0
3n(5
Negative
 Casts/lpf
Negative 
Monos (x10°/μL)
1.7
8:0-0
 Biirubin 
Negative
Crystals 
Negative
Lymphs (x10²/μL)
0.1
2.5-7.5
Blood 
 Negative 
 Bacteria
 Negative
Platelets (×10²/μL)
288
200-800
pH
5.0
Fibrinogen (ng/dL)
600
200-600
TP (P) (g/dL)
10.9
6-8
 Hemopathology: many acanthocytes and keratocytes, RBC fragments.
hypochrormic RBCs.
 Biochemical
Reference
 Profile
Interval
Gluc (mg/dL)
31
55-95
BUN (mg/dL)
7-20
Creat (mgy/dL)
4.6
1.0-1.8
Ca (mg/dL)
7.8
8.2-9.9
Phos (mg/dL)
6.9
4.3-7.0
 TP (g/dL)
10.3
6.3-7.6
Alb (g/dL)
5.3
2.5-4.3
Glob (g/dL)
5.0
2.6-5.0
T. Bili(mng/dL)
0.8
0.1-0.4
CK (IU/L)
352
57-280
AST (IU/L)
286
40-130
GGT (IU/L)
14
10-26
SDH (IU/L)
17
8-23
Na (mEq/L)
129
136-147
K (mEq/L)
6.7
3.6-5.2
CL (mEq/L)
91
95-105
TCO2 (mEq/L)
17.0
24-32
An. gap (rmEq/L)
27.7
14-26
712
Case 56
Interpretive discussion
commonly results from increased sodium chloride loss
induced by the enterotoxin that promotes active secretion
Hematology
into the gut lumen. Increased water loss follows this osmotic
There is a monocytosis and a lymphopenia that represent
gradient. Bicarbonate is also lost in the feces, and hypovo-
the effects of stress. The plasma protein concentration is
lemia may lead to tissue hypoperfusion, lactic acidosis, and
increased, most probably due to dehydration. Erythrocyte
decreased bicarbonate concentration as well. Fecal potas-
indices reflect hemoconcentration as well, as evidenced by
sium loss is typically increased, but concomitant metabolic
the increased RBC count, hemoglobin concentration, and
acidosis results in exchange of intracellular potassium for
PCV. The MCV is decreased, which may be due to an under-
extraceliular protons, and a redistributional hyperkalemia.
lying iron-deficiency anemia of the newborn that is obscured
by hemoconcentration. The presence of several erythrocyte
Blood gas data
 morphologic abnormalities supports this. Iron deficiency is
There is a combined metabolic (decreased bicarbonate) and
frequently associated not only with a microcytic anemia, but
respiratory (increased pCOz) acidosis. The metabolic acidosis
also with oxidative damage to the erythrocytes, resulting in
results from bicarbonate loss in the diarrhea and from lactic
membrane abnormalities and fragmentation changes.
acidosis due to tissue hypoperfusion. The increased anion
gap reflects the accumulation of unmeasured anions such as
Biochemical profile
lactate. The mild respiratory acidosis indicates pulmonary
There is a profound hypoglycemia, which in a neonatal calf
dysfunction. Early pneumonia or decreased pulmonary per
with diarrhea is most probably related to decreased food
fusion secondary to dehydration are possible explanations.
intake, as well as the possibility of sepsis. Sepsis is unlikely.
considering the normal neutrophil concentration.
The BUN and serum creatinine concentrations are
Urinalysis
increased, but the origin of this azotemia cannot be dis-
 The only significant abnormality is a urine specific gravity
cerned from this data alone. Refer to the discussion in the
of 1.0l4. Six-day-old calves, unlike neonates of many other
urinalysis section below.
species, should have mature capacity to concentrate urine.
Serum calcum is mildly decreased, possibly due to
Dehydration should stimulate antidiuretic hormone release
decreased milk intake. The serum total protein and albumin
from the hypothalamus, and increased water reclamation by
concentrations are increased, further reflecting hemocon-
the renal tubules. However, electrolyte loss in this type of
centration due to dehydration. The serum CK and AST
hypotonic dehydration often leads to medullary solute
    a    s
depletion and a loss of the renal concentration gradient.
muscle damage subsequent to prolonged recumbency or
Another alternative is that there is renal disease, due to renal
hypoperfusion. The total bilirubin is increased. Together
hypoperfusion, sepsis, etc., resulting in both azotemia and
with the increased AST activity, this may indicate hepatocel-
loss of concentrating ability.
lular damage. Alternatively, there may be cholestasis due to
dehydration or prehepatic icterus due to increased destruc-
tion of oxidatively-damaged iron-deficient erythrocytes.
Summary
The serum sodium and chloride concentrations are
decreased, reflecting decreased intake and/or increased loss
Secretory diarrhea and hypotonic dehydration in a neonatal
from the body. E. coli-associated diarrhea in neonatal calves
calf.
713
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Case 57
Signalment: 9-month-old bull
Interpretive discussion
History: Anorexia, depression
Physical examination: Enlarged abdomen
Hematology
PCV is decreased, indicating anemia.
MCV is decreased, suggesting iron deficiency anemia sec-
Hematology
 Reference
ondary to chronic blood loss.
Interval
Neutrophilia, increased band neutrophils, and monocyto-
sis are indicative of chronic inflammation.
 PCV (%)
19
24-46
Increased fibrinogen also suggests inflammation.
MCV (fL)
31
37-53
 Keratocytes and schistocytes are commonly seen with iron
NCC (×10/μL)
18.0
4.0-12.0
deficiency anemia.
Segs (x103/μL)
10.5
0.6-4.0
Bands (x10°/μL)
2.5
0-0.1
Mon0s (x10²/μL)
1.0
0-0.8
Biochemical profile
Lymphs (x10°/μL)
3.5
2.5-7.5
Glucose is markedly increased, perhaps a sympathoadrenal
Eo5 (×10²/μL)
0.5
0-2.4
response that can be seen in severely ill cattle. Other pos-
Platelets (x10²/μL)
Adlequate
200-800
sibilities include prior treatment with glucose-containing
Fibrinogen (mg/dL)
1000
200-600
fluids, diabetes mellitus, or acute pancreatitis. Other lab data
 Hemmopathology: Numerous schistocytes, keratocytes
supports proximal duodenal obstruction, in which marked
hyperglycemia is a consistent finding. This may be due to a
combination of stress-induced hyperglycemia and poor
peripheral perfusion, so that the glucose isn't used. Also low
 Biochemical
Reference
K may result in decreased cell uptake of glucose
Profile
Interval
BUN, creatinine, and phosphorus are increased. Urine
Gluc (mg/dL)
618
55-95
specific gravity would help determine if renal or pre-renal.
BUN (rng/dL)
06
7-20
Because of severe dehydration as indicated by increased
Creat (rngy/dL)
6.1
1.0-1.8
albumin, at least a pre-renal component is likely. Phospho-
Ca (mg/dL)
7.8
8.2-9.9
 rus may also be increased due to high GI obstruction, which
Phos (rngy/dL)
14.1
4.3-7.0
is lilkely the diagnosis.
TP (g/dL)
10.1
6.3-7.6
Calcium is slightly decreased. Phosphorus is excreted in
Alb (g/dL)
4.5
2.5-4.3
the saliva of ruminants; with GI obstruction, elimination of
 Glob (gy/dL)
5.6
2.6-5.0
phosphorus via the GI tract is decreased. Mild hypocalcemia
T. Bili (rng/dL)
0.8
0.1-0.4
has been reported with abomasal and forestomach disease.
CK (IU/L)
1100
57-280
Total protein and albumin are increased, indicating dehy-
AST (IU/L)
350
40-130
dration. Globulin is increased, which may be due to dehy-
Na (mEq/L)
130
136-147
dration or antigenic stimulation.
K (mEq/L)
3.1
3.6-5.2
CL (mEq/L)
Bilirubin is increased, which in this patient may be due to
47
95-105
TCO2 (mEq/L)
50
24-32
cholestasis or anorexia.
Serum creatine kinase activity is increased, probably
indicative of myopathy. AST is mildly increased, either from
 myopathy or hepatocellular damage.
 Blood Gas
Marked hypochloremia is probably due to abomasal acid
Reference
 Data (Venous)
Interval 
secretion into the lumen. Obstruction of abomasal out flow
and distention exacerbates. Chloride is decreased more than
HCO; (mEq/L)
49.3
23-31
would be expected with abomasal displacement or volvulus;
pH 
7.412
7.32-7.45
this degree of hypochloremia is indicative of high GI obstruc-
pCO2 (mmHg)
80
34-44 
tion. Potassium is lilkely decreased for the same reason.
 Sodium is low and is perhaps being lost in urine. This may
 be due to hyperglycemia resulting in osmotic diuresis and
 thus increasing urinary losses of electrolytes.
Hyperosmolality may also be contributing to hyponatre-
mia, as a result of cellular water moving into extracellular
714
Case 57
fluid compartment, diluting serum sodium (l.6mEq/L
Summary
decrease in Na for every lo0 mg/dL increase in glucose)
Total CO, and HCO, are increased, indicating marked
 This animal had a high GI obstruction (foreign body). thus 
hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis. pH is in the high normal
explaining many of the abnormalities.
range as a result of compensatory respiratory acidosis
Azotemia was probably prerenal due to dehydration,
(increased pCOz). Remarkable hypochloremia and alkalosis
although there are abnormalities in distal tubular transport
indicated that there is obstruction of abomasal out flow.
which may be due to hypochloremia; osmotic diuresis may
preventing re-exchange of chloride and bicarbonate.
be also contributing to these abnormalities.
 Inflammation is present, perhaps associated with the GI
unmeasured anions. Most of the anions contributing to this
obstruction.
-  an  i s,  ou a
 Iron deficiency anemia from chronic blood loss is present
phates and protein. Additionally, there may be increased
(perhaps abomasal ulcer, GI parasites).
lactate due to decreased tissue perfusion, or increased
Other tests that should be performed include urinalysis.
sulfates due to tissue breakdown.
especially specific gravity, and fecal occult blood.
715
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
58
Signalment: 9-day-old female Holstein
 Interpretive discussion
History: Several days duration of diarrhea, anorexia.
extreme weakness
Hematology
 Physical examination: Hypothermic, 12%
  si     a
dehydrated
inflammatory leukogram. The PCV is increased, reflecting
hemoconcentration due to dehydration.
Hematology
Reference
Biochemical profile
Interval
There is a profound hypoglycemia, which in a neonatal calf 
with diarrhea is most probably related to decreased food
PCV (%)
51
24-46
intake, as well as the possibility of sepsis. Considering the
NCC (x10²/μL)
19.7
4.0-12.0
increased neutrophil concentration, sepsis is unlikely.
Segs (×10°/μL)
11.4
0.6-4.0
The BUN
and serum creatinine concentrations are
Monos (x10²/μL)
2.0
8:0-0
increased, but the origin of this azotemia cannot be dis-
Lyrmphs (×103/μL)
E'9
2.5-7.5
cerned without a urinalysis. However, given the other evi-
 Platelets (×1 03/μL)
 Adlequate 
200-800
dence of hemoconcentration, prerenal azotemia is the most
likely cause. Although higher serum phosphorus concentra-
tions are common in young animals, this degree of hyper-
phosphatemia is more likely related to decreased glomerular
 Biochemical
Reference
filtration rate. There is a marked hypocalcemia, but this may
Profile
Interval
be due solely to the hypoalbuminemia; i.e., the ionized
Gluc (mg/dL)
46
55-95
calcium concentration may be normal, but the protein-
BUN (mg/dL)
63
7-20
bound fraction is decreased.
Great (mmg/dL)
3.7
1.0-1.8
There is marked hypoproteinemia, despite the severe
Ca (ng/dL)
5.9
8.2-9.9
 degree of dehydration. This is due both to hypoalbuminemia
Phos (mg/dL)
14.5
4.3-7.0
and hypoglobulinemia. The former may be due to liver
TP (g/dL)
3.0
6.3-7.6
disease, inanition, or intestinal loss associated with the diar-
Alb (g/dL)
1.9
2.5-4.3
rhea. The latter is very lilkely due to lack of passive transfer.
Glob (g/dL)
1.1
2.6-5.0
which would have subsequently predisposed this neonate to
T. Bili(mng/dL)
0.2
0.1-0.4
infections, resulting in diarrhea and sepsis.
CK (IU/L)
7819
57-280
The increased serum CK and AST activities may be due to
AST (IU/L)
177
40-130
GGT (IU/L)
28
10-26
muscle damage, to prolonged recumbency, or hypoperfu-
 sion. The very slight increase in GGT activity may be due to
Na (mEq/L)
158
136-147
7.9
3.6-5.2
absorption of a small amount of colostrum, which is high in
K (rmEq/L)
CL (mEq/L)
117
95-105
GGT activity in ruminants.
TCO2 (mEq/L)
15
24-32
The increased serum sodium and chloride indicate that
An. gap (mEq/L)
14-26
this calf is hypertonically dehydrated. One typically expects
hypotonic dehydration to develop in a neonatal calf with
scours, owing to electrolyte loss in the secretory diarrhea.
Thus, it is more likely that this is not a secretory diarrhea.
 Blood Gas
Reference
but rather another infectious cause of diarrhea, with or
 Data (Venous)
Interval
without septicemia. Water, loss in excess of solute may be
compounded by reduced water consumption, increased
pH 
7.140
7.32-7.45
insensible losses due to fever, and/or exudation (along
pCO2 (mmHg)
45.7
34-44
HCO: (mEq/L)
with albumin}
15.3
23-31
across ac
damaged
intestinal mucosa.
716
Case 58
the diarrhea, redistributional hyperkalemia is commonly
acidosis due to tissue hypoperfusion. The increased anion
observed in cases like this owing to exchange of intracellular
gap reflects the accumulation of unmeasured anions like
potassium for extracellular protons (H') in response to the
lactate.
metabolic acidosis. The respiratory acidosis suggests inade-
quate pulmonary perfusion.
Summary
Blood gas data
There is a combined metabolic (decreased bicarbonate) and
Nonsecretory diarrhea and hypertonic dehydration in a neo-
 respiratory (increased pCO2) acidosis. The metabolic acidosis
natal calf following failure of passive transfer.
results from bicarbonate loss in the diarrhea and from lactic
717
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
50
Signalment Six-year-old male castrated male fox
 Biochemical Profile
 slightly
Reference
terrier.
hemolyzed
lnterval 
History Intermittent vomiting and diarrhea for past
seven weeks, seizured for a few minutes a few hours
Glucose (rng/dL)
123
99
75-130
before presentation on 8/8.
Blood Urea Nitrogen (mg/dL)
8
9
7-28
Physical examination Lethargic, weak, "bloated"
 Creatinine (mg/dL)
0.5
0.4
0.7-1.9
Calcium (mg/dL)
4.4
5.1
9.0-11.7
Fhosphorus (mng/dL)
1.7
1.5
2.1-6.0
 Hematology
8/8
8/17
Reference
Magnesium (mng/dL)
0.9
0.7
1.8-2.5
Interval
 Total Protein (g/dL)
2.1
2.3
5.4-7.4
 Albumin (gy/dL)
1.2
1.2
2.7-4.5
 Packed cell volume (%)
28
22
40-55
 Globulin (gy/dL)
0.9
1.1
2.0-3.8
Hgb (g/dL)
8.9
7.0
13-20
 Total Bilirubin (rng/dL)
0.1
0.1
E:0-0
RBC (106/μL)
3.81
2.95
5.5-8.5
 Cholesterol (mng/dL)
69
71
130-300
MCV (fL)
73
73
62-73
 Alanine amminotransferase (IU/L)
600
274
10-110
MCHC (g/dL)
32
32
96-22
 Aspartate arminotransferase (IU/L)
540
163
16-50
 Total nucleated cell count
17.3
17.9
4.5-15
 Alkaline phosphatase (IU/L)
660
405
20-142
(x103/μL)
Creatine kinase (IU/L)
1343
356
50-275
 Segmented neutrophils 
14.4 (83%)
16.3
2.6-11 
GGT (IU/L)
77
108
0-9
(x103/μL)
Sodium (mEq/L)
136
140
142-152
Band neutrophils (×103/μL)
0.3 (2%)
0-0.2
Potassium (mnEq/L)
2.9
3.6
3.5-5.2
Monocytes (x10°/μL)
0.3 (2%)
1.3
0.2-1.0
Chloride (mEq/L)
106
109
108-120
Lymphocytes (x1 0°/μL)
1.9 (1 1 %)
0.2
1-4.8
Bicarbonate (mEq/L)
17.6
20.6
16-25
 Eosinophils(x103/μL)
0.2
0.1-1.2
Anion Gap (mEq/L)
15
14 
13-22
 Platelets (x103/ μL)
302
323
200-500
Calc. osmolality (rmosmm/L)
267
275
284-304
 Plasma protein (g/dL)
2.5
2.9
6-8
lron 
100
140
75-280
Reticulocytes (x103)
80,000
209,450
0-60,000
TBC
110
153
(2.1 %)
(7.1 %)
 Sat percent 
91
92
 Hemopathology: slight polychromasia, slt toxic neuts 
UIBC
<10
13
lonized calcium (mmol/)
0.96
0.80
1.30-1.46
 Coagulation 
 Reference
Interval
 Protime (sec)
17.5
7.5-10.5
APTT (sec)
52.9
10.5-16.5
 Antithrombin 45% of normal pooled sera 
718
Case 59
Interpretive discussion
enteropathy is usually because of hypoalbuminemia.
decreased ionized calcium may also occur in these patients
Hematology
as a result of decreased GI calcium absorbtion and also
Regenerative anemia is present as evidenced by reticulocy-
because of decreased vitamin D absorption. Hypomagnese-
tosis. This may be due to blood loss or blood destruction.
mia may also result in hypocalcemia by leading to decreased
Hypomagnesemia has been reported to cause hemolytic
synthesis or release of PTH or by leading to decreased
anemia in humans. The total protein is not useful to dif-
responsiveness to PTH by skeletal and renal tissue. More-
ferentiate hemolysis from loss in this case, as it is likely
over, hypomagnesemia can cause decreased activation of
decreased due to other causes. Blood loss could be though
vitamin D by kidneys.
the GI tract.
The hypomagnesemia is severe and in this case is likely
An inflammatory leukogram is present as evidenced by
due to loss through the GI tract. Decreased vitamin D may
neutrophilia and increased bands on 8/8.
result in decreased magnesium absorption.
 A stress leulkogram is present on 8/17 as evidenced by
mature neutrophilia and lymphopenia. A monocytosis may
through the kidney or shifts of magnesium from extracel-
be a component of a stress leukogram.
lular to intracellular, but there is no evidence for renal
Plasma protein by refractometry is markedly decreased
disease. Other disorders associated with hypomagnesermia
(see biochemical profile interpretation) .
include diuresis, diabetic ketoacidosis, pancreatitis, sepsis,
Biochemical profile
history or evidence of these.)
 Hypocholesterolemia is usually due to either decreased
Numerous biochemical profiles were performed over several
weeks. The common abnormalities are marked hypopro-
intake through the GI tract, or decreased production as a
result of liver failure. In this patient, it is likely due to
teinemia, hypoalbuminemia, hypoglobulinemia, and hypo-
increased intake, secondary to protein losing enteropathy.
calcemia, Hypocholesterolemia is present in three of the
Increased ALT and AST in later profiles are indicative of
profiles, as well. All but the first biochemical profile also
hepatocellular damage, although the AST may be increased
showed increased ALT, AST, ALP, and CK. Sodium and
due to muscle damage, as CK is increased. ALT may be
potassium are decreased in the last three profiles, and serum
induced by steroids, as well.
 magnesium is markedly decreased. Serum creatinine is also
Increased GGT and ALP may be due to cholestasis or
decreased on the last two profiles. These abnormalities are
induced by corticosteroids. The serum alkaline phosphatase
discussed below.
and GGT were not increased in the initial biochemical profile 
performed by the referring veterinarian. Additional history
Panhypoproteinemia
revealed that the dog had been receiving injectable gluco-
The most likely differential for a decrease of this magnitude
corticosteroids, which are likely responsible for the increase
in both serum albumin and globulin, particularly in a dog
in these enzymes. The dog lilkely has a steroid hepatopathy
with a history of diarrhea, is protein-losing enteropathy.
at this time.
Other possible causes would be blood loss or loss of
Hyponatremia and hypokalemia are also likely due to
protein into the abdominal cavity due to inflammation. The
losses through the GI tract.
PCV is not low enough to explain this degree of
The increase in APPT and PT are likely due to decreased
hypoproteinemia.
vitamin K absorption, as it is also a fat soluble vitamin.
The decreased antithrobin III is likely due to concurrent
Hypocalcemia
albumin losses.
While some of the hypocalcemia can be explained by hypo-
albuminemia, this cannot account for this degree of
hypocalcemia. When corrected for hypoalbuminemia, the
Additional tests needed
calcium is still low. (For example, in the profile on 8/17, 5.1
Parathyroid hormone assay, vitamin D assay.
-1.2 + 3.5 = 7.4.) The decreased ionized calcium further
substantiates that both ionized and bound calcium are
decreased.
Summary
calcemia other than the hypocalcemia that may occur in
patients with protein losing enteropathy. since primary
The most likely diagnosis in this dog is protein losing enter
hypoparathyroidism should result in increased phosphorus
opathy with resulting severe hypocalcemia and hypomag-
concentration. While hypocalcemia with protein losing
nesemia, and likely secondary hypoparathyroidism.
719
SECTloN VI Clinical Case Presentations
Outcome
Yorkshire trriers:five cases {1992-1998). J Am Ver Med Assor
PTH was low normal and vitamin D was decreased. Small
217: 703-6.
bowel biopsy showed mixed inflammation, dilated crypts.
necrosis, bacterial overgrowth, and mild lymphangiectasia.
parathyroidism attributed to hypomagnesemia in a dog with
protein-losing enteropathy. J Am Ver Med Assor 219: 1732-4.
Dog had positive occult blood in feces. It was treated by
-Aeiedoday u snsan enuasauaeuody aou [enap u suje[dxa
changing diet (Eukanuba low-residue dry). Prednisone
roidism (decreases cAMP generation and blunts release of
(1.3mg/kg bid). Tums, and enrofloxacin (Baytril). and
PTH) and also results in blunted end organ response to PTH by
coconut oil (l0-20 mL per day added to food).
decreasing phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C in cell
membranes.
Further reading
 Kimmel SE, Waddel LS, Michel KE (20oo) Hypomagnesemia and
hypocalcemia associated with protein-losing enteropathy in
720
Case 60
'ase
61
 Signalment Ten-year-old, spayed female, mixed breed
Other Data
3op
History Chronic weight loss, chronic voluminous
 Bile acids-fasting (μmol/L)
1.0
<15.5
diarrhea, ravenous appetite
Bile acids-post prandlial (μmol/L) 
7
5-20
Physical Bright and alert, thin with a 1/5 body
Folate (μg/L)
20.4
7.7-24.4
condition score, 5% dehydrated.
Cobalamine-B12 (ng/L)
154
251-908
Trypsin-Like Immunoreactivity 
(TLI)-fasting (μg/L)
0.2
5.7-45.2
Fecal float
negative
Hematology
Reference
Interval
Packed cell volume (%)
37
36-54
 Plasma protein (g/dL)
5.2
5.4-7.2
Biochemical Profile
Reference
Interval
Glucose (mg/dL)
94
77-126
Blood Urea Nitrogen (mg/dL)
17
5-20
Creatinine (mg/dL)
1.1
0.6-1.6
Calcium (mg/dL)
9.7
9.3-11.6
Phosphorus (rng/dL)
4.1
3.2-8.1
Total Protein (g/dL)
5.3
5.1-7.1
Albumin (g/dL)
3.0
2.9-4.2
Globulin (g/dL)
2.3
2.2-2.9
 Total Bilirubin (mg/dL)
0.1
0.1-0.4
Cholesterol (mg/dL)
49
80-315
ALT (IU/L)
44
10-55
AST( IU/L)
23
12-40
ALP (IU/L)
66
15-120
Creatine Kinase (IU/L)
81
50-400
Sodium (mEq/L)
145
143-153
Potassium (mmEq/L)
4.1
4.1-5.4
Chloride (mEq/L)
112
109-120
TCO2 (meq/L)
22
16-25
Anion Gap 
15
15-25
721
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Interpretive discussion
is compatible with distal small intestinal disease or EPI. The
low TLI is diagnostic for EPI.
The decrease in the plasma protein may be compatible with
loss of protein or decreased protein production. On the bio-
chemical profile, total protein, albumin and globulins are at
the low end of the reference interval. Because the dog is
Summary
dehydrated, it is possible that these values will decrease
below the reference interval when the animal is rehydrated.
This dog was diagnosed with exocrine pancreatic insuff-
Given the history of chronic diarrhea and the low body
ciency (EPI), and she responded to dietary supplementation
condition score, protein losing enteropathy or exocrine
with pancreatic enzymes and cobalamine injections. The
pancreatic insuffciency (EPI) are primary differential
syndrome of EPI results from inadequate production and
diagnoses.
release of pancreatic enzymes into the intestinal tract. Mal-
 The hypocholesterolemia can be the result of malabsorp-
digestion and malabsorption of nutrients results in diarrhea
tion, maldigestion, protein losing enteropathy, or liver
that is often voluminous. Steatorrhea and hypocholesterol-
failure. Given the normal liver enzymes and total bilirubin,
emia are consequences of maldigestion and malabsorption
there is no evidence of hepatocellular damage or cholestasis.
of fats. Unlike patients with protein losing enteropathy.
However, liver enzymes do not measure liver function:
fasting and postprandial bile acids were done to evaluate for
the reference interval. Intrinsic factor is required for absorp-
hepatic insufficiency. Given the normal fasting and post-
tion of dietary cobalamine/vitamin Bl2. Because the pan-
prandial bile acids, decreased production of cholesterol sec-
creas is the source of intrinsic factor in the dog, cobalamine
 ondary to hepatic insufficiency is unlilkely.
deficiency may develop as a result of malabsorption second-
The low normal total protein, albumin, and globulin in
ary to EPI and is reflected in the low serum cobalamine
conjunction with hypocholesterolemia is compatible with
levels seen in this patient. Pancreatic ascinar atrophy is the
protein losing enteropathy or EPI resulting in malabsorption
and maldigestion, respectively. Both of these conditions are
commonly in the German shepherd breed. When pancreatic
associated with diarrhea and weight loss. Differentiating
ascinar atrophy occurs in an older dog such as this patient.
these two conditions requires additional testing. The normal
other causes of EPI such as pancreatitis or neoplasia should
serum folate in conjunction with decreased cobalamnie-B12
be explored.
722
Case 61
61
Signalment: 3-year-old castrated male golden retriever
Interpretive discussion
History: Lethargic, heat seeking
 Physical examination: Obese, poor hair coat,
Hematology
tailhead alopecia
A mild nonregenera tive, normocytic, normochromic anernia
is the only abnormality in the CRC. "Target cells" are
common and are not very diagnostically useful. They com-
 Hematology
Reference
monly present in animals with hypercholesterolemia.
Interval
Biochemical profile
PCV (%)
34
37-55
MCV (fL)
65
60-72
The only abnormalities present are hypercholesterolemia and
MCHC (g/dL)
35
34-38
mild hyponatremia. Hypercholesterolemia is marked, and in
Retics (x103/μL)
<60
conjunction with the history, physical examination, and
NCC (x10²/μ1)
12.5
6-17
mild anemia, is very suggestive of hypothyroidism. Mild
Segs (x103/μ1)
E6
3-11.5
hyponatremia has been reported in approximately 30% of
Mon0s (x10/μ1)
1.0
0.1-1.3
dogs with hypothyroidism.
Lyrmphs (x10²/μ1)
2.2
1-4.8
Platelets (x10°/μ1)
Adequate
200-500
Endocrine data
TP (P) (g/dL)
7.5
6-8
Total T4 is within the reference interval. However, since
 Hermopathology: Nummerous leptocytes ("target cells") present 
many variables affect TT4, and this dog has clinical and
laboratory findings that are suggestive of hypothyroidism a
free T4 and endogenous TSH are indicated. The decreased
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
FT4 and increased endogenous TSH are diagnostic for
 Profile
hypothyroidism.
Gluc (mg/dL)
105
65-122
BUN (rng/dL)
20
7-28
Summary
Creat (mg/dL)
1.2
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
10.5
9.0-11.2
Phos (mg/dL)
4.0
Early primary hypothyroidism.
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
7.0
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
3.7
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
3.3
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (rng/dL)
0.2
0-0.4
Chol (rng/dL)
720 (18.7)
130-370 (3.4-9.6 mmol/L)
ALT (IU/L)
110
10-120
AST (IU/L)
35
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
220
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
143
145-158
K (mEq/L)
4.5
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
107
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
20
14-27
Endocrine Data
Reference Interval
TT4 (μg/dL)
1.6
1.4-4.0
Free T4 (ng/dL)
0.24 (3.0)
1.2-3.4 (15.4-4.8 pmo/L)
Endogenous TSH
0.5
0.1-0.45
(ng/mL) (Irnulite)
723
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
Signalment: 13-year-old Mc dog
 Urinalysis
History: Polyuria, frequent urination with small
volumes
Color
Yellow
Urine Sediment
 Physical examination: Overweight
Transparency
Apnop
WBCs/hpf
 50-100
Sp. Gr.
1.014
 RBCs/hpf
>100
 Protein 
2+
 Epith cells/hpf 
 Negative
Hematology
Reference
2n15
4+
 Casts/lpf
 Negative 
Interval
 Biirubin 
 Negative
 Crystals 
 Negative
Blood 
4+
 Bacteria
spon +e
PCV (%)
36.0
37-55
PH
5.0
Hgb (g/dL)
13.4
12-18
ketones
 Negative 
RBC (×10%/μL)
5.26
5.5-8.5
MCV (fL)
69.0
60-72
MCHC (g/dL)
37.0
34-38
NCC (x10/μL)
18.1
6-17
 Coag ulation
Reference
Segs (x103/μL)
16.7
3-11.5
Data
 Interval
Mon05 (x10²/μL)
1.3
0.1-1.3
Lyrmphs (×10°/μL)
0.2
1.0-4.8
PT (seconds)
7.5
7.5-10.5
 Platelets (×103/μL)
452
200-500
aPPT (seconds)
18.2
10.5-16.5
TP (P) (g/dL)
8.2
6-8
FDPs (μg/mL)
1:12
<1:10
 Hermopathology: few Howell-Joly bodies 
Endocrine Data
Reference
 Biochemical Profile
 Reference Interval
Interval
Gluc (mg/dL)
806 (44.3)
65-122 (3.5-6.7mmol/L)
BUN (rng/dL)
7-28 (2.5-10.0 mmol/L)
Free T4 (ng/dL)
<0.15
1.2-3.4
81 (28.9)
total T4 (μg/dL)
0.85
1.5-3.5
Creat (mg/dL)
1.6
0.9-1.7
endog TSH (ng/mL)
0.05
0.1-0.45
Ca (ng/dL)
8.4 (2.1)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmo/L)
ionized Ca++ (mg/dL)
3.56
4.5-5.6
 Phos (mng/dL)
7.2 (2.3)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.0mmol/L)
TP (g/dL)
6.0
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
E'E
2.7-4.5
Interpretive discussion
Glob (g/dL)
2.7
1.9-3.4
Hematology
T. Bili (rng/dL)
1.3 (22.2)
0-0.4 (0-6.8 μmol/L)
Chol (mg/dL)
467 (12.1)
130-370 (3.4-9.6mmol/L)
The PCV and total RBC count are marginally decreased, with
ALT (IU/L)
1355
0-120
no abnormalities in red blood cell size, hemogiobin content.
AST (IU/L)
341
16-40
 or morphology. One should consider recent blood loss (par-
ALP (IU/L)
4660
35-280
ticularly GI hemorrhage) even though plasma protein con-
GGT (IU/L)
9-0
centration is normal. Alternatively. there may be a mild
CK (IU/L)
266
50-250
normochromic, normocytic anemia associated with renal
Na (mmEq/L)
144
145-158
failure. The leukocyte count is increased, with a mature
K (mEq/L)
3.8
4.1-5.5
neutrophilia and lymphopenia. This is a stress leukogram,
CL (mEq/L)
86
106-127
and may support the possibility of hyperadrenocorticism as
TCO2 (mEq/L)
18.5
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
31.3
8-25
part of the disease process.
Armylase (IU/L)
1687
50-1250
Lipase (IU/L)
3746
095-0E
724
Case 62
Biochemical profile
hyperglycemia should initiate consideration of diabetic keto-
The serum glucose concentration is markedly increased. This
acidosis with subsequent urinary electrolyte loss. However.
is well beyond the level encountered due to excitement
although the anion gap is increased, the serum total CO is
(sympathetic activation) or stress (glucocorticoid release).
normal. It is possible that there are concurrent causes for
and should immediately suggest diabetes mellitus.
metabolic acidosis (ketoacidosis) and metabolic alkalosis
The BUN is disproportionately increased relative to the
(vomiting and/or gastrointestinal stasis).
mild increase in serum creatinine concentration. The
BUN:creatinine ratio is 50.6, which should suggest gastro-
Urinalysis
intestinal hemorrhage, leading to an increase in hepatic urea 
The urinary specific gravity is in the isosthenuric range.
production. Nevertheless, some degree of azotemia (prere-
despite azotemia and hyperphosphatemia. This may be the
nal, renal, or postrenal) is probably also present (refer to
result of renal disease, or impaired concentrating ability due
discussion of urinalysis below). The serum phosphorus is
to electrolyte depletion and loss of the medullary concentra-
moderately increased, and may be associated with the
tion gradient. There is significant proteinuria, pyuria, hema-
impaired glomerular filtration and the azotemia. Because
turia, and bacteriuria which most likely indicate a bacterial
the serum total calcium concentration is also decreased, one
infection and inflammatory response in the urinary tract. In
 should consider dietary imbalance or renal disease as causes
the absence of tubular casts or information regarding enzy-
of secondary hyperparathyroidism. See discussion of ionized
muria or urinary fractional excretion of electrolytes, it is
Ca below.
difficult to specify the anatomic location of this disorder.
The serum total protein and albumin concentrations are
There is significant glucosuria corresponding to the marked
normal. Unless there is a concomitant cause for hypopro-
hyperglycemia rioted earlier. The absence of ketones on the
teinemia, the absence of hyperproteinemia decreases the
dipstick speaks against the possibility of prominent ketoaci-
probability for hemoconcentration and prerenal azotemia
dosis (and ketonuria) noted above. However, this test does
due to dehydration.
not detectg one of the ketones, β-hydroxybutyric acid. One
The serum cholesterol is moderately increased. This may
can anticipate that detectable ketosis would develop if
be related to cholestasis, as indicated by the moderate
Untreated.
increase in serum to biliruhin concentration and serum ALP
and GGT activities. However, the degree of increase in cho.
Coagulation data
lesterol is sufficient to warrant consideration of abnormali-
The coagulation profile indicates a slightly prolonged APTT
ties in lipoprotein metabolism owing to hepatic disease or
and mildly increased FDP concentration. This may be the
an endocrine abnormality. Likewise, the degree of increase
result of liver disease (although one may expect a change in
in ALP and GGT activities suggests other means for their
PT prior to one in the APTT). or incipient DIC (although
induction beyond cholestasis, such as hyperadrenocorticism.
Marked increases in serum ALT and AST activities indicate
platelet concentra tion is usually decreased with DIC). If liver
disease was severe enough to impair coagulation factor syn-
hepatocellular damage, which may have contributed to the
thesis, one would first expect to see hypoalburninemia and/
increases in ALP and GGT activities. The serum CK activity
or hypocholesterolemia. It is not possible to draw conclu-
is essentially normal, and rules out the potential contribu-
sions with these borderline abnormalities.
tion of muscle damage to serum AST and ALT increases.
Hepatic lipidosis associated with diabetes should be consid-
ered as a cause of hepatocellular injury and cholestasis.
Endocrine data
A marginal increase in serum amylase and marked
Low free T4, low total T4, and low endogenous TSH are
increase in serum lipase activities may indicate the presence
diagnostic for secondary hypothyroidism. Secondary hypo-
of pancreatitis. However, concurrent azotemia may impair
thyroidism as a result of decreased endogenous TSH is com-
renal extraction of these enzymes from the serum, leading
monly associated with diabetes mellitus.
to increases in their activities.
Serum Na, K, and Cl concentrations are decreased. One
should consider typical causes for electrolyte depletion,
Summary
including pathologic losses from the gastrointestinal and
urinary systems, as well as a shift to third space. The marked
725
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
.ase
63
Signalment: 3-year-old MC English springer spaniel
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
History: Anorexia, occasional vomiting
 Profile
Physical examination: Lethargic, thin,
approximately 8% dehydrated
Gluc (mg/dL)
E8
65-122
BUN (mg/dL)
47 (16.8)
7-28 (2.5-10.0 mmo/L)
Creat (mmg/dL)
1.6
0.9-1.7
Hematology
Reference
Ca (mg/dL)
13.8 (3.45)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80 mmol/L)
Interval
 Phos (mngy/dL)
6.2 (2.0)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.0 mmol/L)
TP (g/dL)
7.5
5.4-7.4
PCV (%)
32
37-55
Alb (g/dL)
5.0
2.7-4.5
Hgb (g/dL)
11.1
12-18
Glob (g/dL)
2.5
1.9-3.4
RBC (x10%/μ1)
4.47
5.5-8.5
T. Bili(mng/dL)
0.2
0-0.4
MCV (fL)
72
60-72
Chol (mng/dL) 
135
130-370
MCHC (g/dL)
35
34-38
ALT (IU/L)
49
10-120
Retics (x103/μL)
ND*
<60
AST (IU/L)
19
16-40 
NCC (x10²/μ1)
9.8
6-17
ALP (IU/L)
98
35-280
Segs (x10²/μ1)
5.6
3-11.5
Na (mEq/L)
132
145-158
Monos (x10²/μ1)
0.8
0.1-1.3
K (mEq/L)
5.5
4.1-5.5
Lymphs (x10²/μ1)
2.2
1.0-4.8
CL (mEq/L)
97
106-127
E05 (x103/μ1)
1.2
0.1-1.2
TCO2 (mEq/L)
10
14-27
Platelets (x10²/μ1)
Acdequate
200-500
An. gap (mEq/L)
8-25
TP (P) (g/dL)
8.5
8-9
 Armylase (IU/L)
1300
50-1250
*Not Determined 
Lipase (IU/L)
570
095-0E
 Endocrine Data
Reference Interval
 ACTH stimulation
 serum cortisol (μg/dL)(pre)
<0.1 (<2.8)
1-4 (28-100 nmol/L)
 serum cortisol (μg/dL)
<0.1 (<2.8)
<10.5 (<290 nmol/L)
(post)
 Urinalysis
 Urine specific gravity
1.020
726
Case 63
Interpretive discussion
subsequent increased GI calcium uptake, calcium retention
by the kidney. as related to sodium loss, or increased
Hematology
albumin-bound calcium. Other causes of hypercalcemia,
A mild anemia is present. Reticulocyte concentration was
such as hypercalcemia of malignancy. primary hyperpara-
not determined, thus the degree of regeneration is unknown.
thyroidism, and vitamin D toxicosis are much less likely in
Increased polychromasia is not mentioned, suggesting that
this patient.
the anemia is nonregenerative; however, the McV is at the
 Mild hyperproteinemia, due to hyperalbuminemia, is due
upper end of the reference interval, suggesting the presence
to dehydration.
of large immature erythrocytes. Considering the degree of
 Hyponatrermia and high normal potassium should cause
dehydration. anemia is likely more severe than is
suspicion of Addison's disease. While these electrolyte
apparent.
abnormalities are not marked, and result in a Na :K ratio of
While the leukogram is normal, a patient that is ill and
24, they should prompt an ACTH stimulation test. Hypona-
vomiting would be expected to have a stress leukogram. The
tremia and hyperkalemia in this patient, on the other hand.
absence of a stress leukogram should prompt consideration
could be a result of renal disease. Hypochloridemia is con-
of hypoadrenocorticism.
sistent with hyponatremia. Low total CO is consistent with
Plasma protein is increased, probably as a result of
metabolic acidosis, and the anion gap is increased due to
dehydration.
increased unmeasured anions, which in this dehydrated
hypovolemic patient are probably lactic acids.
Biochemical profile
Mild increase in serum amylase and lipase activities are
Azotemia is evidenced by increased BUN, creatinine, and
probably secondary to decreased glomerular filtration.
 phosphorus concentrations. While azotemia may be pre-
renal, since the dog is dehydrated, one would expect the
urine specific gravity to be greater than 1.030, if this were
Endocrine data
the case. However, the serum sodium concentration is
The immeasurably low cortisol concentration with a
decreased, and ability to concentrate is impaired by medul-
lary washout of sodium. Refer to the discussion on sodium
and potassium for further interpretation.
Hypercalcemia, in light of hyponatremia and hyperkale-
Summary
mia, is likely due to hypoadrenocorticism. The pathophysiol-
ogy may be related to decreased glucocorticoids and
Hypoadrenocorticism
727
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
Signalment: 8-month-old intact male dog
 Urinalysis
History: Suddenly collapsed during grooming: bloody
diarrhea
Color
 Urine Sediment
 Physical examination: Extreme weakness.
Transparency
Apno
WBCs/hpf
0-1
bradycardia, and cool extremities
Sp. Gr.
1.019
RBCs/hpf
2-3
 Protein 
 Negative
 Epith cells/hpf 
1-2 transitional
2n15
Negative
Casts/lpf 
0
Hematology
Reference
Bilirubin
 Negative
Crystals 
0
Interval 
Blood 
 Negative
Bacteria
pH
6.0
PCV (%)
42
37-55
Hgb (g/dL)
13.3
12-18
RBC (×10%μL)
6.6
5.5-8.5
MCV (fL)
64
60-72
Endocrine Data
 Reference Interval
MCHC (g/dL)
32
34-38
NCC (x10°/μL)
12.0
6-17
 ACTH stimulation:
Segs (x103/μL)
7.2
3-11.5
serum cortisol
1.1 
1-4 
Mono5 (x10°/μL)
0.6
0.1-0.3
(μg/dL)(pre)
Lyrmphs (×10°/μL)
3.6
1-4.8
serum cortisol 
1.3 (36)
10-20 (276-552nmo/L)
Eos (×103/μL)
0.6
0.1-1.2
(μg/dL)(post)
Platelets (x103/μL)
410
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.9
8-9
 Hemopathology: Normal
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
 Profile
Gluc (mg/dL)
87
65-122
BUN (mg/dL)
63 (22.5)
7-28 (2.5-10.0 mmol/L)
Creat (mgy/dL)
1.6
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
10.3
9.0-11.2
Phos (mg/dL)
5.6
2.8-6.1
 TP (g/dL)
6.8
5.7-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
6E
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
2.9
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (rng/dL)
0.3
0-0.4
Chol (mg/dL)
230
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
80
10-120
AST (IU/L)
32
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
90
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
127
145-158
K (mEq/L)
7.5
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
66
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
12
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
2.3
8-25
728
Case 64
Interpretive discussion
 Decreased serum total COz concentration suggests meta-
bolic acidosis. Metabolic acidosis is common in hypoadreno-
Hematology
corticism and results from decreased tissue perfusion
The CBC reveals no significant abnormalities.
secondary to hypotension and from decreased renal tubular
excretion of H+ secondary to mineralocorticoid deficiency.
Biochemical profile
This dog is azotemic. Since urine concentration is not ade-
Urinalysis
 Except for the evidence of inadequate urine concentrating
quate (i.e., it is not >l.030), this may be a renal azotemia,
but prerenal azotermia with inadequate renal concentrating
ability (see the discussion of azotemia above), the urinalysis
ability may occur in hypoadrenocorticism. The hypotension
is normal.
and dehydration that accompany hypoadrenocortism may
Endocrine data
result in azoternia while hyponatremia and solute diuresis
may result in medullary washout which, in turn, limits renal
The inadequate response to ACTH stimulation in com-
bination with hyponatremia and hyperkalemia confirms
concentrating ability. The result is azotemia with a urine
specific gravity indicating inadequate renal concentrating
ability.
monly have decreased basal plasma cortisol concentrations
which fail to increase or increase only slightly after ACTH
Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia, in combination with
stimulation. If these values do increase after ACTH stimu-
the abnormal response to ACTH stimulation, confirms the
lation, they are usually well below normal post-ACTH
diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism (see discussion of the
stimulation values, especially in dogs with primary
ACTH stimulation test below). While a Na:K ratio <23:1
hypoadrenocorticism.
is suggestive of hypoadrenocorticism, hyponatremia and
hyperkalemia are not specific for this disease. Oliguric or
anuric renal failure are common causes of hyponatremia
Summary
and hyperkalemia and should be considered when these
abnormalities are observed, but the response to ACTH
Hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and a Na:K ratio of 17:1
stimulation should he adequate to distinguish these
strongly suggest hypoadrenocorticism. An inadequate
diseases.
response to ACTH stimulation confirms this disease. The
Hypochloremia is common in animals with hypoadreno-
azotemia with evidence of inadequate urine concentrating
corticism. In renal tubules, Cl is reabsorbed with Na in both
ability, while typical of primary renal failure, is more likely
the proximal tubule and the loop of Henle. After hypona-
due to a combination of prerenal azotemia and decreased
tremia develops, the concentration of Na in the ultrafiltrate
renal concentrating ability resulting from the effects of
is decreased, and this, in turn, decreases the amount of Na
available for reabsorption in these portions of the nephron.
to have a stress leukogram (Iymphopenia): absence of
The decreased Na absorption results in decreased Cl absorp-
stress leukogram in this ill animal is compatible with
tion and hypochloremia.
hypoadrenocorticism.
729
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
65
Signalment: 6-year-old M canine
 Blood Gas Data
Reference
History: Lethargic, quit eating
(arterial)
 Interval
Physical examination: Depressed, weak pulse.
apparent weakness
pH
7.213
7.33-7.45
PO2 (mmHg)
101.0
67-92
PCO2 (mnmHg)
27.6
24-39
HCO:(meq/L)
10.4
14-24 
(np/bu) +ey paziuo!
6.40
4.5-5.6
Hematology
Reference
Interval 
 PCV (%)
46.0
37-55
 Urinalysis
Hgb (g/dL)
16.2
12-18
PBC (×10%/μL)
7.10
5.5-8.5
Color
Yellow
 Urine Sediment 
MCV (f1)
65.0
60-72
Transparency
Apnop
WBCs/hpf
1-4
MCHC (g/d1)
35.0
34-38
Sp. Gr.
1.018
 RBCs/hpf
1-2
NCC (x103/μL)
20.4
6-17
 Protein 
Negative 
 Epith cells/hpf 
1-2
 Segs (x10°/μL)
11.4
3-11.5
 Negative
 Casts/lpf
Negative
Monos (x10°/μL)
1.8
0.1-1.3
 Biirubin 
Trace
 Crystals 
Negative 
Lymphs (x10°/μL)
5.5
1-4.8
Blood
 Negative 
 Bacteria
Negative 
E05 (×10²/μL)
1.6
0.1-1.2
pH 
6.0
Other
 Platelets (×103/μL)
574
200-500
dn
E6'0
TP (P) (g/dL)
5.9
8-9
 Endocrine Data
Reference Interval
 Biochemical
 Reference Interval
 ACTH stimulation:
 Profile 
 serum cortisol 
0.04 (1.1)
1-4 (28-110nmo/L)
(μg/dL)(pre)
Gluc (mg/dL)
79
65-122
 Serum cortisol 
0.09 (2.5)
<20 (<552nmol/L)
BUN (rng/dL)
95 (33.9)
7-28 (2.5-10.0 mmol/L)
(μg/dL)(post)
Creat (mg/dL)
3.8 (334)
0.9-1.7 (80-150μmol/L)
(p/6) e)
14.3 (3.57)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80mmo/L)
Phos (mg/dL)
9.9 (3.2)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.0mmo/L)
TP (g/dL)
5.8
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
3.0
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
2.8
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (mng/dL
0.3
010.4
Chol (mg/dL)
130
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
62
10-120
AST (IU/L)
108
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
38
35-280
GGT (IU/L)
3
9-0
Na (mmEq/L)
124
145-158
K (mEq/L)
7.1
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
8.9
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
10.1
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
32
8-25
Ammylase (IU/L)
1490
50-1250
Lipase (IU/L)
130
095-0E
730
Case 65
Interpretive discussion
accumulation of unmeasured anions such as lactic acids or
phosphates.
Hematology
There are no erythrocyte abnormalities. There is a lym-
Blood gas data
phocytosis, which should prompt brief consideration of
 The blood gas data indicate an uncompensated metabolic
lymphoma (note the hypercalcemia). or which could be
acidosis (decreased pH and HCO, normal pCOz). The ionized
explained by a corticosteroid deficiency. Whenever an ill
calcium concentration is increased, further supporting a
animal does not have a stress leukogram, one should con-
finding of hypercalcemia. One should consider the possibili-
sider the possibility of hypoadrenocorticism.
ties of either primary hypoadrenocorticism or renal disease
resulting in a functional deficit in response to corticosteroids 
Biochemical profile
and calcium retention.
The BUN, serum creatinine, and phosphorus concentrations
are moderately increased. These findings indicate decreased
Urinalysis
glomerular filtration rate. However, one cannot differentiate
 The urinary specific gravity revels only marginal concentrat-
the nature of the azotemia (prerenal, renal, or postrenal)
ing ability. which may result from either renal disease, or
based on these findings alone. Refer to the discussion of
loss of the medullary concentration gradient due to electro-
urinalysis results for further interpreta tion.
lyte depletion. This is a common finding in hypoadrenocorti-
The serum total calcium concentration is moderately
cism that should prompt further diagnostics to rule out
increased. The most common causes for this would be
primary renal disease. The absence of nonregenerative
anemia is evidence counter to chronic renal disease. The
cism, or renal failure. One might also consider primary
 dipstick protein was negative, and the UPC is <l.0, support-
hyperparathyroidism and vitamin D toxicosis.
ing no significant urinary protein loss.
The serum total protein, albumin, and globulin concentra-
tions are normal. The absence of hemoconcentration
decreases the probability for prerenal azotemia associated
Endocrine data
The pre and post ACTH cortisol concentrations are both low.
with dehydra tion.
There are no significant changes in indices of liver disease.
and there is an inadequate response. This confirms
with the exception of a mild increase in serum AST activity.
hypoadrenocorticism.
This may be due to mild hepatocellular damage or muscle
damage, but is small enough that further consideration may
not be necessary.
Summary
There are significant decrease in the serum concentrations
of Na and Cl, as well as a significant increase in serum K
Hypoadrenocorticism with typical azotemia secondary to
concentration. The Na:K ratio is 17.5, which is strongly
hypovolemia. While there is no biochemical evidence of
suggestive of hypoadrenocorticism. The presence of a meta-
hemoconcentration, hypovolemia is a consistent event
bolic acidosis (low total COz) is consistent with that possibil-
in
the
pathogenesis
ofazotemiaassociatedwith
ity. and the anion gap may be increased owing to
hypoadrenocorticism.
731
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
55E
Signalment Six-month-old Fs Norwegian elkhound
 Endocrine tests requested
 Reference Interval
History Poor appetite, small, and has not grown well
Physical examination Quiet, unhappy thin dog
 ACTH stimnulation 
serum cortisol (μg/dLxPre-basal)
0.4
1-4.5
 serum cortisol (μg/dL)(Post)
0.5
5.5-20
Hematology
 Reference Interval
Interpretive discussion
 PCV (%)
35.0
34-55
Hgb (g/dL)
11.8
11-18
Hematology
RBC (10%/μL)
5.6
5.5-8.5
The PCV, hemoglobin, and total RBC count are within refer-
MCV (fL)
69
60-72
MCHC (g/dL)
34
34-38
ence limits but plasma protein is increased indicating dehy-
NCC (x10²/μL)
7.7
6-17
dration. If the animal is dehydrated, it is likely that it is
Segs (x103/μL)
3.6
3-11.5
mildly anemic. There are no abnormalities in leukogram. Ill
Bands (x10²/μL)
0
E'0-0
animals usually have a stress leukogram.
Monos (x10°/μL)
1.2
0.1-1.3
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
2.4
1-4.8
Biochemical profile
Eos (×10²/μL)
0.5
0.1-1.2
 Platelets (x10²/ μL)
299
200-500
The most significant abnormalities are Na, K, Na:K ratio.
TP (P) (g/dL)
8.5
6-8
and Cl. There are three possible differential diagnoses. The
most likely differentials are Addison's disease or chronic
renal failure, possibly with a ruptured urinary bladder third.
Chronic renal failure is not as probable considering that the
creatinine is normal and the animal is capable of concentrat-
 Biochemical Profile
 Reference Interval
ing urine. The BUN:Ct ratio is 50. therefore one should
suspect dehydration or GI bleeding. Dehydration is deter-
Gluc (mg/dL)
67
65-122
BUN (mg/dL)
mined to be present by increases in both albumin and total
54
7-28
0.9
0.9-1.7
serum and plasma protein and can be further confirmed by
Creat (rmg/dL)
Ca (ng/dL)
12.7
9.0-11.2
physical examination. Creatinine will increase in dehydra-
 Phos (mng/dL)
10.2
2.8-6.1
tion due to decreased excretion; however, the BUN increases
TP (g/dL)
7.8
5.4-7.4
earlier because there will be decreased excretion and
Alb (g/dL)
4.9
2.7-4.5
increased reabsorption from tubules. The slow transit time
Glob (g/dL)
2.9
1.9-3.4
of glomerular filtrate through the tubules due to dehydra-
T. Bili (mg/dL)
0.2
0-0.4
tion allows for increased reabsorption of BUN, hence it
Chol (ng/dL)
211
130-370
increases more than creatinine. The urine specific gravity
ALT (IU/L)
92
10-120
would be expected to be >l.035 if the dog is dehydrated and
AST (IU/L)
22
16-40
has normal renal function. The inability to concentrate
ALP (IU/L)
155
35-280
beyond 1.020 is likely attributable to medullary washout
Na (mmEq/L)
130
145-158
due to the low sodium. Ruptured urinary bladder is unlikely
K (mEq/L)
7.7
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
98
since the dog is urinating and there is no history of trauma.
106-127
17
To confirm Addison's disease one should perform an ACTH
Na :K ratio
>25
TCO2 (mEq/L)
14-27
stimulation test following the determination of baseline cor-
An. gap (rmEq/L)
28.7
8-25
tisol concentrations.
Lipase (IU/L)
175
<500
Further support for Addisonian is: hypercalcemia. Hyper-
Arnylase 
1895
220-800
calcemia is seen in one third of dogs with hypoadrenocoriti-
cism. However hypercalcemia can also be seen in a small
percentage of dogs with renal failure. It would not be
expected in a dog with ruptured bladder. The presence of
hypercalcemia in this dog helps prioritize Addison's before
Urine Analysis
renal failure, ruptured urinary bladder and other differen-
Urine 5.g. voided
1.022
tials. Hyperphosphatemia is attributed to decreased glomer-
ular filtration rate due to dehydration in this case.
732
Case 66
The serum glucose concentration is at the low end of the
Special testing
reference interval. Hypoglycemia is sometimes seen in
ACTH stimulation confirmed hypoadrenocorticism. The
patients with hypoadrenocorticism, likely due to a lack of
basal sample is less than l μg/dL which strongly implicates
 glucocorticoids as well as mineralocorticoids.
Addison's especially given a Na:K ratio of 17. The post
The decreased bicarbonate (TCO2) is indicative of a meta-
sample of 0.5 is not an increase over basal and is therefore
bolic acidosis. Amylase is increased and this is attributed due
flatline which confirms hypoadrenocorticism in this dog.
to decreased glomerular filtration rate. Amylase and lipase
are excreted through the urine and any cause of decreased
GFR may result in one or both enzymes being increased.
Summary
Urine specific gravity of 1.022 in a dog with dehydration
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), with prerenal
due to renal disease or medullary washout of sodium. The
azotemia and probable medullary washout.
latter is more likely as azotemia is considered to be prerenal
 The most likely lesion is lymphyocytic adenalitis which
and medullary washout fits with Addison's and chronic
destroys all three cortical zones of both adrenal glands.
hyponatremia. The two most important solutes that produce
Regeneration will not occur therefore recommend treat-
a concentration gradient in the medullary interstitium are
ment with glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids for life.
UN and sodium. The decreased sodium in the medullary
 Dog was treated successfully, gained weight, and lived for 7
  l   s 
years.
only be partially concentrated.
733
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 1l-year-old spayed female beagle
 Urinalysis
History: Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and bilateral
symmetrical alopecia for 5 months
Specific Gravity
1.005
Physical examination: "Pot-bellied," comedones in
inguinal region, panting
 Endocrine Data
Reference
Interval
Hematology
Reference
Interval 
 ACTH stimulation
 serum cortisol 
12 (331)
1-4 (28-110)
PCV (%)
50
37-55
(μg/dL)(pre)
NCC (x10/μ1)
22.6
6-17
 serum cortisol 
15.5
<20
Segs (x10²/μ1)
20.0
3-11.5
(μg/dL)(post)
Monos (x10²/μ1)
2.3
0.1-1.3
Low dose dexamethasone suppression test
Lymphs (x103/μ1)
0
1-4.8
serum cortisol
9.0 (248)
1-4 (28-110)
Eos (x10°/μ1)
0.1-1.2
(μg/dL)(Pre)
NRBC (×103/μ1)
E'0
0
serum cortisol
8.0 (221)
<1.5 (41)
 Platelets (x103/μ1)
Acdequate
200-500
(μg/dLX3 hour post)
TP (P) (g/dL)
7.6
6-8
 serum cortisol
6.0 (166)
<1.5 (41)
(μg/dLx8 hour post)
 High dose dexamethasone suppression test
 Biochemical
Reference
serum cortisol 
10 (276)
1-4 (28-110)
 Profile
Interval
(μg/dL)(Pre)
serum cortisol 
8 (221)
<1.5 (41)
Gluc (mg/dL)
140 (7.7)
65-122 (3.5-6.7
(sod)(7p/6m)
mmo/L)
 snouabopLa
10 (2.2)
20-100
BUN (mg/dL)
6 (2.1)
7-28 (2.5-10.0
 ACTH (pg/mL)
(4.4-22.0)
mmol/L)
Creat (mg/dL)
1.0
0.9-1.7
Ca (mg/dL)
10.2
9.0-11.2
 Phos (mg/dL)
2.7 (0.9)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.0)
TP (g/dL)
7.2
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
4.1
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
3.1
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.2
0-0.4
Chol (mng/dL)
460 (12.0)
130-370 (3.4-9.6)
ALT (IU/L)
400
10-120
ALP (IU/L)
4500
35-280
Na (mEq/L)
159
145-158
K (mEq/L)
3.9
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
127
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
20
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
16
8-25
734
Case 67
Interpretive discussion
tration is within the reference interval. while most dogs
with hyperadrenocorticism have normal basal cortisol con-
Hematology
centrations, this increase is very suggestive of hyperadreno-
Mature neutrophilia, monocytosis, and lymphopenia are
corticism. While dogs with pituitary dependent hyperplasia
(PDH) have hyperplastic adrenals and dogs with functional
ticosteroids. Increased concentration of nucleated RBCs are
adrenocortical tumors have the potential to respond to
 a   se    aa   
ACTH stimulation by increasing cortisol production and
secondary to hyperadrenocorticism.
release, not all do so. Cortisol increases above the reference
interval following ACTH stimulation in approximately 85 %
Biochemical profile
of dogs with pituitary dependent disease, and in approxi-
Mild hyperglycemia is consistent with increased endogenous
mately 50% of dogs with adrenal tumors. In summary.
or exogenous corticosteroids. Glucocorticoids increase glu-
while ACTH stimulation is a useful screening test for PDH
coneogenesis and decrease peripheral utilization of glucose
and adrenal tumors, cortisol concentrations do not exceed
by antagonizing the effects of insulin.
the high end of the reference interval in many dogs. Thus.
The BUN concentration is below the reference interval.
While decreased BUN may be associated with liver failure
tumor, based on the ACTH stimulation results.
or inadequate protein intake, diuresis will also result in
Low and High Dose Dexamethasone Suppression: Dexa-
 '     n ss  as
methasone screening tests are diagnostically useful because
is probably stimulated by glucocorticoids.
in patients with pituitary dependent disease, the abnormal
Hypercholesterolemia is associated with numerous condi-
pituitary is somewhat resistant to the negative feedback
tions, including hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperad-
action of cortisol. Moreover, while dexamethasone may
renocorticism, and cholestasis. In this patient, the increase
inhibit endogenous ACTH production in dogs with adrenal
is probably due to hyperadrenocorticism.
tumors, endogenous ACTH production is probably already
Alanine aminotransferase activity is mildly increased.
maximally suppressed, and at any rate, these tumors usually
indicating glucocorticoid-induced increase in ALT produc-
autonomously secrete cortisol, independent of ACTH. In
tion or hepatocellular damage. Hepatocellular damage is an
normal dogs. endogenous ACTH is suppressed by dexameth-
important feature of steroid hepatopathy, which may be
asone, resulting in a rapid decline in plasma cortisol concen-
occurring in this dog. Alkaline phosphatase activity is mark-
trations which remain suppressed for up to 48 hours. Thus.
edly increased. While cholestasis may result in an increase
since this dog's cortisol concentration did not decrease,
of this magnitude, bilirubin is not increased, suggesting that
either pituitary dependent disease resulting in adrenocorti-
the increase is likely due to corticosteroid induction of alka-
cal hyperplasia, or adrenal neoplasia, is present.
line phosphatase. Activities of this magnitude are almost
Endogenous ACTH: Endogenous ACTH is below the refer-
always related to steroid effect. Determination of steroid-
ence interval in this dog. indicating that the dog has a func-
induced allkaline phosphatase isoenzyme would be helpful.
tional adrenal tumor, rather than pituitary disease.
Mild hypernatremia and hypokalemia are commonly seen
in approximately 50% of dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
Summary
Urinalysis
Urine specific gravity is low, and is likely due to hyperadre-
Hyperadrenocorticism due to functional adrenal tumor. On
nocorticism. Glucocorticoids are thought to interfere with
abdominal radiographs, a calcifed mass cranial to the right
ADH receptors, resulting in isosthenuria or hyposthenuria,
kidney was observed. On ultrasound examination, a large
and polyuria and polydipsia.
right adrenal mass was seen. The left adrenal was not detect-
able. A CT scan of the brain was normal.
Endocrine data
ACTH stimulation: The baseline cortisol concentration is
well above normal and the post-stimulation cortisol concen-
735
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
ase
68
Signalment: 4-year-old MC golden retriever
 Urinalysis
History: Polyuria, polydipsia for several months, on 
medication for flea allergy dermatitis
Color
Yellow
Urine Sediment
Physical examination: Exudative, erythematous 
Transparency
Apno
WBCs/hpf
2
 plaques in inguinal area. "pot-bellied" appearance
Sp. Gr.
1.002
 RBCs/hpf 
2
 Protein 
 Negative
 Epith cells/hpf 
0
2n15
Negative
 Casts/lpf
0
Bilirubin
 Negative
 Crystals 
0
Hematology
Reference
Blood 
Negative
 Bacteria
4+
Interval
pH
6.5
 PCV (%)
40
37-55
NCC (x10/μL)
25.9
6-17
Segs (x103/μL)
23.4
3-11.5
 Endocrine Data
Reference Interval
Monos (x10°/μL)
2.0
0.1-1.3
Lyrmphs (×10°/μL)
0.4
1-4.8
 ACTH stimulation
E05 (×103/μL)
0.1
0.1-1.2
serum cortisol 
1.2
1-4
 Platelets (x103/μL)
 Aclequate
200-500
(μg/dL)(pre)
TP (P) (g/dL)
7.5
8-9
serum cortisol
1.2 (33)
>10.5: <20 (>290: <550nmol/L)
(sod)(7p/6m)
Low dose dexamethasone suppression test
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
 serum cortisol 
2.0
1-4
 Profile
(μg/dL)(pre)
 serum cortisol
2.0 (55)
<1.5 (<41 nmol/L)
Gluc (mg/dL)
140 (7.7)
65-112 (3.5-6.7mmol/L)
(μg/dLX3-hour post)
BUN (mg/dL)
serum cortisol
1.7 (47)
<1.5 (<41 nmol/L)
18
7-28
Creat (mgy/dL)
1.2
(μg/dLx8-hour post)
0.9-1.7
Ca (ng/dL)
10.5
9.0-11.2
 Phos (mg/dL)
4.0
2.8-6.1
TP (g/dL)
7.0
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
4.0
2.7-4.5
Glob (g/dL)
3.0
1.9-3.4
T. Bili (rng/dL)
0.2
010.4
Chol (mg/dL)
350
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
110
10-120
AST (IU/L)
30
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
5500
35-280
GGT (IU/L)
260
9-0
Na (mEqy/L)
148
145-158
K (mEq/L)
5.0
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
112
106-127
TCO2 (mEq/L)
16
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
25
8-25
736
Case 68
Interpretive discussion
Glucocorticoids are thought to interfere with ADH receptors.
resulting in isosthenuria or hyposthenuria, and polyuria and
Hematology
polydipsia. Bacteriuria without significant pyuria may also
Mature neutrophilia, monocytosis, and lymphopenia are
occur with hyperadrenocorticism.
indicative of a corticosteroid (stress) leukogram.
Endocrine data
Biochemical profile
ACTH stimulation: Patients with iatrogenic hyperadrenocor
 Mild hyperglycemia is consistent with increased endogenous
ticism have a "flat-line" response to ACTH stimulation
 or exogenous corticosteroids.
(much like a patient with hypoadrenocorticism) due to feed-
back to the pituitary and secondary adrenal atrophy. While
While cholestasis may result in an increase of this magni-
some corticosteroid drugs cross-react on the cortisol assay.
tude, bilirubin is not increased, suggesting that the increase 
the post-ACTH response will not be higher than the pre-
is likely due to corticosteroid induction of alkaline phospha-
ACTH response.
tase. Determination of steroid-induced alkaline phosphatase
Low Dose Dexamethasone Suppression: LDDS is not
isoenzyme would be helpful.
helpful in diagnosing iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. The
Gamma glutamyl transferase activity is also markedly
pituitary is already responding to feedback from iatrogenic
increased, and with the lack of increase in ALT and AST
corticosteroids, and adrenal glands are atrophied.
activities, as well as bilirubin concentration, corticosteroid
induction is likely.
The combination of mild hyperglycemia and increased
Summary
ALP and GGT activities, with no other evidence of cholesta-
sis, should trigger further endocrine testing.
Iatrogenic Cushing disease which resulted from Vetalog
injections for flea allergy dermatitis. Fleas were eliminated.
Urinalysis
and the dog was slowly withdrawn from corticosteroids by
     
commonly seen in patients with hyperadrenocorticism.
months.
737
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
C
Signalment: 10-year-old spayed female Airedale
 Urinalysis
History: "Leaking" urine, polydipsia, limping
Physical examination: Ruptured anterior cruciate
Sp. Gr.
1.008
ligament, "pot-bellied," mild truncal alopecia
Bacteria
Many
Hematology
Reference
 Endocrine Data
 Reference lnterval
Interval
 ACTH stimulation:
PCV (%)
58
37-55
serum cortisol
8 (221)
1-4 (28-110nmo/L)
NCC (x10²/μL)
24.4
6-17
(μg/dL)(pre)
Segs (x103/μL)
21.5
3-11.5
serum cortisol 
20 (552)
<20 (<552nmol/L)
Monos (×10²/μL)
2.4
0.1-1.3
(μg/dL)(post)
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
0
1-4.8
Low dose dexamethasone suppression test 
NRBC (x10°/μL)
0.5
0
Platelets (x10²/μL)
serum cortisol
6 (166)
1-4 (28-110nmo/L)
Adequate
200-500
(μg/dL)(pre)
serum cortisol
0.9
<1.5
(μg/dLX3-hour post)
serum cortisol
1.7 (47)
<1.5 (<41 nmo/L)
 Biochemical
 Reference lnterval
(μg/dLx8-hour post)
 Profile
 High dose dexamethasone suppression test
Gluc (mg/dL)
130 (7.1)
65-122 (3.5-6.7mmol/L)
serum cortisol 
9 (248)
1-4 (28-110nmo/L)
BUN (mg/dL)
18
7-28
(μg/dL)(Pre)
Creat (rngy/dL)
1.2
0.9-1.7
serum cortisol 
3 (83)
<1.5 (<41 nmo/L)
Ca (mg/dL)
10.2
9.0-11.2
(μg/dL)(post)
 Phos (mg/dL)
4.9
2.8-6.1
endogenous ACTH 
(LL) 05E
20-100
TP (g/dL)
5.7
5.7-7.4
(pg/mL)
(4.4-22.0pmo/L)
Alb (g/dL)
2.7
2.7-4.5
 Glob (gy/dL)
3.0
1.9-3.4
T. Bili
0.3
010.4
Chol (mg/dL)
350
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
65
10-120
AST (IU/L)
60
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
4000
35-280
738
Case 69
Interpretive discussion
consistent with hyperadrenocorticism. Eighty-five percent
of dogs with pituitary dependent hyperplasia stimulate, as
Hematology
do approximately 50% of dogs with adrenal tumors. Thus,
The PCV is mildly increased, with increased nucleated eryth-
the ACTH stimulation is not diagnostic in this dog. but is
rocyte concentration. Possibilities for this combination might
suspicious.
include hypoxia or other causes of increased erythropoietin
Low dose dexamethasone suppression: Baseline cortisol is
above normal. The dog suppressed at 3 hours, with escape 
times have increased erythropoiesis. Additionally, corticoste-
from suppression at 8 hours. In normal dogs, endogenous
roids may inhibit removal of NRBC by macrophages in
ACTH is suppressed by dexamethasone, resulting in a rapid
spleen. Mature neutrophilia, monoctosis, and lymphopenia
decline in plasma cortisol concentrations which remain sup-
are indicative of a stress leukogram.
pressed for up to 48 hours. Most dogs with adrenal tumors
show no suppression at 3 or 8 hours. If a dog suppresses at 
Biochemical profile
3 hours, but does not remain suppressed at 8 hours, it is
i s    n  
likely that the dog has PDH, rather than an adrenal tumor.
 and may be a result of increased endogenous or exogenous
This "escape" is thought to be due to rapid clearance of
glucocorticoids.
dexamethasone.
Alkaline phosphatase is markedly increased, AST is mildly
 High dose dexamethasone suppression: Baseline cortisol
increased, and cholesterol is borderline high. No other
is above normal. The dog did not suppress to the range for
abnormalities are present. Increased alkaline phosphatase
normal dogs. Dogs with adrenal disease do not suppress, and
activity and mild hypercholesterolemia may be secondary to
most dogs with pituitary dependent adrenal hyperplasia
cholestasis; however, serum bilirubin is not increased. Alka-
(PPH) do suppress. Very high dose steroids will suppress
  o    
ACTH production, and hence cortisol secretion, even with
steroid induction. This is most likely given the magnitude of
PPD. However, most dogs with pituitary macroadenomas do
increase. The slight increase in serum AST activity may be
not suppress; an endogenous ACTH serum concentration is
 due to mild steroid hepatopathy or steroid induction.
indicated.
Endogenous ACTH: Dogs with PDH have normal to
Urinalysis
increased endogenous ACTH, while dogs with adrenal
 Urine specific gravity is quite low, and while it is not neces-
tumors have decreased endogenous ACTH. Thus, this dog
sarily abnormal, it is consistent with decreased urinary con-
has pituitary dependent disease.
to decreased responsiveness to ADH. Bacteriuria without
pyuria may be seen in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism.
Summary
and increased serum alkaline phosphatase activity should
A large pituitary macroadenoma was present in this dog.
trigger screening tests for hyperadrenocorticism.
this diagnosis.
Endocrine data
ACTH stimulation: Baseline cortisol is above normal and
poststimulation is "borderline." Stimulation of above 20 is
739
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Case
Signalment Eight-year-old MC, poodle
History Hair loss. PUPD
Physical exam Hair loss along abdomen and legs.
pendulous abdomen
Hematology
 Reference lnterval
 Urinalysis
 PCV (%)
42.0
37-55
Color
 yellow
 Urine Sediment 
Hgb (g/dL)
13.8
12-18
Transparency
hazy
WBCs/hpf
00-02
RBC (10%/μL)
5.8
5.5-8.5
Specific Gravity
1.008
 RBCs/hpf
50-100
MCV (fL)
72.0
60-72
 Protein 
2+
Epithelial cells/hpf 
few
MCHC (g/dL)
34-38
Glucose
1+
Casts/lpf
neg
NCC (x10²/μL)
23.4
6-17
Ketones
neg
Segs (x103/μL)
20.1
3-11.5
 Biirubin 
neg
Crystals 
triple phosphate
Bands (x10²/μL)
0
E:0-0
Blood 
+E
Bacteria 
1+
Monos (x10°/μL)
2.7
0.1-1.3
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
0.6
1-4.8
E05 (×10/μL)
0
0.1-1.2
Platelets (x10°/ μL)
455
200-500
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.5
8-9
 Hemopathology: few nucleated red blood cells noted
Endocrine data
Cortisol (μg/dL)
 Reference Interval 
Basal cortisol
3.6
1-4 
ACTH stim
28
8-16
Basal cortisol
4.1
1-4 
 Biochemical Profile
 Reference Interval
LDDS 8h post
4.4
<1.4
Gluc (mg/dL)
289
65-122
 Basal cortisol 
3.8
BUN (rng/dL)
22
7-28
HDDS 4h
4.6
<1.4
Creat (mg/dL)
0.8
0.9-1.7
HDDS 8h 
2.2
<1.4
Ca (mg/dL)
10.1
9.0-11.2
 Endogenous ACTH pg/mL 
264
10-80
 Phos (mng/dL)
5.2
2.8-6.1
TP (gy/dL)
6.7
5.4-7.4
Two weeks later
Alb (g/dL)
E'6
2.7-4.5
 Basal cortisol 
0.3
1-4 
Glob (g/dL)
3.4
1.9-3.4
 ACTH stim
0.4
8-16
T. Bili (mg/dL)
0.2
0-0.4
Chol (mg/dL)
411
130-370
ALT (IU/L)
420
10-120
AST (IU/L)
122
16-40
ALP (IU/L)
6855
35-280
Na (mmEq/L)
146
145-158
K (mEq/L)
4.3
4.1-5.5
CL (mEq/L)
115
106-127
Na:K ratio
34
>25
TCO2 (mEq/L)
20
14-27
An. gap (mEq/L)
15.3
8-25
Lipase (IU/L)
175
<500
 Amylase 
441
220-800
740
Case 70
Interpretive discussion
disease from an adrenal tumor. The basal concentration of
cortisol in the LDDs is just above reference interval but the
Hematology
8 hour value is well above 1.4μg/dL therefore there was
A few nucleated red blood cells are present in the absence
failure to suppress and Cushing's disease is ruled in when
of anemia. This may indicate a disruption in the endothelial
all the other data fits, as in this dog. (False positive rate for
barrier in centers of hematopoiesis, or is possibly a result of
LDDS, however, is as high as 50% therefore all the other
immunosuppression and lack of removal of nuclei by mac-
lab and historical and physical exam results need to fit with
rophages. Increased NRBCs can be seen with hemangiosar-
HAC.) Unfortunately. a 4 hour sample was not collected
coma, some leukemias, lead toxicity, hyperadrenocorticism
  n i    
(HAC) and DIC. The leukogram is characteristic of a stress
and adrenal dependent HAC. If the 4 hour sample exhibited
or steroid response: mature neutorphilia, lymphopenia.
suppression (<l.4) with the present value for the 8 hour
eosinopenia and monocytosis.
sample of no suppression it would have indicated a rebound
which is consistent with pituitary dependent Cushing's
disease, the more common cause of HAC. The HDDS is
Biochemical profile
confusing or at least not very helpful. The basal cortisol is
Marked increase in ALP with only mild increases in ALT and
normal, the 4 hour sample clearly failed to suppress and
AST indicate possible cholestasis and or hyperadrenocorti-
the 8 hour sample is above 1.4, but it is almost 50% less
cism. An ALP over 500oIU/L without bilirubinemia and
than the basal and the 4 hour samples. The interpretation
only mild increases in ALT and AST is most consistent with
is the HDDS failed to suppress, indicating AT or PD HAC
HAC. Further support for this diagnosis is history of alopecia
(suppression would indicate the dog had PD HAC). Although
and PUPD coupled with dilute urine, cystitis and nucleated
the endocrine testing to this point indicates an adrenal
red blood cells. Over 90% of Cushingoid dogs will have mild
tumor is possible, adrenal tumors only account for 10-20%
to marked ALP. If ALP is not increased it is very unlikely
of dogs with HAC. Furthermore there seemed to be some
that a dog has HAC. Cholesterol is increased which in this
suppression by the HDDS but even using a decrease of cor-
dog could be cholestasis, hypothyroidism, or HAC. Increases
tisol by 50% from basal it still did not clearly suppress.
 ()  on  a    
Another way to define suppression is if the 8 hour sample
topathy induced by hyperadrenocorticism. Hyperglycemia is
is less than 50% of basal even if it is still greater than 1 .4 μg/
moderate, which is consistent with hyperadrenocorticism.
dL. In this dog the 8 hour sample is 57% of basal, and the
The urine analysis has abundant evidence for infectious
8 hour sample is 47% of the 4 hour sample. Because dis-
cystitis; numerous leukocytes and bacteria are present. Col-
tinction of AT and PD is needed for treatment and the HDDS
lection method is not specifed, therefore inflammation
could be present anywhere in the urogenital tract. Protein-
endogenous ACTH concentration were performed. Abdomi-
uria may be due to the inflammatory response and increased
nal Us did not identify an adrenal tumor and the endog-
capillary permeability. Absence of casts and no azotemia
enous ACTH clearly indicates this dog has PD HAC.
support cystitis over pyleonephritis. Dilute urine is lilkely a
result of a failure to concentrate due to glucocorticoid
interference with ADH, subsequent polyuria, and respon-
sive polydipsia. Cystitis is fairly common in dogs with
Summary
hypera drenocorticism.
At this point, laboratory evaluation of the endocrine
The e ACTH is markedly increased, and therefore the dog
system should be done. Initially, a low dose dexamethasone
has a pituitary neoplasm secreting ACTH. The dog was given
suppression test (LDDS) should be performed. If LLDS indi-
mitotane. The ACTH stim 2 weeks post diagnosis indicates
cates hyperadrenocorticism, one should then perform an
a flat line response. The dog was clinically normal, and the 
electrolytes were normal, and therefore this indicated
adrenocorticism (PD HAC) from an adrenal tumor.
degeneration to necrosis of zona fasiculata by the mitotane.
When dosed correctly the cortex will eventually regenerate.
Under the stimulation of the ACTH secreting pituitary tumor
Endocrine testing
the adrenal cortex will regenerate and is the reason repeated
In this patient, the ACTH stimulation was done and
 ACTH stims will be required during maintenance therapy.
although the basal cortisol is normal the post stim sample
The results of the ACTH stim are the same pattern seen with
hypoadrenocorticism, spontaneous disease, or from mito-
corticism. One must now differentiate pituitary dependent
tane or steroid therapy.
741
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
5156
Signalment: 6-year-old male dog
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
History: Change in temperament from docile to
 Profile
irritable. Severe constipation for several days.
Physical examination: No abnormalities detected
Gluc (mg/dL)
80
65-122
BUN (mg/dL)
28
7-28
Creat (mng/cdL)
1.5
0.9-1.7
Ca (mmg/dL)
14.3 (3.57)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80 mmo/L)
Hematology
Reference
 Phos (mgy/dL)
1.7 (0.5)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.0 mmol/L)
Interval
TP (g/dL)
6.1
5.4-7.4
Alb (g/dL)
3.4
2.7-4.5
PCV (%)
44
37-55
Glob (g/dL)
2.7
1.9-3.4
Hgb (g/cdL)
14.5
12-18
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.4
0-0.4
RBC (×10%μL)
6.7
5.5-8.5
Chol (rng/dL)
235
130-370
MCV (fL)
66
60-72
ALT (IU/L)
100
10-120
MCHC (g/dL)
EE
34-38
AST (IU/L)
16-40 
NCC (x10°/μL)
15.6
6-17
ALP (IU/L)
285
35-280
Segs (x103/μL)
12.7
3-11.5
Na (mEq/L)
145
145-158
Mono5 (x10/μL)
0.2
0.1-1.3
K (mEq/L)
5.3
4.1-5.5
Lymphs (×10°/μL)
2.4
1-4.8
CL (mEq/L)
115
106-127
Eos (×103/μL)
E0
0.1-1.2
TCO2(mEq/L)
21
14-27
 Platelets (×103/μL)
440
200-500
An. gap (mEq/L)
14
8-25
TP (P) (g/dL)
6.8
8-9
 Hemopathology: Normal 
Urinalysis (catheterized)
Color
Yellow
 Urine Sediment
Transparency
Clear
WBCs/hpf
0-2
Sp. Gr.
1.011
RBCs/hpf
0
 Protein 
Negative 
 Epith cells/hpf 
0
3n(5
 Negative 
Casts/lpf 
0
 Biirubin 
Negative
Crystals 
0
Blood 
 Negative
 Bacteria
0
pH 
6.5
 Endocrine Data
 Reference
Interval
Intact parathormone
22
 2-13 (pmol/L)
PTHrp
 Undetectable 
<0.2 (pmol/L)
742
Case 71
Interpretive discussion
calcemia can, however, interfere with renal concentrating
ability and can result in decreased urine specific gravity with
Hematology
subsequent polyuria and polydipsia. Nephrocalcinosis, other
In light of normal results for other erythrocyte measure-
toxic effects of calcium on renal tubules, and interference
ments. the decreased MCHC is marginal and not
with the action of antidiuretic hormone are possible mecha-
important.
nisms for decreased concentrating ability in hypercalcemic
 The mild mature neutrophilia, in the absence of lympho-
animals. The absence of polyuria and polydipsia in this dog
penia, suggests normal variability or very mild inflammation.
 suggests that calcium interference with renal concentrating
This dog's irritability may have predisposed it to epinephrine
ability is not a major factor.
release when the venipuncture was performed, although
excitement leukograms are quite rare in dogs.
Endocrine data
Increased intact parathormone (iPTH) concentration and
Biochemical profile
undetectable PTH-related protein (PTHrp) concentration
Hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia can occur with
indicate that this dog has primary hyperparathyroidism.
rather than hypercalcemia of malignancy. The iPTH concen-
ism (hypercalcemia of malignancy). In this case, the increased
trations are increased due to overproduction of PTH by
intact parathormone (iPTH) and normal parathormone-
hyperplasticor neoplastic parathyroid glands. Parathormone-
related protein is synthesized by malignant cells of
neoplasms such as lymphoma and apocrine gland adenocar-
assays below). Other causes of hypercalcemia include
cinoma of the anal sac, but not by the parathyroid glands.
vitamin D toxicosis, excessive bone resorption, and renal
and concentrations of PTHrp are, therefore, not increased in 
failure (5-10% of these cases in dogs). but serum phospho-
animals with primary hyperparathyroidism.
rus concentration is typically normal to increased in these
cases.
The slightly increased serum alkaline phosphatase activity
Summary
is not significant. There is no evidence suggesting either
 cholestasis or increased corticosteroid levels. Since this dog
The combination of hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia.
has an abnormality of calcium and phosphorus metabolism,
increased iPTH concentration, and undetectable PTHrp
it is possible that altered bone metabolism is occurring.
concentration  indicate  primary  hyperparathyroidism  in
Although the net effect in this animal is probably bone
this case. A mass in the neck region compatible in location
demineralization, increased osteoblastic activity, as part of
with the parathyroid gland was found during a more thor-
effort to regenerate bone, may have resulted in this slight
ough physical examination. Surgical removal and histo-
increase in activity.
pathologic examination revealed a parathyroid adenoma.
This dog's clinical signs and serum calcium and phospho-
Urinalysis
rus concentrations returned to normal after surgery. Irrita-
  sn     a 
bility is unusual in hypercalcemic dogs: dullness is more
 Status and, therefore, may be normal in this patient. Hyper-
common.
743
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
.ase
Signalment Eleven-year old Fs Australian cattle dog
Interpretive discussion
History Poor appetite
Physical examination Quiet, adequate body
Hematology
condition
 Unremarkable; absence of a stress leukogram may prove
informative.
Hematology
 Reference Interval
Biochemical profile
 PCV (%)
53
39-58
Mild hypercalcemia is the only abnormality. The increased
Hgb (g/dL)
19.7
13.8-20.3
total serum calcium explains the dilute hyposthenuria, as
RBC (10%/μL)
7.67
5.7-8.0
hypercalcemia affects the function of ADH on tubules.
MCV (fL)
75
61-75
Serum phosphorus is normal which is somewhat helpful to
MCHC (g/dL)
34.3
30.8-35.4
shorten the list of differentials for hypercalcemia. Recom-
NCC (x103/μL)
6.91
4.4-11.6
mend rechecking calcium, total and ionized, and if both are
Segs (x103/μL)
4.9
2.8-9.1
increased pursue possible causes of hypercalcemia. The
Bandls (×103/μL)
0
E'0-0
calcium is lilkely to be increased again given the urine spe-
Monos (x103/μL)
0.9
0.07-1.0
B     e   
Lymphs (x103/μL)
2.4
E'E-9'0
 d   o 
Eos (x103/μL)
0.2
0-1.2
Platelets (x103/ μL)
200-500
because the serum phosphorus is normal and there are no
99E
TP (P) (g/dL)
7.4
other significant biochemical abnormalities. Unlikely differ-
6.1-7.5
entials are hypoadrenocorticism, renal failure, vitamin D
toxicity, and granulomatous diseases, all of which usually
have increased serum phosphorus and produce other bio-
 Biochemical
Reference Interval 
chemical disturbances. The only two diseases that produce
 Profile
 hypercalcemia and hypophosphatermia in dogs are hypercal-
cemia of malignancy and primary hyperparathyroidism.
Gluc (mg/dL)
91
70-131
BUN (rng/dL)
14
6-26
Creat (ng/dL)
0.7
0.7-1.5
Summary and follow-up
Ca (ng/dL)
12.3
9.3-11.5
 Phos (mng/dL)
2'2
2.5-5.6
Both total serum calcium and ionized calcium were increased
 Magnesium (mgy/dL)
2.0
1.8-2.5
on a recheck. On physical examination, no evidence of lym-
 TP (g/dL)
6.7
5.2-7.4
phoma or perirectal apocrine gland adenocarcinoma was
Alb (g/dL)
3.9
6'6-6
found. Serum was sent for PTH and PTH-rp.
Glob (g/dL)
2.8
1.7-3.8
T. Bili (rmng/dL)
0.1
E'0-0
 Endocrine Data
Reference Interval
Chol (mg/dL)
274
124-344
ALS (IU/L)
72
12-54
PTH (pmol/L)
35.5
3-17
ALP (IU/L)
62
16-140
 PTHrp (pmol/L)
0
0-0.9
GGT (IU/L)
5
9-0
iCa
1.65
1.25-1.45
CK (IU/L)
176
43-234
Na (mEq/L)
145
140-156
K (mEq/L)
4.4
4-5.3
These results confirm hypercalcemia and rule in primary
CL (mEq/L)
111
108-122
hyperpa rat hyroidism.
Na : K ratio
32.6
>25
The neck region was explored and a small mass was found
TCO2 (mEq/L)
22
18-26
in the region of one thyroid lobe. During surgery a STAT
An. gap (mEq/L)
16.1
11.2-19
methodology to measure PTH pre and post removal of any
Lipase (IU/L)
210
12-147
mass was employed and the results were:
 Amylase 
600
236-1337
Ad ditional Endocrine Data
Reference
Interval
Urine Analysis
 PTH Sarmple 1. pre, Turbo intact PTh (pg/mL)
98
11.2-72.8
Urine 5.g. voided
1.007
 PTH Sample 2, post, Turbo intact PTh (pg/mL)
9.0
744
Case 72
 The decrease in PTH in the second sample, after the para-
in dogs. but if PTH is detectable in an animal that is hyper-
thyroid mass was removed is dramatic (less than 50% of
 calcemic and not azotemic then this combination is inap-
previous sample) indicating that the offending lesion was
propriately abnormal because PTH should be decreased or
removed.
undetectable in response to nonparathyroid induced hyper-
calcemia. If PTH is within the reference interval, it is inap-
Comment
propriately high in the face of hypercalcemia, and therefore
diagnostic for primary HPTH. It indicates the parathyroid
The serum concentration of PTH was increased in this
gland is secreting PTH at a time when secretion should be
dog when it was hypercalcemic which makes the diagnosis 
suppressed. It is critical to measure PTHrp concurrently as
of primary hyperparathyroidism (HPTH) quite simple.
many dogs with hypercalcemia of malignancy will have
However, increased PTH is only present in about 25% of
measureable PTH.
Hdh Ad ym (s) so uuan an pue so
Ultrasonography of the neck region is just as accurate at
will have a concentration of PTH within reference interval.
identifying a parathyroid mass as is measuring serum PTH
and if positive will localize the side of the neck to look for
will have serum PTH concentrations in the low to middle
the adenoma during surgery. More than one mass is possi-
range. Increased concentrations of PTH are the exception
 ble, especially in Keeshonds.
745
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment Eleven-year-old FS mixed breed dog
 Urinalysis cystocentesis
History Weight loss, poor appetite and lethargy
Physical examination Thin body condition.
Color
yellow
Urine Sediment
depressed attitude
 Transparency
clear
WBCs/hpf
E-0
Specific Gravity
1.010
RBCs/hpf 
10-30
 Protein 
1+
 Epithelial cells/hpf
none 
Glucose
Casts/pf
6au
Ketones
neg
Crystals 
auou
Hematology
 Reference Interval
 Biirubin 
neg
Blood 
2+
 Packed cell volume (%)
32
85-66
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
10.8
13.8-20.3
RBC (10%/μL)
4.27
5.7-8.01
Interpretive discussion
MCV (fL)
74
61-75
MCHC (g/dL)
34
30.8-35.4
Hematology
 Total nucleated cell count (x10²/μL)
10.2
4.4-11.6
There is a mild anemia. Although a reticulocyte count is not
Segmented neutrophils (x1 03/μL)
7.9
2.84-9.11
present the indices are normocytic normochromic which
 Band neutrophils (x103/μL)
0
E'0-0
indicate it may be nonregenerative. The azotemia could
Monocytes (x10²/μL)
1.9
0.075-1.0
Lyrnphocytes (x103/μL)
0.4
0.59-3.3
explain this anemia if the azotemia is due to chronic renal
Eosinophils (x10²/μL)
0
0.03-1.2
disease. Anemia of inflammatory disease is another possible
 Platelets (x10²/ μL)
98E
190-468
cause of the anemia in this dog. There is a stress leukogram
 Plasma protein (g/dL)
7.1
6.1-7.5
as evidenced by the lymphopenia, eosinopenia, and
monocytosis.
Biochemical profile
The dog has renal failure based on mild azotemia combined
 Biochemical Profile
 Reference Interval
with isosthenuria. However, any time the serum calcium is
increased the kidneys may not be able to concentrate urine
Gluc (mg/dL)
98
70-131
adequately (interference with ADH) which in this case
BUN (rng/dL)
74
6-26
clouds the interpretation that primary renal disease is
Creat (mg/dL)
3.7
0.7-1.5
 present. If this dog is dehydrated the azotemia may all or
Ca (mg/dL)
17.3
9.3-11.5
partially be due to prerenal and the dilute urine in the face
 Phos (mg/dL)
7.3
2.5-5.6
of dehydration is caused by hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia
Magnesium (mg/dL)
2.0
1.8-2.5
is severe, hyperphosphatemia is mild to moderate. The Ca x
TP (g/dL)
6.9
5.2-7.4
 P product is 126. which indicates mineralization of soft
Alb (g/dL)
66
6'6-E
tissues is occurring. Mineralization may have caused the
Glob (g/dL)
3.0
1.7-3.8
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.1
E'0-0
renal failure or at least enhanced it. The diagnostic dilemma
Chol (mg/dL)
254
124-344
is to determine which came first, the renal failure or the
ALS (IU/L)
372
12-54
hypercalcemia. It is often difficult to distinguish and there
ASt (IU/L)
888
42-175
may be two diseases occurring. renal failure and a disease
ALP (IU/L)
662
16-140
other than renal disease that caused hypercalcemia (e.g.. a
GGT (IU/L)
15
9-0
malignancy, vitamin D toxicity, etc.). In this dog it seems
CK (IU/L)
111
43-234
          
Na (mEq/L)
141
140-156
 second disease causing hypercalcemia. This is based on mild
K (mEq/L)
4.9
4-5.3
hyperphosphatemia and marked hypercalcemia. Rules to
CL (mEq/L)
110
108-122
help make this distinction are: the greater the serum P the
Na : K ratio
28.7
>25
more likely the primary disease is renal and the lower the
TCO2 (mEq/L)
12
18-26
An. gap (mEgq/L)
serum P the more likely there is hypercalcemia of malig-
23.9
11.2-19
12-147
nancy (HCM). The higher the serum calcium the more likely
Lipase (IU/L)
510
 Arnylase
1724
236-1337
there is a malignancy and the lower the calcium the more
 likely renal disease is causing hypercalcemia. The greater the
746
Case 73
azotemia the more likely it is primary renal and the
overweight with an acute onset of problems, none of which
this dog has. The dog has a metabolic acidosis probably
caused by the mineralization or it is pre renal. The easiest
caused by dehydration and or renal disease.
way to distinguish is to either find the malignancy or iden-
A reasonable plan is to search for lymphoma (palpate
tify the type of renal failure (chronic, acute, glomerular.
lymph nodes, search for an anterior thoracic mass, abdomi-
pyelonephritis etc.). In this dog it seems clear the primary
nal organ evaluation, etc.) and do a rectal and perirectal
disease is one that is causing hypercalcemia because the
exam to evaluate if a carcinoma of the anal sacs is present.
azotemia is mild, the hypercalcemia is severe and hyper-
If a malignant tumor is found there is no need to perform
phosphatemia is mild. This distinction can be more difficult
PTH and PTH rp assays.
in other cases. A reasonable plan is to search for cancer and
give the dog fluids to see if the azotemia can be reversed.
Measuring ionized calcium may also be diagnostically
Summary
helpful. If the ionized calcium is within the reference inter-
val then primary renal failure is more likely, but if ionized
A mass was found in the pelvic vault, and aspirational cytol-
calcium is increased it could still be either primary renal or
 ogy indicated it was a tumor of the anal sacs. These are
a malignancy.
invariably malignant, but repeated excisions and or chemo-
The urine is not concentrated, which could be primary
therapy can extend a dog's life for months or years. These
renal or secondary to hypercalcemia. There is some blood
owners declined treatments. Intravenous and subcutaneous 
likely due to cystocentesis, which may also be responsible
fluid therapy decreased the azotemia, but it did not return
for the l+ protein. The rest of the analysis is unremarkable.
     s a 
if or what type of renal disease was present and whether
and the enzymes associated with cholestasis are increased
mineralization played a role. The anemia was due to anemia
(ALP, GGT). There are many possible causes of cholestasis in
of chronic disease (cancer) and or concurrent renal disease.
this dog, one of which is an infiltrative disease in the liver
 The most common substance secreted by tumors is PTHrp.
such as lymphoma, another possiblity is pancreatitis. The
which stimulates phosphaturia and results in hypophospha-
   P  as  a  ss
temia, absolute or as in this dog relative for the degree of
likely due to decreased GFR (azotemia) and therefore
azotemia. Primary hyperparathyroidism could cause the
decreased excretion than pancreatitis. If the dog had pan- 
hypercalcemia and phosphaturia, but rarely is there concur-
creatitis it may have hypocalcemia, tender abdomen and be
rent azotemia with primary hyperparathyroidism.
747
SEcTloN Vl Clinical Case Presentations
Signalment: 9-year-old intact male dog
 Biochemical
Reference Interval
History: One seizure. Occasional tremors observed.
 Profile
Physical examination: Physical abnormalities, but
had seizure during examination
Gluc (mg/dL)
138 (7.6)
65-122 (3.5-6.7 mmo/L)
BUN (mg/dL)
14
7-28
 Creat (rng/dL)
0.5
0.9-1.7
Hematology
Reference
Ca (mmg/dL)
4.0 (1.0)
9.0-11.2 (2.25-2.80 mmo/L)
Interval 
Phos (mg/dL)
7.0 (2.3)
2.8-6.1 (0.9-2.9 mmol/L)
TP (g/dL)
7.0
5.4-7.4
PCV (%)
44
37-55
Alb (g/dL)
96
2.7-4.5
Hgb (g/dL)
15.2
12-18
Glob (g/dL)
3.4
1.9-3.4
RBC (×10%μL)
7.1
5.5-8.5
T. Bili (mng/dL)
0.4
0-0.4
MCV (fL)
62
60-72
(7p/6u) 104)
161
130-370
MCHC (g/dL)
35
34-38
ALT (IU/L)
38
10-120
NCC (x10²/μL)
20.2
6-17
AST (IU/L)
18
16-40 
Segs (x103/μL)
17.2
3-11.5
ALP (IU/L)
176
35-280
Monos (x10°/μL)
2.4
0.1-1.3
Na (mEq/L)
145
145-158
Lyrmphs (x10²/μL)
0.6
1-4.8 
K (mEq/L)
4.4
4.1-5.5
 Platelets (x103/μL)
470
200-500
CL (mEq/L)
103
106-127
TP (P) (g/dL)
7.2
6-8
TCO2 (mEq/L)
22
14-27
 Hemopathology: Normal
An. gap (mEq/L)
24
8-25
Urinalysis
Color
Yellow
Urine Sediment
Transparency
Clear
WBCs/hpf
0
Sp. Gr.
1.032
 RBCs/hpf
0
 Protein 
Negative 
 Epith cells/hpf 
0
2n15
Negative
 Casts/lpf
0
Biirubin
Trace
 Crystals 
0
Blood 
Negative
 Bacteria
pH
6.0
 Endocrine Data
Reference Interval
iPTH (pmol/L)
2
2-13
748
Case 74
Interpretive discussion
may also result in hypocalcemia, but hypophosphatemia
Hematology
ciency. Hypoparathyroidism can be confirmed by measuring
Mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, and monocytosis are
the serum intact parathormone concentration (see below).
typical of a stress leulkogram.
Slight hypochloremia, in the absence of abnormalities in
Na, K, or total COz, is probably insignificant.
Biochemical profile
The serum glucose concentration is in the range typical for
Urinalysis
glucocorticoid-induced hyperglycemia. Stress is the most
The urinalysis is normal.
likely cause in this case. particularly in light of the
leukogram.
Endocrine data
 Decreased serum creatinine concentration is meaningless
The serum intact parathyroid hormone (iPTH) concentration
in most cases. This abnormality can result from diuresis, but,
is at the low end of the reference interval. The normal
if this is the cause, the BUN concentration is usually also
response of the parathyroid glands to hypocalcemia is pro-
decreased. The absence of a history of polyuria and the
duction of PTH. Low normal iPTH concentration in a hypo-
normal BUN concentration make diuresis unlikely in this
calcemic animal strongly suggests inability of the parathyroid
case.
glands to respond to hypocalcemia and, therefore, hypo-
Hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia can occur in renal
parathyroidism. Other possible causes of hypocalcemia (dis-
failure, pancreatitis with prerenal azotemia, eating a diet
cussed above) should result in high normal to increased
iPTH concentra tions.
 Hypoparathyroidism is most likely in this case. Normal BUN
concentration and decreased serum creatinine concentra tion
indicate that renal function is normal. Clinical signs are not
Summary
typical of pancreatitis, and there is no evidence of a prerenal
azotemia. This dog may be receiving a diet with excessive
The combination of hypocalcemia with low normal iPTH
phosphorus, but this is very unlikely if the dog is receiving
concentration indicate hypoparathyroidism. Other diseases
a commercial diet. Hypoalbuminenmia is another cause of
can result in hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, but
hypocalcemia, but the absence of hypoalbuminemia indi-
iPTH concentration in these diseases is typically high normal
cates that this is not a consideration. Vitamin D deficiency
to increased.
749
Note: Page numbers in italics refer to Figures: those in bold to Tables.
Abdominal fluid analysis
Acute-phase proteins (APP), 460-461
Albumin
coagulation case studies. 644-645
Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism)
azotemia. 337-338
hematology case studies. 628. 636-637
birds. 596
birds. 592
hepatic case studies. 686-687. 688. 701-702
case studies. 726-733
classification. 460-461
pancreatic case stucies. 705-706
hypercalcemia. 388. 566-567
electrophoresis, 32.33
 Abnormal values. See Data interpretation;
hypocholesterolemia, 493
 hypoalbuminemia with hypoglobulinemia.
Reference interval
polyuria. 334
464-465, 465
Absolute polycythemia. 114-115
primary vs secondary. 513. 514-521
liver evaluation. 416. 679
Absorbance spectrophotometry. 20-25. 20.
ruling out, 497
measurement. 461. 462
21.23
Adenocarcinoma. 640-641
as protein abnormality. 355-358
Absorbed complement preparation.
Adjusted calcium. 546. 548-549
selective hypoalbuminemia. 465-466
cossmatching. 221-222
Adrenal dependent hyperadrenocorticism (ADH).
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
Acanthocytes (spur cells). 65. 88
275
birds. 590
Accuracy. defined. 45. 46
Adrenal gland disorders. 513-534
clinical chemistry. 524-525
Acetaminophen toxicosis, 100. 102
corticosterone, 596
fish. 612
Acetyl-coenzyme A (Acetyl-CoA). 482
fish. 613
liver evaluation. 403. 406-410, 408
Acid-base analysis. 393-400. See aiso Blood gas
hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease). 522-
mammals, 573. 578
analysis
532. 522
reptiles, 604
birds. 586-587, 589
hyperaldosteronism. 521-522
rodents. 575
case studies. 646-647. 669. 670. 673-676. 685.
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease). 514-
Allium family. 101-102
709-710, 712-717, 730-731
521. see also Addison's disease
Alloantibodies. 205-206
data imterpretation, 396-398. 397. 398
overview of. 514
Alpacas, hepatic case stucies. 699-700
ferrets. 579-580
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
Alphal-proteinase inhibitor concentration (αI-
fish. 609-611
endoorine case studies. 726-737. 740-742
PI). 451
mixed acid-base disturbances. 398-399. 399
hyperadrenocorticism testing. 530
American College of Veterinary Internal
physiologic comsiderations. 394-396. 394, 395
stimulation test, 527-530, 529
Medicine (ACVIM). blood transfusion, 210
rabbits. 578
Aegyptianella spp..265.266
Ammonia
reptiles. 602-603
African hedgehogs (Atelerix albiventris)
ammonia biurate. 350
rodents. 575
hematology of. 235. 236. 237
fish, 611
technical considerations. 393-394
laboratory evaluation. 581
in plasma. 415-416
Acid-citrate-dextrose (ACD). 209-210
 plasma biochemical values. 575
toxidity. 211.432
Acquired coagulopathy. 195-196
Agglutination
Amperometry. 29. 30
Acromegaly (hypersomatotropism). 541-542
crossmatching. 219-220. 220
Amphibians. 313-320
Activated coagulation time (ACT). 190. 192. 198.
defined. 70-71
blood collection. 313-314, 314. 613
202-203
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 92
erythrocytes. 314-315. 314. 315
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).
leukocyte agglutination, 129-130
hematopoiesis. 319-320
190, 192. 194. 198, 203
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
leukocytes. 315-318. 316. 317-318
Acute blood loss, 87-88
birds. 590. 595
parasites. 319
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). 176-178.
hepatocyte injury. 404-405. 404
serum reference values, 613
177
kinetic enzyme assay. 24
thrombocytes. 318-319. 318. 319
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML). 168-174
muscle injury. 477-478
Amylase
Acute renal failure (ARF). 367. See aiso Renal
reptiles. 602
 pancreatic injury. 427
failure
rodents. 576
renal failure. 358-359
Veterinary Hematology and Clinical Chemistry. Second Edition. Edited by Mary Anna Thrall, Glade Weiser, Robin W. Allison,
and Terry W. Campbell.
@ 20l2 John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley 6 Sons, Inc.
750
Index
Amyloidosis. pancreatic, 432
Atelerix albiventris (African hedgehogs)
hematopoiesis. 266-272. 267. 269
Anaplasma piatys. 199.200
hematology of. 235. 236. 237
laboratory evaluation, see Birds. laboratory
Anaplasmosis. 70. 97
laboratory evaluation, 581
evaluation
Anemia. 75-80
 plasma biochemical values. 575
leukocytes. 249-261, 250-256. 258-259
birds. 247-248
Atomic absorption (AA) spectrophotometry. 25
parasites. 262-266. 262. 264
blood loss. 88
Atoxoplasma spp.. 265
thrombocytes and hemostasis. 26l-262
classification. 75-77
Autoantibodies. 500. 507
thymus, 272
bone marrow respomse, 76
Azotemia. 326-332. 326
Birds. laboratory evaluation. 582-596
erythrocyte size. 75-76. 78-79
case studies. 336-337. 714-715.
adid-base analysis. 586-587
pathophysiology. 76-77
blood collection. 582
defined. 75
defined. 365
calcium, 587-589
ferrets (Mustela putorius). 235
diabetes mellitus. 435
electrolytes. 586-587
fish. 302
 hyperthyroidism. 502
endocrine disorders. 595-596
Heinz body anemia. 709-710
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 92
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 594
iron deficiency anemia. case study. 714-715
lesion location, 339
glucose metabolism. 593-594
laboratory evaluation. 77. 79
pancreatic injury. 427
kidney evaluation. 583-586
monregenerative. 81-84
parathyroid hormone. 551. 555
liver evaluation. 589-592
aplastic anemia. 81-82. 82
rodents. 572-575
infectious agents. 82
phosphorus. 589
pure red cell aplasia. 82-83
Babesia canis. 69. 70
plasma and serum proteins. 592-593
red cell hypoplasia. 83-84
Babesiosis. 70. 97-99. 98
reference intervals. 582-583
/7t Anfu sueaoued
Bateriuria. 347-348
Birman cat neutrophil granulation anomaly. 130,
physical exam. 79-80
Band cells. 271
/31
regenerative, 87-107
Base excess (BE) value. 399-400
Biuret method. 592. 604
blood loss. 87-90. 89
Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). 364
 Bladder tumor associated antigen (BTA) assay.
chronic blood loss. 88-90. 89
Basophilia. 139. 260
364-365
erythrocyte parasites, 94-99. 96. 97. 98
Basophilic stippling. 68
Blastomycosis, 567
Heinz body anemia. 99-103. 100. 103
Blister beetle toxicosis. 561
hereditary defects. 104-107
ammphibians. 316. 317-318
 Blood collection. See aiso Sample collection and
 hypophosphatemia induced hemolysis.
birds. 252-253
processing
103-104
fsh. 304. 307
ammphibians. 313-314. 314
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 90-94.
hunction of, 121, 122
birds. 238-242, 239. 240, 582. 584-585
91. 93, see aiso Immune-mediated
nondomestic mammals. 227-229. 228
films, see Blood films
hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
reptiles. 284-285.285
fish. 298-299. 299. 607-608
microorganisms. 104
Beer's law. 23
laboratory mammals. 225-227. 226
 neonatal isoerythrolysis. 94
Bence Jones proteins. 343. 470
reptiles. 277-280. 278. 279. 600
water intoxication. 104
Bicarbonate concentration HCO. 394. 394,. 395.
transfusion. see Blood transfusion
reptiles, 282
396, 400
Blood films. See aiso Erythrocyte morphology:
 signalment and patient history. 79
Bile acids. 412-416, 414. 418. 591
Leukocytes
Anemia of inflammatory disease, 83. 635
Bilirubin
birds. 241-242, 242, 243. 250-256
Anion gap. 384-385. 385. 386. 396. 436
birds. 591
copper toxicosis. 103
Anisocytosis, fsh, 300
case studies. 686-687
examination. 9-13. 9. 10. 11, 12
Anorexia. 491
diabetes mellitus. 436
fish. see Fish
 Antibiotics. erythrocyte parasites. 95
fish. 612
Heinz body anemia. 100
Antibodies
iver evaluation, 410-412, 410. 413. 418
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 71. 91
 immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 91
urinary tract system. 345. 350
iron defciency anemia. 89
immunoassays and. 52-53
Biliverdin. 586. 591.604
leukemia. 167. 169. 170. 173. 175. 177
structure of. 51-52. 52
 Biochemical profile
myelomonocytic leukemia (M4). 170. 172
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH). 336. 586
coagulation case studies. 640-641. 643-645
preparation, 8-9. 8. 9
Antigen receptor genes. 140-141
endocrine case studies. 723. 726-750
reptiles. 280. 281. 284.286
Antigens. cell surface. 145. 148
gastrointestinal case studies. 703-708. 712-
Blood gas analysis. See also Acid-base analysis
 Antiglobulin test. See Coombs' test 
715. 718-720
endocrine case studies. 730-731
Antithrombin. 358
glucose metabolism case studies. 709-710
gastrointestinal case studies. 712-713. 714-715
Aplasia. 161
hematology case studies. 622-625. 633. 636-
 glucose metabolism case studies. 709-710
Aplastic anemia. 81-82. 82
637. 640-641
hepatic case studies. 684-685
Aprotinin.530
hepatic case studies. 677-678. 680-702
laboratory evaluation. 399
 Arterial blood oxygen. See Acid-base analysis;
pancreatic case studies. 711
urinary tract system. 355
 Blood gas analysis
Biopsy. See also Cancer diagnostics: Tumors
Blood glucose. See Glucose; Pancreas evaluation
Aspartate arminotransferase (AST)
mtestinal wall. 449
Blood lipid evaluation, 482-487, 483
birds. 589-590. 595
thyroid gland. 501
Blood loss. regenerative amemia. 87-90. See aiso
liver evaluation. 405-406. 406
Birds. 238-273
Anemia
muscle injury. 477. 477
 acid-base analysis. 589
Blood mixing. 3. 4
reptiles, 604
blood collection. 238-242. 239. 240
 Blood transfusion, 205-215
rodents. 575-576
bursa of fabricius. 272
administration. 210
Aspergillosis, 260
erythrocytes. 242-249. 242. 243. 246
anticoagulants. 209-210
751
Index
Blood transfusion (ont'd)
hypocalcemia. 352. 389-390. 547
endocrine case studies. 723-750
blood types. 205-206. 207
ionized calcium. 546. 547-548
gastrointestinal case studies. 703-704. 712-715
crossmatching. 208. 215. 218-222. 218
reference intervals. 549
glucose metabolism. 703-704, 707-708
donor selection. 207-209. 208
regulation of. see Parathyroid glands
hematology. 622-641
preparation, 210-211
renal failure. 352-354
hepatitic disease. 677-702
principles of, 206-207, 207
reptiles. 603-604
pancreatic disease. 703-706. 711. 721-722
reactions and sequelae. 2ll-212
total serum calcium, 546-547
renal disease. 646-672
sample preparation. 219
Calaum carbonate, 350. 375
Casts. in urine, 349-350, 367, 369-372. 586
tube typing protocol. 217-218
Calcium oxalate dihydrate. 350
Catalase, 101
typing. 212-215. 212. 213. 214
Calcium oxalate monohydrate. 351
Catecholamines, 429. 484
Blood typing. 212-215. 212.2/3. 214
Calcium phosphate. 351
Cats. See Felines
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Calcium-phosphorus product (Ca x P). 548-549
Cattle
birds. 584
Calcium-sensing receptors (CasR). 545. 550. See
blood types, 206. 207, 221-222
discussion of as term., 327. see aiso Urea
also Parathyroid glands
bovine congenital erythropoietic porphyria.
nitrogen (UN)
Calibrators. 23
106-107
reptiles. 601
Camelids. hepatic case studies, 699-700
bovine leukemia virus (BLV). 136
 Blue-top citrate tube. 35
Cancer diagnostics. 140-149
bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency (BLAD).
Body fluid analysis. See Abdominal fluid analysis
bone marrow. 162-163. 162. 163
71-141
Bone marrow. 150-163
case studies. 640-641
donor selection. 209
aspiration and immune-mediated hemolytic
flow cytometry. 144-145. 146. 147
gastrointestinal case studies. 712-717
anemia. 92
hypoglycemia,430
glutaraldehyde coagulation test. 472
aspiration technique. 150. 151
immunocytochemistry and cytochemistry. 148-
hypothyroidism. 513
birds. 266-272. 267. 269
149. 148
maldigestion and malabsorption. 443-444
cytochemmistry. 155
lymphocyte development and generation of
 sodium sulfte precipitation test. 471. 471
erythroid cells in flms. 150-152
antigen receptor genes. 141
zinc sulfate turbidity test, 471. 471
film interpretation. 15s-160
lymphocyte division. 141
Cavia porcellus (guinea pigs). hematology of. 231.
cell maturation and orderliness. 157-158,
myeloid meoplasms. 166-167
231. 232
158
oncogene detection. 142-144
Cell counting and sizing techniques. 14-16. 14. 15
PARR assay. 141-142. 142. 144
Cellular casts. 349-350
macrophages and iron. 158-159
research. 144
Cellularity. bone marrow films. 15s-156
M:E ratio. 156-157. 157
urinary tract system, 363-365
Central diabetes insipidus (CDI). 537-541
megakaryocytes. 156
Candidatus Mycoplasma haemolamae.90.95.96-97
Channel catfish (fctalurus punctatus). 302
microorganisms. 159-160. 160
Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum.See
Chediak-Higashi symdrome. 131. 131
granulocyte cells in flms. 152-153. 152
Mycoplasma haemofelis
Chemistry laboratory techniques. 19-33. See also
leukemia, see Leukemia
Laboratory technology
megakaryocytes. 153
blood types. 205.207
birds. se Birds. laboratory evaluation 
monocyte cells in films. 153
coagulation case studies. 640-643
cancer, see Cancer diagnostics 
neoplastic disorders. 162-163. 162. 163
donor selection. 208-209. 208
data interpretation, see Data interpretation
 response. amemia and. 76
endocrine case studies. 723-750
electrochemical methods. 20. 27-33
 stem cell disorders. 160-162. 161
gastrointestinal case studies. 703-704. 718-720
amperommetry. 29.30
Bone marrow aspirate. 694-695
glucose metabolis case studies. 703-704
coulometry and conductometry. 29-31
Bones lesions. hypercalcemia, 568
hematology case studies. 624-625. 628-641
osmometry. 31
Bony fish. See Fish 
hepatic case studies. 677-697. 701-702
potentiometry. 28-29. 29. 30
Borrelia anserina.266
hyperadrenocorticism. 524. 530
protein electrophoresis. 31-33. 32. 33
Bovids (sheep and goat fammily)
hyperthyroidism. 503-504
hematologic techniques. see Hematologic
blood types. 206. 207. 221-222
hypothyroidism. 507-508. 509. 511. 512
laboratory techniques
donor selection. 209
liver evaluation. 407-409. 408
light-scatter techniques. 20. 27. 28. 146
 Bovine congenital erythropoietic porphyria.
 maldigestion and malabsorption. 441-443. 442,
photometry. 20-27. 20
106-107
443
absorbance spectrophotommetry. 20-25.
Bovine leukemia virus (BLV). 136
pancreatic disease case study. 711. 721-722
21. 23
Bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency (BLAD).
thyroid tests, 499
atomic absorption (AA) spectrophotometry.
131132
Cantharidin toxicity. 561
25
 Branchial epithelium. 6ll 
Carbammide. See Urea nitrogen (UN)
fluorommetry. 25-27. 26
Brassica family. 102
Carbon dioxide loss. 395. 396
 reflectance photometry. 25
Burr cells (echinocytes). 65
Carcinomas. 564. 640-641
urinary tract system. see Urinary system
Bursa of fabricius. 272
Cardiac muscle. See Muscle injury. evaluation
laboratory evaluation
Cardiocentesis. 227. 278. 313
Chives toxicosis. 101-102
Calciferol. 588
Cartilaginous fsh. See Chondrichthyes: Fish
Chloracetate esterase (CAE). 169
Calcitonin. 550. 588. 603, 610
Case studies
Chloride
Calcium
acid-base disturbances. 617-618. 646-647. 669.
birds. 587
adjusted calcium. 546. 548-549
670. 673-676. 685. 709-710. 712-717.
electrolyte evaluation, 382
birds, 587-589
fsh, 609-610
electrolyte evaluation, 385-390. 387
coagulation. 640-645
renal failure. 354
fish. 610
electrolytes. 617-618. 674-676. 685-687. 694-
reptiles, 602
hypercalcemia. 353. 364. 388-389. 548. 589
695. 697. 707-710, 712-717. 732-733
Cholangiohepatitis. case study. 677-678
752
Index
Cholestasis
Cortisol
 Diabetic ketoacidosis. case study. 709-710
case studies. 679, 680-681, 682-683, 701-702
endocrinology. 497. 523. 529
 Diabetic nonketonic hyperosmolar symdrome.
lipid evaluation. 492
ferrets, 580
case study. 707-708
liver evaluation. 406-410. 411
lipid evaluation. 484
Diagnostic imaging. 532
Cholesterol
Costs and finances
 Diagnostics. See Data interpretation: Sample
birds. 591-592
im-house laboratory services. 39
collection and processing
in blood. 483-484, 483
mstrumentation, 38
Diarrhea
liver evaluation. 416-417
quality assurance. 38
 coagulation case studies. 644-645
renal failure. 358
digestion and intestinal absorption. 443
rodents. 576
Counting area. blood films. 9. 10. 1l1. 12
gastrointestinal case studies. 712-713
thyroid tests, 510
Cows. See Cattle
laboratory abnormalities associated with. 457
Ise 'waiss peni Aieuun
Creatine kinmase (CK). 476-477. 477. 586. 594-
 momsecretory. case study. 714-715
Chondrichthyes. 303. 304-306. 311. See αlso Fish
595. 605
 Diet. See Nutritional deficiencies
Chronic basophilic leukemia, 176
Creatinine and creatinine clearance
Diethylene glycol (DEG). 360-361
Chromic blood loss, 83-84, 88-90. 89
fsh. 609
Digestive system and intestinal absorption.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). 178-179.
principles of. 367
441-458
178
 reptilian kidney evaluation. 601
diarrhea or vomiting laboratory results, 457
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). 175
uimary tract system, 325-326. 327. 330. 357.
exocrime pancreatic insufficiency laboratory
Chronic myeloid leukemia. 170
359. 365
results. 458
Chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms. 174-176
Crossmatching. 208. 215. 218-222. 218. See αiso
malabsorption symdrome laboratory results, 458
Chronic progressive liver disease. 418. 419
Blood transfusion
maldigestion and malabsorption
Chronic renal failure (CRF). 83. 333. 367
Crude oil. 103
canines and felines. 441-443. 442. 443
Circadian rhythm. rodent hematology. 229
Crystalluria. 350-351. 367. 373-376
horses, 443
Citrate tube. 35
Cushing's disease (hyperadrenocorticism)
ruminants. 443-444
Citrate-phosphate-dextrose-adenine (CPDA-I).
birds. 596
reference lab tests, 450-457. 453-454
209-210
case studies. 734-737. 740-742
absorption, 455
 Clinical case presentations. See Case studies
ferrets. 534
 alphal-proteinase inhibitor concentration.
Clostridial infection. anemia associated with.
laboratory evaluation, 489-490. 513. 522-532.
451
104
522. 524
cobalamin. 452
Clotting. See Hemostasis: Platelets
overview of. 532-533
D-xylose absorption. horses. 455-456. 456
Coagulation assay. 463-464
nuling out, 497
fecal elastase I ELISA test, 450
endocrine case studies. 724-725
screening tests. 529. 530
oral glucose absorption/tolerance test, 456
gastrointestinal case studies. 718-720
umusual cases. 533-534
oral lactose tolerance test. horses, 456
hepatic case studies. 680-681. 701-702
Cuvettes (absorption cells). 22
numinal fluid, 455
pancreatic case studies. 70s-706
Cystine, 351
serum folate, 451-452. 452
Coagulation case studies. 640-645
Cytauxzoon felis.99
senum trypsin-like immunoreactivity. 450 
Coagulation factors. 185. 187. 191. 192-193. 194
Cytauxzoonosis. feline, 99
serum vitamin B2. 451. 452. 452
Coagulopathies. acquired vs inherited, 195-196
Cytopenia, 127
starch digestion test. horses. 456-457
Cobalamin. 84. 452
Cytoplasmic vacuolization. 132
screening tests. 444-450
Codocytes. 66
fecal assessment. 444
 Colony-stimulating factor (CsF), neutrophils.
Data interpretation, 40-49
fecal cytology. 447-449. 447, 448, 449
125
approach to. 47-49. 49
fecal occult blood. 446-447. 446
Colostrum ingestion. 409. 466
e770r, 46-47. 47
fecal parasites, 444-446, 445, 446
Competitive immmunoassays. 53-54
predictive values. 44-45. 45
 imtestinal biopsy. 449
Complete blood count (CBC)
quality control, 45-46. 46
 maldigestion/malabsorption tests, 449-450
anemia. 77
reference interval. 40-43. 41. 42. 43
rectal wall scrapes, 449
diabetes mellitus, 435
 sensitivity and specificity. 43-45
2.3-Diphosphoglycerate (2.3-DPG). 106
endocrine disorders. 524-525
D-dimer determination. 204
Direct antiglobulin test (DAT). 92
hemostasis. 190
Dehydration
 Direct enzyme-linked antiglobulin test (DELAT).
leukemia. 168. 178
gastrointestinal case studies. 712-713. 714-715
92
organization of, 18-19
hyperalbuminemia with hyperglobulinemia.
 Direct immunofluorescence (DIF) flow cytometry.
sample handling. 36
467
92
Computed tomography (CT). 532
hyperfibrinogenemia, 470-471
 Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC).
1<-6 Aawonnpuo
 relative polycythemia. 114
64. 194. 701-702
Conn's symdrome. 521-522
uninary tract system., 328-329. 330. 331
Distemper. blood film. 70
Consultation 
Densitometer, 33. See also Protein electrophoresis
Dogs. See Canines
laboratory staff and pathologists. 39
Dexamethasone suppression test (DST). 536.
Dohle bodies. 128-130. 129
veterimary pathologist, 38-39
734-735. 736-739
Donkeys. See Equidae (horse faily)
Coombs. R.R.A., 92
Diabetes. hypophosphatemia in. 103-104
 Donor selection
Coombs test. 19. 91-92, 219
Diabetes insipidus. 537-541. 538. 540
 blood transfusion. 207-209. 208
Cooximetry, 400
Diabetes mellitus
bone marrow, 150163, see αiso Bone marrow
Copper toxicosis. 102. 103
case studies. 697. 724-725
Drugs
Cormophosphatemia. 352
laboratory evaluation. 431
Crystalluria, 351
Corticosteroid release. 135. 426
laboratory findings assoiated with. 435-436
hyperglycemia. 431-432. 431
Corticosterone. 596
lipid metabolism. 490-492. 491
hypocalcemia. 562
753
Index
Drugs (cont'd)
overview of, 497-501
Erythrocyte morphology. 61-71
hypoglycemia. 429. 430
pituitary disorders, 534-537, 535,
acute blood loss, 88
liver damage. 407-409. 408
541-543
amphibians, 314
stem cell damage. 81-82. 82. 160-162. 161
 pituitary dwarfism and acromegaly.
arrangement on blood films. 69-71
Dwarfism. pituitary. 542-543
542-543
basophilic stippling. 68
D-Xylose absorption, horses. 455-456. 456
rabbits, 579
birds. 242-245
Dysmyelopoiesis. 16l-162
reptiles. 605
color
Dysplasia. 71
rodents. 577
hypochromasia. 62-63. 62
thyroid disorders and tests. 498-501.
polychromasia. 61-62. 62
Eccentrocytes. 66
499
fsh, 299-300
Echinocytes (burr cells). 65
hyperthyroidism. 494. 501-505. 503. 504.
Heinz bodies. 67-68. 67. see also Heinz body
Ehrlichia canis. nonregenerative anemia. 82
505. 506
Ehrlichia ewingil. 199.200
hypothyroidism. 506-513. 509. 510,
Howell-Jolly bodies. 68
Ehrlichiosis. 634
511. 512
nucleated erythrocytes. 68
 Ele ctrochemical laboratory techniques. 20. 27-33.
Endotoxemia. 491-492
overview of. 61
See also Chemistry laboratory techniques;
End-stage liver disease, 418. 419-420.
oxidative damage. 99-101
Laboratory technology
701-702
parasites. 69, 94-99. 96. 97. 98
amperometry. 29. 30
Enterotoxigenic E. coli. 644-645
reptiles. 280-281. 280.281
coulometry and conductometry. 29-31
Enzyme immunoassays (EIAs). 54
shape. 64-67. 64. 65. 67
Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
siderotic granules. 68-69
potentiometry. 28-29. 29. 30
immmune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 92
size, 63-64, 75-76, 78-79
protein eletrophoresis. 31-33. 32. 33
Enzymology. liver assessment, 40l-404.
viral inclusions. 69. 70
Electrolytes. 378-392
402, 404
Erythrocyte Unopette method. 245
anion gap. 384-385. 385. 386
Eosinophilia, 139. 260
Erythrocytes. 3-19
birds. 586-587
Eosinophilic leukemia. 175-176
amphibians. 314-315. 314. 315
calcium. 385-390, 387, see aiso Calcium
Eosinophils
birds. 242-249. 242. 243. 246
case studies. 617-618. 674-676. 685-687. 694
amphibians. 315. 316. 317-318
fsh. 299-302. 300, 301
695, 697, 707-710. 712-717, 732-733
birds. 251-252. 256
nondomestic mammals. 228. 232
chloride. 382
bone marrow. 152
reptiles. 280-283. 281. 283
diabetes mellitus. 436
fecal flms. 448
Erythrocytosis. See Polycythemia
ferrets. 579-580
fish. 304. 307
Erythroid dysplasia. 71
fish. 609-610
function and overview., 120-121. 121
Erythroleukemia (M6). 172-173. 626
fractional excretion of. 354-355. 559
nondomestic mammals. 227. 22s. 233
Erythropoiesis. birds. 268-269. 269
magnesium, 385-387. 391-392
reference interval. 122
Erythropoietin. 115
osmolality. 379
reptiles. 284. 285
 Essential thrombocythemia. 176
Eperythrozoon suis. See Mycoplasma haemosuis
Estrogen toxicosis. 82. 138
potassium. 381. 382-384. 383. 384
Eperythrozoon wenyoni. See Mycoplasma wenyonii
Ethylene glycol toxicity. 359-360. 559
rabbits. 578
Epinephrine,534
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) salt
reptiles, 602-603
Epinephrine release. 134-135. 135
birds, 241
rodents. 575
Epithelial cells. in urine. 347
blood transfusion. 215
sodium, 378-381
Equidae (horse family). 176
leptocytes, 66
hypernatremia. 379-380, 380
blood types, 206.207. 221-222
reptiles. 279
hyponatremia. 380-381. 381
coagulation case studies, 644-645
 sample collection containers. 34. 35. 36
sodium potassium ratio. 381
donor selection. 209
Euthyroid dogs. 501
m urine. abnormalities. 351-355
D-xylose absorption. 455-456. 456
"Euthyroid-sick" symdrome, 51l-512, 511
 Electrophoresis. protein
Equine Cushing's disease. 535-537
Excitement response (epinephrine release).
case studies. 640-641
Equine infectious anemia (EIA) virus. anemia
134-135. 135
hemostasis., 201
associated with. 104
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI)
laboratory evaluation. 31-33. 32. 33
Equine metabolic symdrome (EMS). 537
birds. 594
plasma cell myeloma. 180
glutaraldehyde coagulation test. 472
case studies. 721-722
serum protein measurerment, 461-462
hypocalcemia. 560-561
defined. 425
Embden-Meyerhof (EM) pathway. I05. 106
hypothyroidism. 513
digestion and intestinal absorption.
Endocrinology and disease, 497-543
liver evaluation. 405
441-443. 458
adrenal gland disorders. 513-534
maldigestion and malabsorption. 443
Expenses. See Costs and fnances
Addison's disease. 514-521
maldigestion tests, 456-457
Extracellular fluid (ECF). 378. 379.
hyperadrenocorticism. 522-532, 522. 524,
 oral glucose absorption/tolerance test,
383. 384
529.530
456
hyperaldosteronism. 521-522
peripheral Cushing's symdrome. 537
Factor & deficiency. See Hemophilia A
overview of. 514
pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID).
Failure of passive transfer (FPT). 462-463.
anemia associated with. 83
523
466
birds. 595-596
protein-losing enteropathy. 443
False negative (FN)
case studies. 703-704, 723-750
zinc sulfate turbidity test. 472
blood types. 219
diabetes insipidus. 537-541, 538. 540
Error
Coombs' test, 19. 92
ferrets, 580
factors affecting. 46-47. 47
dexamethasone suppression test. 536
fish. 612
in sample collction. 35
overview of. 43-44
754
Index
False positive (FP)
magnesium. 610
Glycated hemoglobin (GHb). 434
Coombs' test, 92
parasites, 310
Goats
dexamethasone suppression test. 536
thrombocytes and hemostasis. 308-310. 309
blood types. 206, 207. 221-222
overview of. 43-44
viral inclusions, 310-311
donor selection, 209
urine dipstick protein. 343
Flagging. of results. 49
Gold standard. 44
Fanconi symdrome. 362. 689-691
Flow cytometry. 144-145. 146. 147
Goldfish (Carassius auratus). 302
Fatty acids. 482-483
 Fluorescence-labeled optical-read immunodipstick
Gout, 601-602
Feathered edge. blood films. 9. 10
assay (FLORIDA). 57
Granular casts, 349. 372
 Fecal alphal-proteinase inhibitor concentration
Fluoride tube. 35-36
Granulocytes
(αI-PI). 451
Fluorometry. 25-27. 26
birds. 270
Fecal assessment, 444
Foa-Kurloff cells. 231, 232
bone marrow, 153
Fecal cytology. 447-449. 447. 448. 449
Focal lesions, 418-419. 418
fsh, 304-305. 305
Fecal elastase I ELISA test. 450
Folate. 451-452. 452
nondomestic mammals. 227
Fecal occult blood. 446-447. 446
Fractional excretion (Fx Exc) of electrolytes. 354-
Granulopoiesis
Fecal parasites, 444-446.445. 446
355. 559. 567
amphibians. 317
Feline cytauxzoonosis. 99
Free radicals, erythrocytes, 99-101
birds. 270
 Feline leukemia virus (FeLv) infection
Free tetraiodothyronine (fT4), 498-499, 504, 509.
Gray-top tube. 35-36
erythroid dysplasia. se Erythroid dysplasia
510, 512, 513
Green-top heparin tube. 34-35. 35
macrocytosis. 63
Pructosamine. 433-434. 502. 594
Growth hormone. 429. 484, 541-543
myeloid neoplasms. 167. 168. see αlso Leukemia
Fungi. in urine. 348. 376
Guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus). hematology of. 231.
nonregenerative anemia. 82
231. 232
Felines
Gall bladder rupture, case study. 686-687
blood types. 205-206. 207
Gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), 359, 403.
Haemobartonella canis. See Mycoplasma haemocanis
donor selection. 209
409-410. 590-591, 600
Haemobartonella felis. See Mycoplasma haemofelis
glucose metabolism case studies. 707-710
Garlic toxicosis, 101-102
Haemoproteus
hematology case studies. 622-623. 626. 627
Gastrointestinal disease. case studies. 703-704.
birds. 262-263. 262
hepatic case studies. 698
712-715
reptiles. 293
hyperadrenocorticism. 524
Germ line confguration, 140. 14!
Half-life. enzyme, 403
hyperthyroidism. 505. 562
Giardia. 445. 446
Handling. See Blood collection: Sample collection 
hypothyroidism. 513
Globulin
and processing
 maldigestion and malabsorption. 441-443. 442.
birds. 592-593
Hedgehogs. See African hedgehogs (Atelerix
443
classification, 460-461
albiventris)
thyroid tests. 499
liver evaluation. 416
Heinz bodies. 67-68. 67
Ferrets (Mustela putorius)
measurement, 46146 2
Heinz body anemia. 66. 99-103. 100. 709-710
hematology of. 234-235. 235
Glomerular fltration rate (GFR)
Hemmangiosarcoma, 88, 633. 679
hyperadrenocorticism. 534
birds. 583
Hematocrit (HCT). 15-16
laboratory evaluation. 579-580
defined. 366
Hematologic laboratory techniques, 3-19. See aiso
 plasma biochemical values. 574
laboratory evaluation. 324-325. 325. 352
Chemistry laboratory techniques: Laboratory
Fbrin. 190
reptiles, 602
technology
Fibrin degradation products (FDPs). 204
 Glomerular proteinuria. 35s-358
advanced techniques. 13
Pibrinogen
Glucagon, 429. 484, 593-594
blood flm examination, 9-13. 9. 10. 11. 12
abnormal values, 470-471
Glucocorticoids, 429
blood film preparation, 8-9, 8. 9
birds. 593
Glucocorticosteroids
blood mixing. 3
determination by heat precipitation. 472
erythrocyte parasites. 95
cell counting and sizing technigues. 14-16. 14.
fish. 309-310
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 93-94
15
hemostasis disorders, 190. 204
Glucose. 428-436
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 19. 19
laboratory evaluation. 464
birds. 593-594
packed cell volume. 3-5. 4
urinary tract system. 358
im blood. 432-433
 plasma proteins by refractometry. 5-7. 6. 7
Fibroblasts. 155
ferrets. 580
reticulocyte enumeration. 16-18. 17. 18
Films. See Blood films
fish, 612
spectrophotometry. 13-14
Finances. See Costs and finances
horses, 537
total leukocyte concentration. 7-8
Fish. 298-311. 607-613
hyperglycemia. 431
HematologY
acid-base analysis, 610-611
hypoglycemia. 430
case studies. 622-641
adrenal tissue. 613
 liver evaluation. 416
endocrine case studies. 723-750
ammonia, 611
metabolism. 428. 429
gastrointestinal case studies. 712-715. 718-720
blood collection. 298-299. 299. 607-608
rabbits. 579
glucose metabolism case studies. 707-710
branchial epithelium. 611
reptiles, 605
hepatic case studies. 682-687. 689-702
calcium, 610
rodents. 576-577
pancreatic case studies, 703-708. 711
electrolytes. 609-610
serial curves, 434-435. 435
Hematopoiesis
endocrine disorders. 612
im urine. 344. 433
amphibians. 319-320
erythrocytes. 299-302. 300. 301
 Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). 106
birds. 266-272. 267. 269
hematopoiesis., 311
Glucosuria. 433. 689-691
fish. 311
kidney evaluation. 608-609
Glutamate dehydrogenase (GLDH). 406. 590
reptiles. 294-295
lenkocytes. 302-308. 303. 307
 Glutaraldehyde coagulation test. 463-464, 472
Hematopoietic neoplasia. 493-494
liver evaluation. 6ll-612
Glutathione. 101
Hematuria. 346. 363. 435
755
Index
Hemobartonella canis. 634. See also Mycoplasma
fsh. 307
Hypersthenuria (baruria). 366
haemocanis
reptiles. 287, 288. 294
Hyperthyroidism. 494. 501-505. 503. 505. 506
Hemobartonella felis. 69. 622-623. See also
High density lipoproteins (HDL). 486. 487.
Hyperuricemia. 601-602
Mycoplasma haemofelis
See also Lipid evaluation
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
Hemoglobin casts. 350
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
birds. 596
Hemoglobin concentration (Hb)
(HDDS). 530. 531, 532
case studies. 726-733
amphibians, 315
Hippuric acid. 351
hypercalcemia. 388. 566-567
avian erythrocytes. 246. 247
Histoplasma capsulatum.159.160
hypocholesterolemia, 493
fish, 301
 Homogeneous immunoassays. 54
polyuria. 334
glycated hemoglobin. 434
Hormones
primary vs secondary. 513. 514-521. 514
laboratory techniques. 13
glucose metabolism, 429
ruling out, 497
reptiles. 277.282
lipid metabolism. 484
Hypoalbuminemia. 556-557
Hemoglobinuria. 103. 363
rodents, 573. 574
with hypoglobulinemmia. 464-465. 465
Hemogram. See Complete blood count (CBC)
Horses. See Equidae (horse family)
selective, 465-466
Hemogregarines. 291-292. 291. 310
Howell-Jolly bodies, 68. 232
Hypocalcemia
Hemmolysis, 47. 47. 103-104
Human antimouse antibodies (HAMA). 56
case studies, 719, 748-749
 Hemolytic anemmia. See Anemia; Immune-
Hyaline casts, 349. 372
differential diagmosis, 389-390. 547
mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
Hydration status. 328-329. 379. 602
disorders of, 556-562
Hemolytic crossmatch test. 220-221
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA (HMG-CoA)
mnemonic device. 389
Hemophilia A. 195. 195. 642
reductase. 484
renal failure, 352
Hemmostasis. 185-201
 Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease)
Hypochloremia. 382
acquired coagulopathies. 195-196. 196
birds. 596
Hypochromasia. 62-63. 62. 242. 244. 248
anticoagulant proteins. 189. 191
case studies. 734-737. 740-742
Hypoglobulinemia. 464-465. 465. 466-467
birds. 26 1262
ferrets. 534
Hyp oglycemia
coagulation factors. 185. 187. 192-193. 194
laboratory evaluation, 489-490, 513. 522-532.
birds. 594
defined. 185
522. 524
causes. 429-431. 430
diagnostic algorithm. 198. 202
overview of. 532-533
Hypokalemia. 384. 384. 610
disseminated intravascular coagulation. 194 
ruling out, 497
Hypolipidemias, 493-494, 493
fsh, 308-310. 309
screening tests, 529.530
Hypomagnesemia, 391-392, 561
hereditary coagulopathies. 195
 t9-ees 'sases ensnun
Hyponatremia. 380-381. 381
hereditary defects, 200
Hyperalbuminemia. 467.467
Hypoparathyroidlism, 552-553
pathways of. 187
Hyperaldosteronism. 521-522
Hypophosphatemia. 391, 555. 563. 589.
patient evaluation, 190-194. 198
Hyperbilirubimemia, 47, 47. 412, 413
603-604
 platelet function defects, 197. 201
Hypercalcemia
 Hypophosp hatemia induced hemolysis.
platelets. 187-188. 188. 193-194. 193
birds. 589
103-104
procoagulation factors. 186
case studies. 746-747
Hypoplasia. 161
reptiles. 290-291. 600
electrolyte evaluation. 388-389
Hypoproteinemia. 604
thrombocytopenia. 196-197.200
endocrinology. 548. 554. 555. 562-568. 563
Hyposthenuria. 334, 335, 338, 366
vascular causes. 197. 199
reptiles, 603
Hypothyroidism
vessels, 188-189, 190
urinary tract system, 353, 364
case studies. 723. 724-725
Hemotropic mycoplasmas. 94-95 
Hypercalcemia of maligmancy (HCM). 562-566.
laboratory evaluation. 506-513. 509. 511. 512
Heparin. fsh blood collection. 298
563
lipid evaluation. 489
Heparin tube, 34-35. 35
Hyperchloremia. 382
Hypovolemia. 730-731
Hepatic diseases. See aiso Liver evaluation
Hypercholesterolemia. 428. 487-488
Hypoxia. 115. 417-418. 418
case studies. 677-702
Hyperfibrinogenemia, 470-471
hepatic cirrhosis. 688
Hyperglobulinemia. 467, 468-470
Iatrogenic Cushing's disease. 736-737
hepatic failure. 682-683. 684-685. 689-691
Hyperglycemia
Idiopathic hypercalcemia. 567-568
hepatic insufficiency. 493
birds. 594
Iditol dehydrogenase (ID). 406
hepatic lipidosis, 418, 419, 490-491, 491, 698,
case studies. 707-708
Imaging. 532
002-669
causes. 431-432. 431
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
hepatic necrosis, 417. 418
fish. 612
blood films, 71. 91. 93
neoplasia, 409
nfu eaoued
case studies. 624-625. 694-695
Hepatitis. 644-645
Hyperkalemia. 383-384. 383
erythrocyte morphology. 66. 68
 Hepatobiliary disease. 407
Hyperlipidermia
laboratory diagnosis of. 19. 19
Hepatocytes. 402, 404-406. 406
case studies. 703-706
neonatal isoerythrolysis. 94
Hereditary defects, anemia associated with. 104-107
diabetes mellitus. 436
overview of. 90-94
Hereditary methemoglobinemia. 106
lipid evaluation, 489
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 196-197.
Hereditary spherocytosis. 104-105
lipid metabolism. 487-490
638
Hereditary stomatocytosis. 105
Hypermagnesemia. 392
Immunocytochemistry. 148-149. 148 
Hernia., case study. 682-683
Hypermatremia. 379-380. 380. 602
Immunodiagnostics. 51-57. See also specijfc
Hetastarch (HES). 335
Hyperparathyroidism. 555-556. 742-743.
immunoassays
Heterogeneous immmunoassays. 54
744-745
antibody structure. 51-52. 52
Heterophils
Hyperphosphatemia, 352. 390-391, 502, 563,
antibody use. 52-53
amphibians, 317-318
589, 748-749
defined, 51
birds. 249-250. 250
Hypersomatotropism (acromegaly). 54l-542
future trends in. 56-57
756
Index
immunoassay design., 55
electrolytes. see Electrolytes 
Leukocytes. 127-139
immunoassay formats. 53-54. 53. 54
hematologic techniques. 3-19
ammphibians, 315-318, 317-318
immunoassay performance. 56
advanced techniques. 13
birds. 249-261. 250-256. 258-259
Induced enzymes. 402-403. 402. 418
blood flm examination, 9-13. 9. 10. 11. 12
fsh. 302-308. 303. 307
Imherited coagulopathies. 195
blood film preparation, 8-9. 8. 9
inherited abnormalities. 130-132. 131. 132
mstrumentation, investment in. 38
blood mixing. 3. 4
morphology and function. 1l8-121. 119. 120.
Insulin. 429, 433.484. 490. 580
cell counting and sizing technigues. 14-16.
121
nsulin-like growth factors (IGFs). 541
14. 15
neutrophil toxic changes, 128-130. 129
Intact parathormone (iPTH). 742-743. 748-749
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. 19. 19
nondomestic mammals. 228. 230-231
 Interfering substances, laboratory error. 47. 47
packed cell volume, 3-5, 4
normal leukogram. 121-122. 122
Interpretation. of data. See Data interpretation
plasma proteins by refractometry. 5-7. 6. 7
reptiles. 283-290. 284. 285.286. 287. 288
Interrenal tissue, fish, 613
reticulocyte enumeration. 16-18. 17. 18
response pattern interpretation. 132-139. 132.
Intracellular fluid (ICF). 379. 383. 384. See also
 spectrophotometry. 13-14
133. 134. 135. 136. 137
Electrolytes
total leukocyte concentration. 7-8
terminology for. 127-128. 128
Iodine deficiency. 507
thyroid tests, 498-507, 499
m urine. 345-346. 347. 369
Ionized calcium. 546. 547-548. 553. 559. 560
urinalysis. 338-343. 339. 340, see also Urinary
Leukocytosis-inducing factor (LIF), neutrophils.
Ion-specific electrodes (ISE). 28-29. 29
 system laboratory evaluation
125
urinary tract system, see Urinary system
Leukocytozoon, birds. 264-265
birds. 592
laboratory evaluation
Leukogram
 stores of and macrophages. 158-159. 158
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
birds. 258-259
supplementation. 90
birds. 590. 595
normal values. 12l-122. 122
 Iron deficiency anemia
fish, 612
Leukopenia. 260
case studies. 627-632. 701-702. 714-715
muscle injury. 478
Levothyroid treatment, 500. 512
 monregenerative anemia. 83-84
reptiles, 604
Light, wavelength, 21. See also Photometry
regenerative anemia, 88-90,89
rodents. 576
Light-scatter photometry. 20. 27. 28. 146
 Islets of Langerhorn. 428. 428
Lactation tetany. 559-560
Lipase
Iosthenuria. 334, 335. 338. 366
Lainsonia spp.. reptiles. 292-293
pancreatic injury. 426-427
Lateral flow immumoassays (LFIAs). 55. 57
renal failure. 358-359
JAK2 gene, 115
Lavender-top tube. 34. 35
Lipemia, 47. 47
Leakage enzymes. 402-405. 402. 418. See aiso
Lipid casts. 350
Keratocytes. 64
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT): Aspartate 
Lipid droplets, in urine, 349. 369
Ketoacidosis. 436. 492-493
amminotransferase (AST)
Lipid evaluation. 480-494, 483
Ketogenesis. 487
Left shift. 127
in blood. 482-487
Ketones
Leishmania donovani. 159.160
diabetes mellitus. 490-492. 491
 lipid metabolism. 485-487
Leptocytes. 66. 67
dietary absorption of. 480-482. 481
in urine. 344-345
Leptospirosis. anemia associated with. 104
HDL vs LDL mammals., 487
Ketonuria. 435. 525
Leucine, 351
hyperlipidermias. 488-490. 489
Ketosis. 492-493
Leukemia
hypolipidemias, 493-494, 493
Kidneys. See Renal failure: Urinary system
acute myeloid leukemia. 168-174
ketosis and ketoacidosis. 492493
laboratory evaluation
erythroleukemia (M6). 172-173
lipid transport. 484-487. 486
 Kinetic enzyme assay. 24
megakaryoblastic leukemia (M7). 174
measurement. 487-488. 488
Kohler, Georges. 53
monocytic leukemia (M5). 172. 173
 metabolism and hormones. 484
Kurloff body. 231. 232
myeloblastic leukemia (MI-M3). 171
reptiles. 604-605
myelomonocytic leukemia (M4). 169. 170.
Lipidosis. hepatic. 418. 419. 490-491, 491. 698
 Laboratory diagnostic data. See Data
171-172. 172
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL). 486
interpretation: Sample collection and
bone marrow. 162
Lithium heparin. 35. 600
processing
chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms. 174-
Liver evaluation, 401-420
Laboratory mammals. See Nondommestic mammals
176. 175. 176
albumin. 416
Laboratory service options
classification. 166. 167. 169-174. 170
bilirubin. 410-412, 410, 413
considerations of. 37-38
defined and overview. 127. 128. 136. 137
birds. 589-592
extermal services. 39
lymphoproliferative disorders. 176-181. 177
cholestasis. 406-410. 408
im-house services. 38-39
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 176-178
cholesterol. 416-417
Laboratory technology. 3-33. See also Chemistry
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. 178-179.
coagulation factors. 417
laboratory techniques: Electrochemical
178
disease-specifc abnormalities. 417-420. 418
laboratory techniques
 plasma cell myeloma. 179-181. 179
enzymology. 401-404, 402. 404
birds. se Birds. laboratory evaluation
myelodysplastic symdrome. 167-168. 167
fish. 611-612
blood mixing. 4
myeloid neoplasms, 166-167
globulins. 416
bone marrow, see Bone marrow
myeloproliferative neoplasms. 168-169
glucose, 416
cancer, see Cancer diagmostics
Leukocyte agglutination. 129-130
hepatic case studies. 684-685
chemistry techniques. 19-33
Leukocyte count (WBC)
hepatocyte injury. 404-406. 406
electrochemical methods, 20, 27-33. 29. 30.
liver disease vs liver failure, 401
33
avian erythrocytes. 246
 plasma ammonia. 415-416
light-scatter. 20. 27. 27, 28
birds. 257
rabbits. 578-579
photometry. 20-27. 20. 21. 23. 26
fish, 307
reptiles, 604
data interpretation. see Data interpretation
reptiles. 277
rodents. 575-576
757
Index
Liver evaluation (cont'd)
 Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
myoglobinemia and myoglobinuria.
serum bile acids, 412-415. 414
(MCHC). 75-76
478-479. 478
urea. 416
amphibians. 315
rabbits, 579
urine bile acids, 415
avian erythrocytes, 246
reptiles, 605
Long chain fatty acids (LCFA). 480. 481.
fish. 301
rodents. 577
482, 483
Mean corpuscular volume (Mcv)
troponins. 478
Low density lipoproteins (LDL). 487, 492. 578.
amphibians. 315
Mustela putorius (ferrets)
605. See also Lipid evaluation
anemia. 89
hematology of. 234-235. 235
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression (LDDS)
avian erythrocytes. 242-243. 244. 246
hyperadrenocorticism. 534
vs ACTH stimulation. 529
calculations. 13-16
laboratory evaluation. 579-580
endocrine case studies. 734-739
case studies. 630-632
 plasma biochemical values. 574
hyperadrenocorticism screening. 529. 530
 erythrocytes, macrocytic and microcytic. 63
Mycoplasma haemocanis. 95-96.96
laboratory evaluation, 497, 526-527.
fish, 301
Mycoplasma haemofelis. 90. 95
Measurement reproducibility. 48
Mycoplasma haemosuis. 96. 97
Lymphoblasts, 154
Medullary washout. 362. 366-367
Mycoplasma weryonil. 70. 96
Lymphocyte vacuolation, 130
Megakaryoblastic leukemia (M7). 174
Myeloblastic leukemia (MI-M3). 171
Lymphocytes
Megakaryocytes. 153. 156
Myeloblasts, 152. 270
amphibians. 316
Melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH).
Myelocytes. 152. 271
birds., 253-255. 254. 255. 271-272
Myelodysplastic symdrome (MDS). 167-168. 167
development and generation of antigen 
Metabolism
Myeloid: erythroid (M:E) ratio. 156-157. 157. 268
receptor genes. 140-141. 141
anemia associated with. 105-107
Myeloid neoplasms. 166-167
civision of, 141
calcium and phosphorus, see Parathyroid glands 
Myelomonocytic leukemia (M4), 169. 170. 170.
fsh. 305-306. 306. 307
glucose metabolism, see Glucose
171-172, 172
nondomestic mammals. 22s. 230. 233
Metamorphosis, amphibians, hematopoiesis, 319
 Myeloproliferative disorders. 128. 626
overview of. 118-119. 120
Metamyelocytes. birds. 271
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN). 168-169
 reference interval. 122
Metarubricytes. 151
Myoglobin. 478-479
Lymphocytic thyroiditis. 506
Methemoglobinemia. 106
 Myoglobin casts. 350
Lymphocytosis, 135-136, 136. 137. 260
Methylene blue. 103
Myoglobinemia. 478-479
 Lymphoid leukemia. 170
Mice (Mus musculus). hematology of. 228. 229-
Myoglobinuria. 363. 478-479. 478
Lymphoma. urinary tract system.
231. See also Rodents
364-365
Microalbuminuria, 357. 366
N-acetyl-glucosamminidase (NAG). 359
Lymphopenia, 138-139. 260. 289
Microcontainers. 36
Natt and Herrick method
Lymphoproliferative disorders, 128.
Microcytic erythrocytes, 62. 63. 89
amphibians. 317
176-181
Microfilaria
birds. 245. 245. 261
amphibians, 319
fish, 300-301
Macrocytic erythrocytes. 63-64. 76
birds. 265
reptiles. 286
Macrophages. 154. 158-159. 271
reptiles. 293-294
Necrosis. hepatic, 417. 418
Magnesium
Microproteinuria. 357
Negative predictive value. 44
electrolyte evaluation, 385-387. 391-392
Microsporidians, fsh. 310
Neonatal isoerythrolysis (NI). 94
fish, 610
Milk fever, 432. 559-560
Neoplasia, 409
renal failure. 354
Milstein, César. 53
Nephelometry. 27. 28
 Magmesium ammonium phosphate, 351
Minimal residual disease (MRD). 144
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI). 538
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 532
 Monoclonal antibodies, 53
 Nephroliths, 350-351
Magnitude and severity. 48
Monoclonal gammopathy. 467. 468. 469-470
Nephrons. 366
Monocytes
Nephrotic symdrome. 362. 492
canines and felines. 441443. 442
amphibians, 316-317
Neutropenia
hypolipidemias. 493
birds. 255-256. 255
acute inflammatory consumption, 136-137
of lipids. 480, 482
approach to. 138
screening tests. 449-450
fsh. 306. 307
stem cell injury. 137-138
Maldigestion
nondomestic mammals. 230. 233. 234
 Neutrophil degeneration. 129
canines and felines. 441-443. 442
overview of. 119-120. 120. 122
Neutrophil hypersegmentation. 129
horses. 443
reptiles. 285-286. 286. 290
Neutrophilia. factors modulating. 134-135. 136
hypolipidemias. 493
Monocytic leukemia (M5). 172. 173
Neutrophils
of lipids. 480. 482
Monocytosis, 139.260
ammphibians. 315. 316. 317-318
ruminants. 443444
Mortality. immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
fsh, 303-304, 307
screening tests. 449-450
6
granulocyte production. 123. 124
 Maligmancies. See Cancer diagnostics
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS). 130-131
growth factors. 125. 125
Mammals, laboratory. See Family names:
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN). 534
kinetics. 125-126. 125
 Nondomestic mammals
 Muscle injury, evaluation 
maturation and orderly production. 124. 124
Maple leaves, dried or rotted. 102
alanine arminotramsferase. 477
nondomestic mammals. 228. 230. 232. 233.
Mast cells, 154-155
aspartate aminotransferase. 477. 477
235
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC).
birds. 594-595
overview of, 118. 119, 120, 122
13-14. 630-632
creatine kinase. 476-477. 477
pools and trafficking. 124-125. 124, 132, 133,
 Mean cel volume (MCV). See Mean corpuscular
ferrets, 580
134, /35. 137
volume (MCV)
lactate dehydrogenase. 478
toxic changes. 128-130. 129
758
Index
 Nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NADH). 101
Osteoclasts, birds. 272
PARR assay. 141-142. 142. 144
Nitrites. 345
Outliers, defined. 41-42
 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCOz). 29. 30.
Noncompetitive immunoassays. 53-54. 54
Oxalate, 561
394
Nondomestic mammals, 225-237. 571-581
Partial pressure of oxygen (PO). 29. 30. 116. 394
African hedgehogs (Atelerix albiventris). 235.
Packed cell volume (PCv)
Patient evaluation. hemostasis. 190-194
236, 237, 575. 581
amphibians. 315
Patient history. See aiso Case studies
blood collection. 225-227. 226
avian erythrocytes. 246. 247
anemia. 79
ferrets (Mustela putorius). 234-235. 235. 534,
fsh. 301-302. 301
hemostasis. 190-194
574. 579-580
overview of. 3-5. 4
 Pelger-huet anomaly. 130
guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus). 231
polycythemia. 114
 Pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). 106
hematology of. 227-229. 228
regenerative anemia. 87
Perinuclear rings. 244
mice (Mus muscuius). 228. 229-231
renal failure. 358
pH
rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus). 232-234. 233.
reptiles, 277. 281
adid-base analysis. 394. 394. 395. 396-398. 397.
234. 574, 577579
Pancreas evaluation. 425-436
398. 399
rats (Rattus norvegicus). 228. 229-231. 230
birds. 594
avian urine, 585
rodent evaluation. 572-579. 572. 573. 574
endocrine portion. 428-436. 428
birds. 589
 sample collection and handling. 571
glucose measurement, 432-436, 435
rystalluria. 350-351
Nonesterifed fatty acids (NEFA), 480. 482. 700
glucose metabolism, 428-432. 429. 430. 431
reptiles, 602-603
 Nonparametric techniques. 41. 42
hnation of. 425
rminal pH. 455
 Nonregenerative anemia. 81-84
mjury detection. 425-428
urinalysis. 342-343
aplastic anemia. 81-82.82
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity. 426
Phenobarbital. 680-681, 694-695
case studies, 629
peritoneal fluid amylase and lipase activities.
Pheochromocytoma. 534
infectious agents. 82
427
Phloxine B method. 256. 286. 317
pure red cell aplasia. 82-83
 serum amylase activity. 427
 Phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency. I05-106
red cell hypoplasia. 83-84
serum lipase activity. 426-427
Phosphorus
 Nonsecretory diarrhea. case study. 714-715
 serum trypsin-like immunore activity. 426
birds. 589
 Norepinephrine. 534
 Pancreatic amyloidosis. 432
 electrolyte evaluation. 385-387. 390-391
 Normocalcemia. 352
Pancreatic insuffciency. case studies. 72l-722
regulation of, see Parathyroid glands
Nucleated erythrocytes. 68
 Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI). 426
renal failure, 352-354
 Nutritional deficiencies. See αlso Lipid evaluation
Pancreatitis. 425-426. 491. 644-645. 705-706
reptiles. 603-604
anemia associated with. 83-84, 88-90. 101-
Pancytopenia. &l. See also Anemia
Photometry. 20-27.20
103. 103
Panhypoproteinemia. 719
absorbance spectrophotometry. 20-25. 21. 23
birds. 249. 587-589
 Parasites
atomic absorption (AA) spectrophotometry. 25
coagulation and vitamin K. 185. 186, 187.
amphibians, 319
fluorometry. 25-27. 26
195-196. 196
birds. 248. 262-266. 262. 264
reflectance photometry. 25
electrolytes. see Electrolytes
erythrocytes. 69. 94-99. 96. 97. 98
 Piezofilm immunoassay technology. 57
fish, 302
fecal parasites. 444-446. 445. 446
Pirhemocytonosis. reptiles. 293
iodine. hypothyroidism and. 507
fish. 310
 Piroplasmids
 maldigestion and malabsorption. 443
reptiles. 291-294. 29!
fsh. 310
serum folate, 451-452. 452
m urine. 348-349
reptiles. 293
serum vitammin Bi2. 451. 452. 452
Parathyroid adenoma. 560
Pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH).
Parathyroid glands. 545-568
522
Obesity. diabetes mellitus. 490. 491
clinical signs, 549-550
Pituitary disorders. 534-537. 535. 541-543.
Obstruction. G1, 714-715
hypercalcemia. 562-568. 563
738-739
Occult blood test, 446-447. 446
hyperparathyroicdism. 555-556
Pituitary dwarfism and acromegaly. 542-543
Oncogene detection. 142-144
hypocalcemia. 556-562. see also Hypocalcemia
Pituitary macroadenoma. 738-739
Onion toxicosis. 101-102
hypoparathyroicism. 552-553
 Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (PPID). 523.
 Oral glucose absorption/tolerance test (OGTT),
laboratory evaluation., 546-552
456
adjusted calcium. 546
 Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
Oral lactose tolerance test. horses. 456
ionized calcium. 546. 547-548
740-742
Oryctolagus (Rabbits)
parathyroid hormone assays. 551-552
Plants
hemmatology 0f. 232-234. 233. 234
reference ranges. 549
Allum family. 101-102
laboratory evaluation. 577-579
total serum calcium. 546-547. 547. 548
Brassca family. 102
 plasma biochemical values. 574
parathyroid hormone. 550-552. see aiso
 maple leaves. wilted. 102
Osmolality
 Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
Plasma and serum protein evaluation. 460-472.
diabetes mellitus. 436
primary hypoparathyroidism. 553-555
465. See also Albumin: Blood collection:
electrolytes, 378-379
 Parathyroid hormone (PTH). See aiso Parathyroid 
Globulin
osmole gap. 360
glands
 abnormal values. 464-471. 468
overview of. 334-335
birds. 596
hyperalbuminemia. 467. 467
reptilian kidney evaluation. 601
case studies. 744-745
hyperalbuminemia with hyperglobulinemia.
hypercalcemia. 388
467-468. 467
Osmoregulation. fish. 609
measurement of. 545
hyperfibrinogenemia. 470-471
Osmotic diarrhea. 443
overview of. 550-552
hyperglobulinemia. 467. 468-470
Osteoblastic disease, 407
phosphorus excretion. 355
 hyp oalbuminemia with hypoglobulinemia.
Osteoblasts. 154. 155. 272
renal failure. 352. 353. 358
464-465. 465
759
Index
 Plasma and serum protein evaluation (cont'd)
 Potassium
Race horse. hypocalcemia. 560-56l
selective hypoalbuminemia. 465-466
birds. 587
 Rapid Analyte Measurement Platform
selective hypoglobulinemia, 466-467
electrolyte evaluation. 381. 382-384. 383. 384
(RAMPIM). 57
classifcation, 460-461
fish, 610
Rats (Rattus norvegicus). hematology of, 228,
measurement. 461-464. 462. 471-472. 471
renal failure. 354
229-231, 230. See also Rodents
reptiles. 600
reptiles. 602
Reagent strips. 341-346. 342
 Plasma cell myeloma (multiple myeloma).
Potentiometry. 28-29. 29. 30
Reagents, immunoassays. 56
179-181, 179
Precision, defined, 45-46
Rectal wall scrapes. 449
 Plasma protein:fibrinogen ratio (PP:Fib).
 Predictive values, 44-45
Red blood cell volume/hemoglobin concentration.
470-471
Prednisone. 567. 679
78-79
 Plasma proteins by refractometry. 5-7. 6. 7
 Prekallikrein deficiency. 195
Red blood cells (RBCs). 346-347
Plasmodium spp.
Prerenal az0temia. 332. 336-337. 365
Red cell distribution width (RDW). I5-16.
birds. 263-264. 264
Prevalence, 45
729-059
reptiles. 292
 Primary absolute polycythemia. 115
Red cell hypoplasia. 83-84
 Platelets
 Primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn's syndrome).
Red cell leukemia. 71
aggregation of. 36. 37
521-522
Red-top serum collction tube. 34. 35. 36. 37
amphibians, 318-319, 318, 319
Primary hyperlipidemia. 492
Reference interval. 40-43. 41. 42. 43
birds. 261-262. 271
Primary hypoparathyroidism. 553-555
Reference laboratories
concentration of, 16
 Progressive familial nephropathy (renal
adrenocorticotropic hormone. tumors. 531
enumeration. 204
dysplasia). 362
amphibian serum reference values. 613
fsh. 308-310. 309
Prolactin. 588
birds reference intervals, 582-583
function defeats. 197. 201
Proliferative disorder. 127
calcium reference ranges. 549
hemmostasis. 187-188. 193-194. 193
Promyelocytes. 152
digestive system. 450-457. 453-454
 nondomestic mammals. 228
Propylene glycol. 102
absorption. 455
reptiles, 290-291
Prorubricytes. 151. 269
alphal-proteinase inhibitor concentration.
structure and function. 188
Protein
451
Poikilocytes. 64-67. 282
case studies. 685
cobalamin. 452
Point of care tests (POCT). 55
ferrets. 580
D-xylose absorption. horses, 455-456, 456
Poisoning/toxicity
measurement. 461-464, 462
fecal elastase I ELISA test. 450
acetaminophen toxicosis. 100. 102
rabbits. 579
oral glucose absorption/tolerance test, 456
birds. 248-249
reptiles. 604
oral lactose tolerance test, horses, 456
cantharidin toxiity. 561
rodents. 576
ruminal fluid. 455
case studies, 643
in serum. see Plasma and serum protein
serum folate, 451-452. 452
copper toxicosis. 102. 103
evaluation
serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity. 450
Cystalluria. 350
in urine. 343-344. 355-358
serum vitamin Bi2. 451. 452. 452
ethylene glycol., 359-360
 Protein electrophoresis 
starch digestion test. horses. 456-457
heavy metals. birds. 248-249
birds. 592
eosinophils, 122
liver damage. 407-409
case studies. 640-641
immunoglobulin assays. 464
vitamin D. 388. 550. 567
hemostasis. 202
lymphocytes. 122
xylitol toxicosis, 431. 568
overview of. 31-33. 32. 33
parathyroid hormone,549
 Polychromasia, 61-62. 62. 300
plasma cell myeloma. 180
Reflectance photometry. 25
Polychromatophilic erythrocytes. 152
reptiles, 604
Refractometer scale. 7. 462-463
 Polyclonal antibodies. 52-53
 Protein losing enteropathies (PLE)
 Regenerative anemia. 87-107
Polyclonal gammopathy. 467. 468. 469
breed-specific predispositions. 442
blood loss, 87-90. 88
Polycythemia. 114-116
case studies, 718720
case studies. 629
absolute polycythemia. 114-115
hypomagnesemia. 56 1
chronic blood loss. 88-90. 89
acute myeloid leukemia. 174
maldigestion and malabsorption. 493
Heinz body amemia. 99-103. 100. 103
birds. 249
nephrotic symdrome. 492
hereditary defects. 104-107
clinical approach to, 115-116
osmotic diarrhea. 443
hypophosphatemia induced hemolysis,
defined. 114
panhypoproteinemia. 456
t01-01
diagmostic approach to. 1l6. 116
Proteinuria. 340. 355. 366. 435. 525
 metabolic disorders. 105-107
relative polycythemia. 114
Prothrombin time (PT). 190. 194. 198. 203-204
microorganisms. 104
therapy. I16
Pseudohyperkalemia. 383-384
water intoxication. 104
 Polydipsia. causes. 334. 366
Pure red cell aplasia. 82-83
Relative polycythemia. 114
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays. parasite
Pyelonephritis. case study. 677-678
Renal az0temia. 332-333. 336-337. 365
detection. 94
Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency. 105
Renal case studies. 646-672
Polyuria. causes, 334, 366, 538
Renal disease. defned. 365
Porphyrias. 106
Quality control. 45-46. 46
Renal failure
Portosystemic shunt, 417, 418. 689-691,
Quantitative buffy coat (QBC) analysis system.
blood gas. 355
696
7-8
calcium and phosphorus. 352-354
 Positive predictive value. 44
chronic vs acute. 367
Post parturient hemoglobinuria. 103
Rabbits (Oryctolagus)
defined. 366
Postglomerular proteinuria. 355-358
hematology 0f. 232-234. 233. 234
disease staging. 367
Postprandial hyperlipidemia. 488
laboratory evaluation. 577-579
ethylene glycol intoxication. 359-360
Postrenal azotemia. 365. See also Azotemia
plasma biochemical values. 574
hypercalcemia. 566
760
Index
hypocalcemia. 557
 Sample collction and processing. 34-39.
Statistical methods
laboratory abnormalities. other 358-359. 359
 See αiso Blood transfusion
predictive values. 45
biochemistry procedures. 36-37
quality control. 45-46. 46
medullary washout. 362
birds. 592-593
reference imterval. 4043. 41. 42. 43
potassium. 354
contaimers. 34-36. 35
sampling. population sizes. 41
protein abnormalities. 355-358
extermal laboratory services. 39
Stem cell injury
sodium and chloride. 354
handling. 36. 37. 46-47. 47, see also Blood
bone marrow. 160-162. 161
uroabdomen. 361
collection
meutropenia. 137-138
Renal function. See Urinary system laboratory
m-house laboratory services. 38-39
Steroid hepatopathy. 418. 419
evaluation
Saurocytozoon, reptiles. 292
Stomatocytes. 66-67. 67. 105
Renal insufficiency. 365
Sauroleishmania.reptiles.292
Stress response (corticosteroid release). 135
Renal lymphoma. 364-365
Schellackia. reptiles. 292-293
Striped Bass (Morone saxatulis). 302
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS).
Schistocytes, 64, 88
Struvite. See Magnesium ammonium phosphate
378-379. 381
Secondary absolute polycythemia. 115
Sugar gliders, laboratory evaluation. 581
Reptiles. 277-295
Secondary hyperparathyroidism. 558-559
Sulfonamides, 512
adid-base analysis. 602-603
 Secondary pathologic hyperlipidemia.
Superoxide dismutase (SOD). 101
blood collection. 277-280. 278. 279
488489
Sure-Sep tube. 35
calcium and phosphorus. 603-604
Secretory diarrhea. 443. 712-713
clinical chemistries. 599-605
Selective hypoalbuminemia. 465-466
Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein. 349
blood chemistry considerations. 599-600
Selective hypoglobulinemia. 466-467
Tetraiodothyronine (TT4). 498. 502-503. 504. 506.
blood collection. 600
 Selenium deficiency. 102
509-511, 512-513
electrolytes. 602
Sensitivity. 43-45
Theileriosis. 99
endocrine disorders. 605
Sepsis. 430. 636-637
Thrombin. 187
erythrocytes. 280-283. 280. 281. 283
Serial glucose curves. 434-435. 435
Thrombocytes
glucose metabolism, 605
Serum bile acids (SBA). 412-415. 414, 418
aggregation of. 36. 37
hematopoiesis. 294-295. 294
 Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminmase (SGOT).
amphibians, 318-319. 318. 319
kidney evaluation, 601-602
See Aspartate aminotramsferase (AST)
birds. 261-262, 271
leukocytes, 283-290, 284. 285. 286, 287
 Serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT).
concentration of. 16
lipid evaluation. 604-605
 See Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
enumeration, 204
liver evaluation. 604
 Serum protein electrophoresis. Se Protein
fish, 308-310. 309
parasites, 291-294. 291
electrophoresis
function defects. 197. 201
plasma and serum proteins. 604
 Serum protein evaluation. See aiso Plasma and 
hemostasis. 187-188. 193-194, 193
thrombocytes and hemostasis. 290-291
 serum protein evaluation
nondomestic mammals, 228
Reticulocytes
amylase activity. 427
reptiles. 290-291
birds. 243
lipase activity. 426-427
structure and function, 18s
case studies. 632
 Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI).
Thrombocytopenia. 87-88. 196-197.200. 638
enumeration of. 16-18. 17, 18. 89
426. 450
Thrombocytosis. 89
Reverse triodothyronine (rT3). 498
Serum vitamin Bi2. 451, 452. 452
Thromboelastography. 192. 204
Rodents
Sheep and goat
Thrommbosis. 197. 199
hermatology of, 226, 227-237, 228, 230. 231,
blood types, 206, 207. 221-222
Thymus. 272
233
donor selection. 209
Thyroid gland biopsy. 501
laboratory evaluatiom, 572-579
 Short chain fatty acids (SCFA). 481
Thyroid hormones
plasma values. 572. 573. 574
Siderotic granules. 68-69
birds. 595-596
Romanowsky-stained films. 317
 Skeletal muscle. See Muscle injury, evaluation
fish, 612
Rouleaux formation. 69-70. 71
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO).
HMG-CoA reductase activity. 483-484, 484
Rubriblasts, 151
451, 452
overview of, 498-501
Rubricytes, 151, 269
Smooth muscle. See Muscle injury. evaluation
Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), 500. 505.
Ruminants
 Sodium
509. 510
blood types, 206. 207, 221-222
birds. 587
Thyroidectomy. 560
bovine congenital erythropoietic porphyria.
electrolyte evaluation. 378-381. 382
Thyrotoxicosis. See Hyperthyroidism
106-107
fsh. 609-610
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH). 498.
bovine leukemia virus (BLV). 136
renal failure. 354
50S '105-005
bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency (BLAD).
reptiles. 602
Tooth loss. bleeding. 642
131-132
Sodium potassium ratio. 381
Total blood volume. 225
donor selection. 209
Sodium sulfite precipitation test. 463. 471
Total erythrocyte count (TRBC). See also
gastrointestinal case studies. 712-717
 Sorbitol dehydrogenase (SDH). 406. 576. 590
Erythrocytes
glutaraldehyde coagulation test. 472
Specificity. 43-45
fsh. 300-301
hypothyroidism. 513
 Spectrophotometry. 13-14
reptiles. 277, 281, 282
 maldigestion and malabsorption. 443-444
Spherocytes. 65-66, 66. 93. 104-105
Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC). 461
 sodium sulfte precipitation test, 471. 471
 Spiculated erythrocytes. 64
Total leukocyte concentration (TwBC). 7-8.
zinc sulfate turbidity test. 471. 471
Spleen, 272-273
256-257
Ruptured gall bladder case study. 686-687
 Splenic contraction. 114
Total red blood cell count (RBC)
 Spur cells (acanthocytes). 65. 88
amphibians, 315
Saline fragility test, 19. 19
 Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). 564
avian erythrocytes. 246
Salmonids (Trout and Salmon. Saimo spp.). 302
Starch digestion test. horses. 456-457
fish, 301
761
Index
Total serum calcium. 546-547. 547
endocrine normal values. 52s-526
Urine speaifc gravity (USG), 333-337, 335. 340,
 s
gastrointestinal case studies. 712-713
346. 366. 540. 565
fsh. 307
glucose metabolism case studies. 709-710
Uroabdomen, 361
heterophils reptiles. 289
hepatic case studies. 677-678. 680-683. 686-
Urobilinogen. 345
neutrophils. 128-130. 129
687. 689-695. 697. 699-700
Uroliths. 350-351. 554
Toxic heterophils. birds. 260
mormal values. 339
Uroporphyrinogen II cosymthetase (UROgenII
Toxoplasma gondii. 159. 160
pancreatic case studies. 703-708
Cosym). 106-107
Transferrin, 46 1
proteinuria. 340
Transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). 364
Urinary [Protein]:[Ct] Ratio UPC. 367
Vacuum tube filling tips. 36
Tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, 482
Urinary system laboratory evaluation. 323-377
Vapor pressure osmometers. 31
Triglycerides. 483. 486
azotemia. 326-330. 326. 327
Variations. See Data interpretation: Statistical
Triodothyronine (TT3). 498. 499-500, 504-505.
bacteria. 347-348
methods
511
bilirubin. 345
Vascular abnormalities. 194
Troponins. 478
birds. 583-586
Vasopressin, 540
True negative (TN). 43-44
blood glucose. 429
Venipuncture. See aiso Blood collection
True positive (TP). 43-44
case studies. 328-329. 336-337
ammphibians. 313-314. 314
 Trypanoplasms. fish. 310
casts. 349-350. 367. 369-372
birds. 238-242. 239. 240
Trypanosomes
creatinine clearance. 325-326
fish, 298-299. 299
amphibians. 319
cystals. 350-351. 373-376
hedgehogs. 581
birds. 265-266
defnitions. 365-366
reptiles. 277-280. 278
fish, 310
electrolyte abnormalities, 351-355
Very low density lipoproteins (VLDL). 483. 486
reptiles, 292
epithelial cells. 347
Viral inclusions
Trypsinogen activation peptide (TAP). 425
ethylene glycol intoxication. 359-360
erythrocytes. 69. 70
Tube typing protocol. 217-218
ferrets. 579. 580
fsh. 310-311
Tubes (blood colle ction). 34-37
glomerular fltration rate 324-325, 325
Vitamin B12. 451, 452. 452
Tumor mecrosis factor (TNF). 125
glossary. 366
vitamin D
Tumors
glucose. 344
electrolyte 0verview. 385. 387, 388. 391
adrenocorticotropic hormone reference range.
hematuria. hemoglobinuria. and
hypercalcemia. 567
531
myoglobinuria. 363
parathyroid hormone, 550
case studies. 627. 629. 633. 640-641
hypocalcemia, 557
renal failure. 358
coagulation case studies, 640-641
ketomes. 344-345
reptiles, 603
hemangiosarcoma. 88. 633
leukocytes. 345-346. 347. 369
urinary health. 352
 pheochromocytoma. 534
medullary washout. 362
vitamin K
pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
methodology considerations. 330-333
acquired coagulopathies. 195-196. 196
522
coagulation and. 185. 187
Turbidimetry. 27
nephrotic syndrome. 362
coagulation and vitamin K. 186
Turbidity assay. 463-464
overview of. 323-324
pancreatic injury. 428
principles of. 366-368
as therapy. 643
Ulcer. duodenal. 677-678
protein. 343-344
Vomiting. laboratory abnormalities associated
Ultrasonography (US). 532
protein abnormalities. 355-358
with. 457
Undifferentiated leukemia. 170-171. 171
rabbits. 577-578
Von willebrand's disease. 194, 195. 195,
Urea nitrogen (UN)
red blood cells. 346-347
197. 201
defined. 365
renal failure, lab progression of. 358-359. 359
kinetic assay. 25
reptiles. 601-602
Water. See Hydration status: Nutritional
liver evaluation. 416
rodents. 572-575
deficiencies
methodology considerations. 330-333
sedimemts. 369-372. 377
Water deprivation testing. 335-336. 539-540. 540
nonrenal factors that increase. 327
substances affecting. 324
Water intoxication. hemolysis from. 104
overview of. 326-330
urea mitrogen and creatinine. 326-330. 327
Water reabsorption. 366
Uremia. 365
urimalysis. 338-343. 339
Wavelengths. light. 21. See aiso Photometry
Uric acid 
urine concentration, 333-337, 334, 335
Waxy casts, 349
fish, 609
urine specifc gravity. 333-337. 335. 340. 346.
White Sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus). 302
overview of. 351
366, 540. 565
World Health Organization (WHO). acute
reptilian kidney evaluation. 601
uroabdomen. 361
myeloid leukemia. 169
Urinalysis. 338-343
 Urinary tract infections. 525-526
birds. 585-586
Urine [Bile Acid]:[Ct] Ratio. 368
Xanthine. 351
case studies. 622-623. 624-625. 640-641
Urine [Cortisol:[Ct] Ratio UCCR. 368
Xylitol toxicosis. 431. 568
coagulation case studies. 640-641
Urine concentration. 333-337. 334
D-Xylose absorption. horses. 455-456. 456
disease differentiation. 539
Urine cortisol: creatinine ratio (UCCR). 497. 526.
endocrine case studies. 724-731. 734-743.
532
zinc, 102
748-749
Urine protein creatinine ratio (UPC). 357
Zinc sulfate turbidity test, 463. 471. 471. 472
762