Veterinary
Periodontology
Edited by
BROOK A.NIEMIEC
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Veterinary Periodontology
Veterinary Periodontology
Brook A. Niemiec, DVM
Diplomate, American Veterinary Dental College
Fellow, Academy of Veterinary Dentistry
Southern California Veterinary Dental Specialties
San Diego, CA, 92123, USA
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition first published 2013 @ 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
 Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Editorial Offices
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been
granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes
for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1652-4/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
 in rendering professonal services If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services
 of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Niemiec, Brook A.
Veterinary periodontology / Brook A. Niemiec.
p. ; cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1652-4 (hardback : alk. paper)
1. Veterinary dentistry. 2. Periodontics. 3. Periodontal disease. I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Periodontal Diseases-veterinary. SF 867]
SF867.N54 2012
636.089'7-dc23
2012015385
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic books.
Cover design by Nicole Tuet
Set in 10.5/13pt Minion by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without
limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or
promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation.
This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or
other professional services. If professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional
person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shallbe liable for damages arising herefrom.
further inforrmation does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the inforrmation the
organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware
that Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was
written and when it is read.
12013
Contents
Contributors
vi
13
Home plaque control
175
Reviewers
vil
14
Antibiotics in periodontal disease
186
R. Michael Peak
Preface
vili
Section 4 Periodontal surgical
Section 1  Understanding
techniques
191
the disease process
1
15
Gingival surgery
193
The structure and function of the
16
 Periodontal flap surgery
periodontium
206
3
Kevin Stepaniuk and James E. Hinrichs
17
Treatment of the exposed root
Etiology and pathogenesis of
surface
249
periodontal disease
18
18
 Osseous surgery and guided
tissue regeneration
254
3
 Bacteriology of periodontal
Brook A. Niemiec and Robert Furman
disease
35
Cofin E. Harvey
19
 Furcation involvement and
treatment
289
 Section 2  The progression
Pauf Theuns
of disease
6
Section 5  Related topics
297
4
Gingivitis
41
20
Host modulation therapies
299
Periodontitis
51
21
Patient management for
6
Local and regional consequences
periodontal therapy
305
of periodontal disease
69
Brett Beckman
Systemic manifestations of
Section 6  Periodontal
 periodontal disease
81
instrumentation
8
Unusual forms of
22
 Periodontal hand instruments
315
periodontal disease
91
23
 Mechanical scalers
324
Section 3  Initial therapy of
periodontal disease
105
24
Other power equipment used in
periodontology
330
 Dental radiology for
 periodontal disease
107
Appendices
Jerzy Gawor
AVDC-Approved abbreviations
334
Dental charts
340
10
The complete dental cleaning
129
Sharpening
343
4
Resources
346
11
 Advanced non-surgical therapy
154
5
 Plaque and calculus indices
348
12
Local antibiotic usage
170
Index
349
A
Contributors
Brett Beckman, DVM, FAVD, DAVDC, DAAPM
R. Michael Peak, DVM, DAVDC
Florida Veterinary Dentistry, Punta Gorda, FL
Chief of Dentistry
Aflanta Veterinary Dentistry, Sandy Springs, GA
Tampa Bay Veterinary Specialists
 Affiliated Veterinary Specialists, Orlando, FL
The Pet Dentist of Tampa Bay, Inc.
www.thepetdentist.com
Robert Furman, BVMS, MRCVS
Chief Resident
Kevin Stepaniuk, BSc, DVM, FAVD, DAVDC
 Southern California Veterinary Dental Specialties
Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Irvine, CA
 College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
Jerzy Gawor, DVM, PhD, FAVD
St. Paul, MN
Klinika Weterynaryjna Arka, Krakow, Poland
Paul Theuns, DVM
Colin E. Harvey, BVSc, FRCVS, DACVS, DAVDC
Goudenregenstraat 29
 Professor of Surgery and Dentistry
3353 VA Papendrecht
Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary
Netherlands
Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
James E. Hinrichs, DDS, MS
 Diplomate, American Board of Periodontology
Professor and Director of Advanced Education in
Periodontology
University of Minnesota
 Minneapolis, MN
yi
Reviewers
Ruth E. Bartel, DAVDC
 Daniel T. Carmichael, DAVDC
Johnathon R. Dodd, DAVDC
Jerzy Gawor, FAVD
Barron P Hall, DAVDC
Christopher J. Snyder, DAVDC
Jason W. Soukup, DAVDC
Tammy L. White, DAVDC
vii
Preface
Veterinary dentistry has been practiced for centuries, but
 veterinarians will enjoy these sections as well as those on
 only really developed into proper performance on small
 pathogenesis and progression of disease, radiology anti-
animal patients since the 1980s. Thanks to veterinary
microbial therapy pain management, and equipment.
dental pioneers such as Emily, Mulligan, Williams,
Experienced practitioners will also benefit from all those
Grove, and Ross, this field has since become a recog-
chapters, but they may use the surgical section to start
 exploring more advanced procedures as well. I expect
are still called “doggy dentists” and often work in obscu-
 this text to be especially valuable for those practitioners
rity, we are indeed coming into our own.
pursuing dentistry certificates, as it provides all the
More and more clients are seeking options for the
current research and techniques in one book with easy-
s s c p,   o sa,
to-follow, high-quality step-by-step graphics. Finally,
 proper dental treatment, especially as trends are turning
 seasoned specialists can utilize this book to review the
toward smaller breeds, which are typically even more
research and potentially glean information from some of
prone to periodontal disease. Furthermore, with trends
the newer techniques from either the author's experience
of increasing life spans for our small animal patients,
 or from my foray deep into the literature.
dental disease is becoming more severe and problematic.
 It is critical to note that although many of the proce-
Moreover, the significant local and particularly systemic
dures in this text seem straightforward, hands-on train-
disease is a growing concern as a consequence
of
ingis essential to proper therapy. This includes techniques
unchecked periodontal  disease.  These  trends
d  rep se pns s as ae y
have
resulted in a collectively marked increase in the number
odontal probing, and scaling (both hand and ultrasonic
 of clients interested in proper periodontal therapy and all
techniques). (Please see appendix 4, “Resources” for a
options available for maintaining teeth and health ( dental
list of courses.)
and overall).
Above all, however, my main goal in writing this book
Throughout the growth in our field, we have leaned
       
heavily on the human side ofdentistry for our information
 practices. In my time of almost 20 years in practice, the
and treatment modalities. While this has certainly been
invaluable, we have learned that dogs and cats are not
within high-end general practices has improved expo-
small humans. Although the basic tenets of periodontal
nentially. However, the quality of dental care within the
disease and treatment are the same between our patients
 average veterinary practice is still very poor. In my
and their human counterparts, there are significant dif-
 estimation, the number of general practices that perform
ferences in the anatomy and physiology as well as
complete subgingival scaling, ever use a periodontal
common disease states. I have made every attempt to
 probe, provide dental radiographs, or have a DVM per-
point out these differences within this text. On occasion,
 form an oral examination is less than 10%. As such, the
this is based on unpublished “experience? of mine and
vast majority of veterinary dental care is significantly
that of my colleagues, which is noted for the reader when
 substandard.
necessary. I believe these comments and sections are an
It is my hope that this text will inspire veterinarians to
important advantage to the reader and are therefore
continue advancing their knowledge and skills regarding
 some of the most important aspects of this book.
periodontal disease and therapy, thereby resulting in
This text is of value to anyone who has interest in
superior care for all veterinary patients. As a final note, I
veterinary dentistry, overall veterinary practice, and
 have also learned a great deal during the writing of this
even human dentistry. Clients and front office staff will
text, which has improved my patient care and greatly
benefit from the chapters on local and systemic disease,
benefited my practice.
so they can understand the disease process. In addition,
the chapters on basic periodontal care (prophylaxis, non-
Best regards,
 surgical treatment, and homecare) will help them to
Brook A. Niemiec, DVM
understand what happens in the dental operatory of gen-
 Diplomate, American Veterinary Dental College
eral practices. Technicians, students, and inexperienced
 Fellow, Academy of Veterinary Dentistry
vili
SECTON1
Understanding the disease process
The structure and function of the periodontium
Kevin Stepaniuk and James E. Hinrichs
Periodontium
CAB
The supporting apparatus of the tooth is known as the
periodontium. The gingiva, periodontal ligament (PDL),
cementum, and alveolar bone are the tissues of the
 periodontium (Figure 1.1). This unique collction of
q a o a ui an in e s san
anchoring the tooth in the bone. Understanding the
structural, functional, biochemical, immunological, and
molecular aspects of the periodontium is necessary to
understand the pathophysiology of periodontal disease,
periodontal treatments, periodontal regeneration, and
periodontal repair. The hard tissues (cementum and
bone) and the soff tissues (PDL and gingiva) of the
 periodontium play active rolls in the local inflammatory
 p ss  ss a 
cytokines, growth factors, and enzymes. This fascinating
interrelation of tissues, along with the normal apoptosis
of the cells of the periodontium, provides the backdrop
for the continued battle between periodontal health and
disease.
Odontogenesis and the periodontium
Figure 1.1 Histological image of the periodontium depicting
dentin (D), cementum (C), periodontal ligament (PDL), alveolar
Odontogenesis is the embryological events in tooth
bone (AB) apposition of buccal alveolar bone (AAB) associated
development. Complete tooth development is described
with insertion of dental alveolar fiber, coronal crest of alveolar
elsewhere.' However, the development of the tooth is not
bone (CAB), medullary alveolar bone (MAB), arteriole (A). gingival
isolated from development of the periodontal tissues.
connective tissue (GCT), stratified epithelium of gingiva (SEG), and
During enamel development an outer enamel epithelium
oral mucosa (OM).
(OEE), inner enamel epithelium (IEE), and stellate
reticulum are present. Adjacent to the enamel epithelium
The tooth root forms after the crown has developed,
are the ectomesenchymal cells that form the dental
but before it is completely mineralized. The OEE and
follicle and papilla. The dental follicle gives rise to the
IEE, without the stellate reticulum, develop into Hertwig's
      
epithelial root sheath (HERS). HERS proliferates into the
ectomesenchymal embryonic tissue forming the dental
 underlying connective tissue to form the root. The dental
 papilla and follicle is derived from neuroectoderm.?
 papilla is stimulated to form odontoblasts, which
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
4  Understanding the Disease Process
 produce dentin. At this stage, the root sheath breaks
 the complete biochemical and molecular changes and
up and cementoblasts are formed from the adjacent
the origins of cells, particularly cementoblasts, are not
ectomesenchymal tissue. This inductive, interactive
fully understood. It may be argued that periodontal
ectodermal-ectomesenchymal pattern of tooth and peri-
tissue cannot be regenerated (restored to normal
odontium development is conserved in most higher ver-
architecture), rather it is repaired.? For example, there is
tebrate species. HERS cells can remain trapped in the
little evidence to support that acellular (primary)
 periodontal ligament and are known as the epithelial
cementum reforms. Instead, when repair occurs, cellular
rests of Malassez (ERMS) (Figures 1.2 and 1.3). These
cementum is deposited; this is argued to not be a true
cells,if stimulated later in life, may become cysts or pos-
odontogenic tissue.? In many regeneration studies, the
sibly odontogenic tumors.45 However, it is debated
newly formed cementum is cellular with low numbers of
whether the ERMS are sources of odontogenic tumors.
fibers resulting in a new aftachment may be weaker than
The enamel epithelium proliferates into a thick
the normal acellular extrinsic fiber cementum.′ Similarly,
reduced enamel epithelium that fuses with the oral
repair as opposed to complete regeneration of a PDL
epithelium.6 The gingiva forms as the crown of the tooth
occurs following damage.*
 penetrates into the oral epithelium and erupts into the
oral cavity. A dentogingival junction is created and the
Gingiva
 junctional epithelium is established.
The oral mucosa is classified into specialized mucosa
Repair and/or regeneration of the periodontium share
(dorsum oftongue), the non-keratinized alveolar mucosa
and the keratinized masticatory mucosa. The mastica-
of these unique tissues. A complete understanding of
tory mucosa includes the hard palate mucosa and the
these chemical messengers and cell origins may provide
gingiva. The gingiva is demarcated from the alveolar
a basis for periodontal repair and regeneration. However,
General histology of the gingiva
 stratified squamous epithelium and deeper
connective tissue (collagen fibers and ground sub-
stance) are the components of the gingiva. Gingival
connective tissue consists of collagen fibers (type I and
I11 collagen), fibroblasts, nerves, blood vessels, lym-
 phatics, macrophages, eosinophils, neutrophils, T and
B lymphocytes, and plasma cells.19,1o This connective
PD
 tissue is called lamina propria with a superficial papil-
lary layer and deeper reticular layer. There are some
variations in the lamina propria in relation to the type
Figure 1.2 Epithelial rests of Malassez: dentin (D), cementum (C).
 of gingiva. In the attached gingiva, the lamina propria
periodontal ligament (PDL) with rests of Malassez (RM), and
o sd aa ym l re aeed e s
incremental apposition lines in alveolar bone (AB).
Figure 1.4 A photograph showing part of a dog's right maxilary
Figure 1.3 Connective tissue with an arteriole (A) with epithelial
arcade. The mucogingival junction (MGJ) demarcates between
rests of Malassez (RM) displayed as a mosaic pattern.
keratinized gingiva and non-keratinized alveolar mucosa.
The Structure and Function of the Periodontium  5
the epithelium and a reticular layer adjacent to the
Dentogingival
group: Fibers attach
cervical
 periosteum of the alveolar bone.
cementum to free and attached gingiva. These are
The keratinocyte is the main cell type of the gingival
 the most numerous fibers of the gingiva.
epithelium.! The keratinocytes proliferate via mitosis
Alveologingival group: Fibers attach the alveolar
in the basal layer of the epithelium. As cells migrate to
bone to free or attached gingiva.
the surface epithelium, they differentiate. The keratini-
3.
Dentoperiosteal group: Fibers attach the cervical
zation process includes flattening of the cuboidal cells,
cementum to the alveolar bone after travers-
 production of keratohyaline granules, and disappear-
ing over the alveolar margin and toward the
ance of the nucleus. The majority of gingival epithelium
apex.
is parakeratinized and consists of the stratum basale,
4.
 Circular gingival group: Fibers are interlaced with
stratum spinosum (prickle cell layer), and stratum cor-
the other fiber groups within the marginal gin-
neum. Pyknotic nuclei are present in the stratum cor-
giva and encircle the tooth.
neum of parakeratinized epithelium. Non-keratinized
epithelium lacks a stratum corneum and stratum gran-
ulosum  with  superficial  keratinocytes  containing
Vascular supply, nerves, and lymphatics
of the gingiva
nuclei. Orthokeratinized (complete keratinization with
a stratum granulosum) gingiva was not observed in
The blood supply to the gingival tissues arises from
canine gingival samples.1z The epithelial cells of the
branches of the maxillary arteries and mandibular
gingiva have cell-to-cell attachments consisting of deso-
in ferior alveolar arteries, terminating as supraperiosteal
 mosomes, adherens junctions, tight junctions, and gap
arterioles along the lingual and buccal surfaces of the
junctions.'3
alveolar bone, as well as from the periodontal ligament
Other cells found in the epithelium include Langerhans
vasculature and arterioles from the marginal bone.10
cells, Merkel cells, and melanocytes.19-1 Melanocytes
The   gingival
1vascular system
is
aregion
of
function to produce melanin granules, thereby providing
microcirculation.'5 The microvascular circulation of
a barrier to ultraviolet light damage.
 The melanin
the human gingiva can be divided into the gingival
 granules are phagocytosed and stored by melanophages
region (where the capillaries run perpendicular to the
 in the epithelium and connective tissue." Melanocytes
 surface) and the interdental papillae regions (where the
also function as dendritic cells (antigen-presenting cells).
capillaries run parallel to the surface)."6 The density of
The Langerhans cells are dendritic cells located in the
human gingival capillary loops increases with age and
suprabasal layers of the gingival epithelium.
.They
tends to be greater in females. 17 The vascular network in
originate from the bone marrow and function as antigen-
the dog gingiva was found to have a “glomerulus-like"
presenting cells to the lymphocytes. Merkel cells are
form in the sulcular epithelium and a squamous mesh
found in the deep layers of the gingival epithelium and
form inf
 the junctional epithelium."8 This network
are involved in tactile sensation.
exudates fluid and allows leukocytes to pass into the
The epithelium is attached to the lamina propria
gingival crevicular fluid.
through the basement membrane consisting of the basal
These vascular networks are the primary defense
lamina (lamina lucida and lamina densa) and reticular
against periodontal insults. The vascular beds are impor-
lamina. Proteoglycans and laminin are present. Type IV
tant in autoimmune and periodontal pathologies. The
and Vll are the major collagens of the basement mem-
increased vascular densities in gingiva may be related to
brane.4 Hemidesmosomes of the basal epithelial cells
some of the first non-specific defenses against periodon-
attach to the lamina lucida. Clinically, the distinction of
titis. Capillaries of the marginal gingiva are the first
the region is important. Mucous membrane pemphigoid
vessels involved with inflammation.'5
cleavage occurs at the basement membrane, resulting in
Innervation   of  t
the
gingiva arises
from the
 the entire epithelium, including the basal layer, cleaving
periodontal ligament and the regional trigeminal
off the lamina propria, whereas pemphigus vulgaris
(cranial nerve V) branches. The mucosa of the oral
causes intraepithelial cleavage, leaving basal
cells
cavity is richly innervated and primarily sensory.' The
 attached to the lamina propria.
rich supply of neuronal axons is found in the lamina
propria following the course of the vasculature in
Gingival fiber groups
addition to nerve fibers in the vicinity of the epithe-
The gingival fiber group is sometimes considered to be
lium.'" Specialized sensory nerve endings are present
 part of the periodontal ligament fiber group, which will
(Meissner's or Ruffini's corpuscles, Krause's bulbs, and
e p s a   e ss 
mucocutaneous endorgans) that detect heat, cold,
gingiva are organized into groups (Figure 1.5):6
touch, and pain.
6  Understanding the Disease Process
(a)
(b)
GS
DGF
DG
1
DAF
AB
SLM
Hgure 1.5 (a) Schematic drawing of the gingiva and gingival fiber groups. Dentogingival group (DG), alveologingival group (AG),
dentoperiosteal group (DP), circular gingival group (C), alveolar bone (AB), periodontal ligament (PDL), gingival sulcus (GS).
marginal gingival, and attached gingiva, while dentinal-alveolar fibers (DAF) radiate from cementum to insert into surface of
alveolar bone.
 Microscopic anatomy of periodontal lymphatics is
the underlying alveolar bone and tooth roots from
challenging and difficult to study.20z1 Within the oral
mechanical trauma, and provides an epithelial barrier
mucosa the lymphatics play a primary role in the diffu-
 to help prevent bacteria from reaching the underlying
sion, control, and resolution of inflammatory processes.
 tissues. The gingiva plays an active role in cellular
Lymphatics remove extracellular fluid, cellular debris,
communication, responds to infection, and integrates
 bacteria, and cells. The endothelial wall of gingival lym-
 the innate and acquired immune responses when chal-
 phatics is complex, with more intercellular junctions
 lenged by bacteria." Epithelial cells excrete inter-
and intercellular channels with few open endothelial
leukin-8and
other
cytokines
and
produce
junctions.22 The lymph of the gingival lymphatics drains
 antimicrobial peptides as part of an innate defense
into the PDL lymphatic system and follows the vascula-
mechanism.'3
ture to a collective network, external to the periosteum
of the alveolar bone, as it moves toward regional lymph
nodes.10.21
Free gingiva and the sulcular epithelium
The surface of the free gingiva adjacent to the tooth
Classification of gingiva and types
forms the wall of the gingival sulcus. The gingiva on the
of gingival epithelium
opposite side of this layer is exposed directly to the oral
 The gingiva is divided into the free gingiva (synonyms
cavity (Figure 1.6). The epithelial layer exposed directly
include marginal and unattached gingiva), attached
 to the oral cavity is a parakeratinized stratified squamous
gingiva, and interdental gingiva. The gingiva protects
epithelium. The free gingiva of young dogs is delicate
The Structure and Function of the Periodontium  7
SC
ES
SE
SG
 SS.
SB
1
CTC
Figure 1.7 Photograph of a left maxillary canine tooth of a dog.
RP
gingiva, and alveolar mucosa. The free gingival groove within
 the keratinized gingiva is identified with an arrow.
absent with a probing depth close to 0mm.25 Clearly,
AB
op paa sl m shp u se paa ae a
having deeper “normal’ sulcular measurements as com-
sulcular measurements. Likewise, in dogs without
PDL
MGJ
periodontal inflammation, the gingival sulcus is often
minimal and there is minimal gingival crevicular fluid
Figure 1.6 Healthy periodontium depicted with stratified
and leukocytes.25 The cementoenamel junction (CEJ) is
squamous oral epithelium exhibiting Rete pegs (RP), stratum
normally positioned just apical to the free gingival
corneum (SC——keratinzed), stratum granulosum (SG—granular),
 margin. In young dogs, the junctional epithelium extends
stratum spinosum (Ss—prickle cell), and stratum basalar (SB-
from the CEJ to the oral epithelium with minimal gin-
germinativum). The sulcular epithelium (SE) consists of SB and SS
gival sulcus observed.23.25
with a limited amount of granulosum in coronal aspect, while
junctional epithelium (JE) contains SB and SS and no granulosum.
Attached gingiva
The mucogingival junction is identified as MGJ. ES represents the
enamel space. CTC is the connective tissue attachment to
The free gingiva is continuous to the attached gingiva
and may be demarcated by a free gingival groove
cementum, AB the crest of the alveolar bone, PDL the periodontal
ligament, C the cementum, and D the dentin, respectively
(Figure 1.7).23 The thickness of attached gingiva in large
breed dogs (as determined by transgingival probing) was
measured as 1.10-2.20 mm, with the thinnest areas in
and flat with a knife-edge marginal termination, whereas
the region of the incisors and the thickest regions around
older dogs have a more curved appearance.?3 The free
the canine, maxillary fourth premolar, and mandibular
a pue aa'i-o'I 1e pansea sem iu i
first molar teeth.? These measurements may not
width (most apically) at 1.31-1.34 mm.23
correlate with small and toy breed dogs. Individual
The gingival sulcus is lined with a non-keratinized
variation of masticatory mucosa thickness has been
stratified squamous epithelium that is referred to as sul-
observed in humans.?"7 Likewise, the gingival width (as
cular epithelium. The gingival sulcus is bound by the
measured from the free gingival margin to the
junctional epithelium apically, the tooth, and the sulcu-
mucogingival junction) varies in the canine oral cavity
lar epithelium. Sulcular epithelium lacks rete pegs." It is
with less gingival width in the region of the maxillary
suggested that the non-keratinized nature of the sulcular
premolars compared to the canine tooth.2 It has been
epithelium is the result of the local irritation and inflam-
suggested that 2 mm of attached gingiva (apical-coronal
 mation within the gingival sulcus.1
height) must be maintained for periodontal health.? The
The normal gingival sulcus depths are < 3 mm in dogs
clinical significance of gingival width and thickness in
 and <0.5 mm in cats.24 In plaque-free dogs and/or when
various regions in the oral cavity is not known. It could
plaque is well controlled, the gingival sulcus is essentially
be speculated that these thinner regions are more likely
8  Understanding the Disease Process
the attachments will be stronger in these regions. These
regions are considered to be the strategic teeth in carni-
 vores and are challenged with the greatest mechanical
forces during mastication.
 In humans, stippling of the attached gingiva has been
associated with the interdigitation of the rete pegs and
 dermal papillae.o This appears not to be the case in
canine patients. The microscopically detectable pits in
the canine gingiva do not correspond to the structures of
the rete pegs and dermal papillae.12 Loss of stippling has
been suggested as a sign of gingivaldisease in humans0.1z
 In the dog, however, stippling can still be present in
Figure 1.8 Photograph of the attached gingiva of a left maxillary
of the gingiva in dogs was found to be 5-10 cell layers 
fourth premolar in a young dog. Stippling illustrated within
thick whether it was in a region of stippled or unstippled
keratinized gingival tissue.
gingiva.12
 predisposed to periodontal disease, and the thicker and
Interdental gingiva
wider regions would be more ideal sites to use for
The interdental gingiva between the teeth can form a
flap
pyramidal or col shape." The col is a non-visible con-
procedures and harvesting free gingival grafts).
cavity between buccal and lingual gingival papillae. The
The attached gingiva is a parakeratinized stratified
 col is covered with non-keratinized epithelium and is
squamous epithelium and has strong connections to the
most commonly found between the maxillary fourth
underlying periosteum ofthe alveolar bone. The attached
 premolars and first molars, the mandibular first and sec-
gingiva is demarcated from the alveolar mucosa by the
ond molars, and the incisors in dogs.29 This region of
mucogingival junction (MGJ), which remains stationary
 non-keratinized epithelium is more susceptible to irrita-
throughout life. Significant clinical loss of gingiva
tion and trauma, resulting in inflammation and possible
toward the MGJ (gingival recession) and/or probing
early loss of periodontium.
depths of the gingival sulcus beyond the MGJ require
Junctional epithelium and the gingival
that can be maintained for periodontal health.
crevicular fluid
The attached gingival connective tissue and epithe-
The gingival epithelium lining the sulcus is continuous
lium interdigitate. The connective tissue and gingival
to the junctional epithelium (JE) at the apical extent of the
epithelial extensions are termed the dermal papilla and
sulcus. The JE is a non-keratinized stratified squamous
rete pegs, respectively. Well-developed rete pegs provide
epithelium that attaches the gingiva to the tooth
strong attachment to the underlying connective tissue.
(Figure 1.9). JE contains fewer desmosomal junctions
This well-developed interdigitation of the epithelial rete
 compared to other oral epithelial tissues.
pegs and papillary layer can result in a clinical appear-
JE provides a physical epithelial barrier to the apical
ance of gingival stippling on the labial surface of attached
 periodontal structures. It allows passage of gingival cre-
gingiva (Figure 1.8).12 In humans, the stippling is most
- e) s  e ()   
prominent in the maxillary subpapillary region, whereas
 desis) into the sulcus. The JE has a rapid cell turnover
dogs do not have a proper interdental papillae and stip-
rate that helps maintain a favorable host-parasite
pling is absent in these interdental spaces.' In one study,
 equilibrium and rapid repair of damaged tissue.° The JE
gingival stippling was found most commonly in older
 replaces every 4-6 days, whereas the sulcular epithelium
dogs (8-9years of age), with younger dogs having absent
 takes several more days to do so. The gingival epithelium
takes 9-12 days to replace.63 It has been suggested that
recent study, the stippling was found most commonly in
 JE cells have endocytic capacity similar to neutrophils
midle-aged dogs and less in young and older patients.12
and macrophages.6
 Interestingly, the most prominent signs of stippling 
 Apical to the JE, the densely packed collagen bundles
d  an  a a e  a
 of the connective tissue anchor to the acellular extrinsic
and first molar teeth with absence in the premolar
fiber cementum, which plays a key role in limiting the
teeth.1z These are the same regions that were found to
 migration of the JE (Figure 1.10).6 The apical aspect of
have the thickest width of attached gingiva. Therefore,
the JE is 1-2 cell layers thick, whereas the thickness
The Structure and Function of the Periodontium  9
DATCell
SS
PDL
SB
SLM
Figure 1.11 Schematic drawing of junctional epithelium. Lamina
Figure 1.9 The junctional epithelium is composed of the stratum
propria (LP), periodontal ligament (PDL), cementoenamel junction 
(CEJ), dentin (D), enamel (E), directly attached to tooth cell (DAT
basalar (SB) and stratum spinosum (SS) and constitutes the interface
cell), movement of junctional epithelial cells coronally (M).
between the cementum (C) and underlying connective tissue (CT).
(llustrated by Ms. Sarah L. Mann.)
maintained, and these JE cells remain undifferentiated
(Figure 1.11). The JE produces an internal basal lamina
and anchors to this lamina via hemidesmosomes
(Figure 1.12). The external basal lamina separates the JE
from the gingival connective tissue.
Hemidesmosomes of the JE cells plasma membrane
directly attach to the tooth (DAT cells). An internal
basal lamina on the tooth surface interacts with the epi-
SE
thelial attachment.3 The DAT cells synthesize the
internal basal lamina, since there is no connective tissue
present. The JE is a stratified epithelium with a basal
layer facing connective tissue and a suprabasal layer
extending to the tooth surface.? Interestingly, evidence
suggests these DAT cells have mitotic activity, which is
unique, since they are several cellular layers away from
the basal layer of the epithelium.30
The JE vessels are fenestrated, which functions to
allow exchange of substances through the openings.18
Figure 1.10 Cytoplasmic projections (CP) from the stratum basalar
The GCF moves through these fenestrations into the
(SB) cells of the junctional epithelium extend into intercellular spaces
cellular spaces and then into the sulcus. The movement
of connective tissue (CT) cells and along cementum surface (C)
of GCF coronally helps clean the sulcus. Additionally,
leucocytes move between the cellular gaps of the stratified
-e   g s ir i ss
squamous epithelium and into the sulcus in an organized
 mately 2 mm in apical-coronal direction. As junctional
manner.18
epithelial cells migrate coronally to be shed into the
The GCF may be a transudate or exudate.l03o The
sulcus, a continuous attachment to the tooth surface is
composition of the GCF depends on the presence of a
10 Understanding the Disease Process
Figure 1.13 Histomicrograph of a feline periodontal ligament
space. Alveolar bone (1), periodontal ligament (2), cementum (3),.
Figure 1.12 An electron microscopic image depicting hemides-
dentin (4), acellular afibrillar cementum (5), marginal alveolar
mosomes on the periphery of an epithelial cell with the basal
bone (6). Reprinted with permission, Roux P, et al. Observations of
lamina (BL) consisting of the lamina densa [adjacent to cementum
the periodontal ligament and cementum in cats with dental
(C)] and lamina lucida [adjacent to periphery of epithelial cell(EP)]
resorptive lesions. J Vet Dent. 22(2):74-85, 2005.
interspersed between the hemidesmosome and cementum (HD).
collagen content of gingival connective tissue has been
plaque biofilm. Normally, there will be minimal fluid
identified with increasing age in the dog, whereas no
 production. With inflammation, however, the fluid
age-related gingival epithelial differences were found.23
production increases and the GCF will
contain
However, an earlier study found a thicker keratinized
breakdown products of connective tissue, epithelial cells,
epithelial layer in the juvenile dog.** The most apical cells
inflammatory cells, bacteria, and serum. The GCF
of the JE were at the CEJ in young dogs, and apical to the
mechanically flushes the sulcus, as well as contains anti-
microbial products, immunoglobulins, and plasma pro-
teins; the latter also assists in epithelial adhesion.' It is
going continued passive eruption.23
important to note that the polymorphonuclear leuko-
cytes at the gingival margin do not remove plaque. These
Periodontal ligament
leukocytes provide a protective wall against bacteria.30
The primary granules of these leukocytes contain myelo-
 The PDL is continuous with the gingival tissues, anchors
peroxidase, lysozyme, elastase, cathepsin G, urokinase,
the tooth in the jaw, acts as a shock absorber, and is active
acid hydrolases, and defensins.3° Lactoferrin, elastase,
 in periodontium maintenance (Figures 1.13 and 1.14).
and lysozyme are found in the secondary granules. (See
 The PDL can be divided into a bone-related region rich
chapter 4 for a complete discussion of GCF and its
in cells and vessels, a middle zone with fewer cells and
 response to bacterial infection.)
 thinner collagen fibrils, and a cementum-related region
with dense collagen bundles. Progenitor cells for fibro-
Gingival tissues and age
blasts, osteoblasts, and cementoblasts are found in the
All cells in the body and periodontium experience pre-
PDL.7 The width of the buccal PDL was found to be
0.15-0.2 mm in dogs."3 When PDL is destroyed, dentoal-
gingival cel and fibroblasts havea high rate of apoptosis
veolar ankylosis occurs and the adaptability of the peri-
in the normal turnover of the periodontium.31.32
odontium is lost.
Apoptosis may play a role in different types of drug-
 The principal collagenous fibers of the PDL are arranged
induced gingival enlargement, particularly that caused
 in bundles that insert into the cementum and alveolar bone
by calcium channel blockers.3 However, the mechanisms
and are referred to as Sharpey's fibers. Type I collagen is the
are multifactorial and not fully understood.34.35 Increased
 primary component of these principal fibers. The tensile
The Structure and Function of the Periodontium   11
PDL
(a)
AB
(b)
SF
BB
Figure 1.14 Histomicrograph of feline periodontal ligament
Alveolar bone (AB), periodontal ligament (PDL), tooth (T)
Reprinted with permission, Roux P, et al. Observations of the
periodontal ligament and cementum in cats with dental resorptive
lesions. J Vet Dent. 22(2):74-85, 2005.
Figure 1.15 (a) Insertion of Sharpey's fibers (SF) into cementum
(C). (b) Insertion of Sharpey's fibers (SF) into bundle bone (BB).
strength of these fibers has been reported to be greater
than that of steel. " These fibers mineralize when embedded
into the cementum and alveolar bone (Figure 1.15). The
fibroblasts in the PDL, similar to osteoblasts and cement-
alveolar wall insertion of the Sharpey's fibers is the tension
oblasts, have an increased level of alkaline phosphatase
side of the PDL. As Sharpey's fibers traverse deep into the
activity and produce a mineralized matrix with osteo-
bone, the length of penetration into the hard tissues can be
 pontin and bone sialoprotein. It has been proposed that
much greater than the width of the PDL.&
the maintenance of epidermal growth factor receptors on
The PDL acts as a shock absorber, and the viscoelastic
 the fibroblasts of the PDL maintains these precursor cells
system theory is used to explain the mechanism. As force
as fibroblasts, whereas the loss of these growth factors
is applied to the tooth, the fibers of the PDL tighten and
allows differentiation into cementoblasts and osteo-
blood is then forced from PDL vessels traversing the cri-
blasts.6 Others have suggested HERS may give rise to
biform plate to the cancellous bone. The cribiform plate
cementoblasts and PDL fibroblasts.7
is most abundant in the cervical third of the tooth.37
The fibroblast is the most abundant cell of the PDL
 Additionally, mechanoreceptors, free nerve endings,
 and these cells are continually renewed.* Fibroblasts syn-
 pressure, and vibration sensors are found in the PDL.
thesize collagen and have phagocytic capacity. They
remove collagen fibrils by phagocytosing the fibrils from
Cells and connective tissue of the
the extracellular environment and degrading them with
periodontal ligament
lysomal cysteine proteinases. This lysosomal mecha-
The cellular constituents of the PDL include epithelial
 nism does not involve extracellular collagenase enzymes.
rests of Malassez, immune cells, connective tissue cells,
Collagen degradation of the PDL is an intracellular
and neurovascular cells. The connective tissue cells
include fibroblasts, osteoblasts, and cementoblasts.
fibroblasts, whereas with disease, PDL breakdown is via
Undifferentiated cells that can differentiate into all of
extracellular mechanisms. The intracellular degradation
the above cells are also found in the PDL.63s However,
 allows a more specific and precise control for remodeling
the exact source of the PDL is not fully understood. The
and replacement of the PDL under normal physiological
12   Understanding the Disease Process
Sharpey's fibers
within alveolar
bone
 Sharpey's
fibers within 
Alveolar crest group
cementum
Horizontal group
Alveolar crest
Alveolar bone
 Oblique group
Interradicular septum
Interdental bone
Cementum
Apical group
 Interradicular group
Figure 1.16 The alveolodental fiber groups of the periodontal ligament. Reprinted with permission, chapter 14, Periodontium: Cementum,
alveolar bone, periodontal ligament. In: Dental Embryology. Histology, and Anatomy (Bath-Balogh M, Fehrenback MJ). 2nd ed. Copyright
Elsevier Inc., 2006, p.226.
conditions. New fibroblasts in repair of the periodon-
trauma, and orthodontic tooth movement. The PDL fiber
tium arise from the perivascular cells in the PDL as well
 groups respond to the physiological needs of the tooth.
as from progenitor cells in the adjacent alveolar bone.
The alveolodental fibers anchor between cementum
Ground substance containing glycosaminoglycans
 and bone and include the following (Figure 1.16):6
(hyaluronic acid  and  proteoglycans),  glycoproteins
(fibronectin and laminin), and water fill the spaces bet-
Alveolar crest fiber group inserts in an apico-oblique
ween the cells and fibers in the PDL.37 The extracellular
direction beneath the JE and functions to resist
 components of the PDL connective tissue have a high
extrusion, horizontal, rotational, and lateral tooth
 turnover rate. Collagen has a very short half-life (several
movement.
days) in the PDL, but collagenases have not been detected
Horizontal fiber group inserts between cementum
in the normal tissues.? However, the matrix metallopro-
and bone at right angles and functions to resist
teinase (MMP) enzymes are synthesized in a latent, non-
horizontal and rotational tooth movement. They
active form that becomes activated by tissue and plasma
are located just apical to the alveolar margin.
proteinases, bacterial proteinases, and oxidative stress.14
 Oblique fiber group inserts in a coronal-oblique
MMPs play a major role in connective tissue breakdown
direction (the bone insertion is positioned coronal
during disease, whereas phagocytosis degrades collagen
to the cementum insertion) and functions to
for normal replacement, remodeling, and repair.4
resist intrusive forces associated with occlusal
The epithelial rests of Malassez are identified as iso-
 stress and rotational tooth movement. The forces
lated clusters of cells or interlacing strands in prepared
are transferred into tension of the alveolar bone.
tooth specimens.37 The ERMS are most numerous in the
-oi dn  's al si dn a sn
apical and coronal regions and have been reported more
thirds of the fibers in the PDL.6
 on the mesial side of human molars compared to the
 Apical fiber group inserts from the apex to the alve-
distal side. The exact function ERMS is not known but
olar bone and functions to resist extrusion and
they do not appear to maintain the width of the PDL,
rotational tooth movement.
 prevent ankylosis, or prevent root resorption.?
5.
 Interradicular fiber group is found in multirooted
teeth and connects cementum to marginal bone
Periodontal ligament fiber groups
(Figure 1.17).
Principal fiber bundles insert into bone and cementum as
 Transseptal fiber group anchors the cementum of
Sharpey's fibers. The primary collagens of the PDL are
two adjacent teeth (Figure 1.18). This group of
type I, I11, and X11.14 These fibers reconstruct and reinsert
fibers has an important role necessitating reten-
following periodontal damage from periodontitis,
tion in orthodontics.
The Structure and Function of the Periodontium  13
Vascular network of the periodontal
ligament
The PDL has a good blood supply for a connective tissue.
Branches of the maxillary and mandibular alveolar
artery provide blood to the terminal branches.* The
blood supply to the PDL arrives via (1) the alveolar bone
blood supply through the Volkmann's canals (cribiform
plate), (2) anastomosis with the gingival vessels, and (3)
vessels arriving apically to the tooth. The PDL has a
polygonal mesh vascular network."8 The movement of
blood from the PDL to the alveolar bone allows the PDL
to act as a shock absorber of occlusal forces. In large
molars, the apical region of the vascular meshwork has a
vertically longer, more elliptical shape, and adjacent
capillary venules with anastomosing branches.α Blood
vessels of the PDL provide nourishment to the cells of
the PDL and osteoblasts of the adjacent alveolar bone.
Lymphatics of the PDL drain into the alveolar bone
in the coronal two-thirds and the apical lymphatics in
Figure 1.17 Intact interradicular periodontal fibers traverse the
the apical one-third.2 Lymphatics were identified in
intraseptal bone and insert into the roots of a molar tooth despite
the alveolar bone traversing to adjacent periodontal
extensive periodontitis in furcation region.
ligaments.20
The rete venosum in the alveolar bone may act as the
reservoir for the displaced blood from the PDL vessels
 during occlusal force loading."α Additionally, there are
very few valves in the venules of the PDL that traverse
the Volkmann's canals. "α Valves normally prevent back-
flow of blood in veins and venules. In the case of the
PDL, the absence of valves can allow blood to flow back
to the PDL from the alveolar bone when the occlusal
forces are removed.
Cementum
Cementum, an avascular tissue with no innervations, is
approximately 45-50% mineralized [hydroxyapatite,
Ca,(PO)(OH),], and 55-50% connective tissue. The
Figure 1.18 Horizontally oriented transseptal periodontal fibers
organic matrix of cementum is mostly composed of
lay coronal to the alveolar bone and insert into proximal surfaces
types I (90%) and 11 (5%) collagen.143:4 The cementum
of adjacent teeth
receives nourishment from the PDL.
Cementum must attach to the dentin surface of the
root. In cementum, bone sialoprotein may act as an
In addition to the principal fiber groups, there is an
adhesion molecule to maintain cells on the root surface
indifferent fiber plexus of collagen inserting in all
and initiate mineral formation.3* It is proposed that there
directions.' The PDL does not contain mature elastin 
is a specific cementum attachment protein (a cementum-
but does contain two immature forms known as oxyta-
specific collagen) and a cementum-derived growth factor
lan and elunain.' Oxytalan fibers, similar to elastin,
unique to cementum.3s
are found oriented in an apico-coronal direction and
Cementum is thinnest at the cementoenamel junction
attach to the coronal third of the tooth.? It has been
and thickest apically. Root cementum was found to be
speculated that the function of these fibers is to pro-
 5-10 times greater in older dogs and cementum thick-
vide elastic properties to the PDL, facilitate fibroblast
ness increased apically, whereas the width of the PDL
attachment and migration, and may be involved in
remained constant.?3 In humans, approximately 60-65%
vascular flow.*
 of teeth have cementum overlapping enamel, 30% ending
14  Understanding the Disease Process
 The intrinsic fibers are arranged parallel to the root
 Box 1.1 Development of the cementum
 surface. Sharpey's fibers (extrinsic fibers) insert at
The development of the cementum is not fully understood or
approximately 90 degrees to the root surface, are fully
 characterized. Although basic periodontium embryology was
mineralized in acellular cementum, and are only partially
previously discussed, it is worthwhile to focus on the
mineralized (mineralized periphery with unmineralized
cementum more closely, as there are consequences when
core) in cellular cementum. Acellular cementum forms
ayl , uoeiauaban, pue ,jedai, leuopouad bueneaa
before cellular cementum. However, cellular cementum
cementoblasts arise from the dental follicle. The
forms at a faster rate.
disintegrating HERS does not have a secretory role in
acellular cementum formation, despite some theories
Acellular afibrillar cementum (ACC): No cemento-
suggesting otherwise.3.40 Amelogenin, an enamel matrix
cytes, extrinsic, or intrinsic fibers are present. It is
 protein, was not found in cells of HERS.3 Enamel matrix 
a mineralized ground substance located over the
proteins (EMPs) have been debated as an important molecule
enamel and dentin at the CEJ and has no role in
 in regeneration. However, detection of EMP expression along 
attachment.67 The precise cellular origin and
the root is sparse and its presence in bone and cementum is
function is unknown.
unclear.7 Detection in some studies could be the result of
Acellhular extrinsic fiber cementum (AEFC): Densely
dentin contamination during extraction of the EMP. Although
 packed with Sharpey's fibers and lacking cemen-
enamel matrix protein extracts have been used for
tocytes. It is located on the cervical and middle
periodontal regeneration, and there is some evidence of
third of the tooth, covering 40-70% of the root sur-
successful "regeneration," there is no evidence they play a
role during normal cementum development.40
face, and functions to anchor the PDL to the tooth
 EMP may promote the cementoblast activities of
root.° It is estimated there are 30,000 fibers/mm?
proliferation, migration, adhesion, and differentiation and
inserting into the cementum.
may stimulate periodontal attachment structures during 
Cellular mixedstratified
cementum
(CMSC):
repair, but this does not necessarily result in
Extrinsic and intrinsic fibers are present and ift
regeneration.38
may contain cementocytes. It is found on the
apical one-third of the root and in the furcation
areas.67 It contains layers of acellular extrinsic
at the junction between enamel and cementum, and
fiber cementum and cellular/acellular intrinsic
 5-10% have a space between enamel and cementum.
fiber cementum. The purpose is to compensate
Clinical conditions such as cemental aplasia, hypoplasia,
for physiological forces acting on the tooth in the
cemental hyperplasia, and hypercementosis can occur.
alveolus.
When cementum and the PDL are lost, the tooth can
Cellular intrinsic fiber cementum (CIFC): Cemen-
become ankylosed to the alveolar bone with resulting
tocytes and intrinsic fibers are present with no
loss of proprioception and resistance of occlusal forces.
extrinsic fibers. It is found filling resorption
lacunae and root fracture sites.' The intrinsic
Types of cementum
fibers are not found within the PDL. CIFC has no
 role in tooth attachment with the fibers arranged
Cementum is classified based on cells and the source of
parallel to the root surface while circling around
collagen fibers.33 Unlike bone, cementum is avascular,
lacks innervation, and shows little or no remodeling in
the root.6
5
Acellular intrinsic fiber cementum (AIFC): There are
the canine and feline.3* Cementum is divided into acel-
no cementocytes and intrinsic fibers are only
lular (referred to as primary) and cellular (referred to as
present. It is a component of the stratified layers
secondary) and then further divided based on the ori-
 of AIFC and CIFC that contributes to the CMSC.7
gins of the collagen fibers from cementoblasts (intrinsic
6
Intermediate cementum: This cementum is found
fiber  cementum)  and  f
fibroblasts (extrinsic fiber
near the cementodental junction and remnants
cementum are distinct types of cementum developing
of HERS are embedded in the calcified ground
substance.
 from different embryonic origins.2
 Both acellular and cellular cementum are arranged in
Alveolar bone
lamellae parallel to the long axis of the tooth represent-
 ing rest periods. Acellular cementum is more mineral-
 Bone is comprised of 67% inorganic material (hydroxy-
ized than cellular, whereas cellular contains cementocytes
 s  r o  pe (
 in lacunae.° Cementocytes have a physiological adaptive
the majority (80-90%) of the organic component of bone
role in tooth movement and repair of periodontal tissue.
with greater than 95% being type I collagen and less than
The Structure and Function of the Periodontium   15
for apatite mineral deposition as well as other non-
collagenous proteins.
Different types of bone are found in the maxillofacial
region. Woven bone arises from a connective tissue tem-
 plate and a process of intramembranous ossification. The
maxilla and mandible contain alveolar processes that
GS
house roots of the teeth.6 Alveolar bone supports the
UE
tooth structure, helps distribute occlusal forces, and is
A 1MM
continually remodeled as it responds to the forces of mas-
tication. The alveolar bone is composed of plates of cor-
B1MM
tical (compact) bone with spongy cancellous (trabecular)
bone in between. Cancellous bone is also found in the
C 1MM
interradicular and interdental spaces between cortical
bone and the alveolar wall.42 Bone lining the alveolus,
where the Sharpey's fibers insert, is referred to as bundle
PDL
bone. Bundle bone, irregularly arranged and less dense, is
produced by osteoblasts between the Sharpey's fibers.42
The bone layers are arranged parallel to the apico-coronal
direction of the tooth.41 The inner cortical bone is radio-
 graphically dense and is radiographically referred to as
the lamina dura. Cortical bone meets coronally at the
Figure 1.19 A drawing of the dentogingival interface demon-
alveolar margin and is usually 1.5-2.0 mm below the CEJ
strating the biological width measured from the apical aspect of
the gingival sulcus to the alveolar margin (B + C). This space is
(Figure 1.19).43
occupied by the junctional epithelium (JE) and the gingival
Alveolar bone consists oflamellated and bundle bone.?
connective tissue and gingival fibers (). The tooth (T) is anchored
The osteon is the structural unit of bone with a central
in the alveolar bone (AB) by the periodontal ligament (PDL).
Haversian canal and interconnecting Volkmann's canals.
Reprinted with permission, J Vet Dent. 25(2):86-95, 2008
Histologically, a cement line can be seen between old and
newly formed bone. The apical and coronal aspects of
o  d )   
connecting the bone marrow to the PDL via Volkmann's
canals.6
Alveolar bone remodeling
Bone is remodeled while under constant force. There is an
interdependency of osteoblasts and osteoclasts called cou-
 pling.37 Osteoclasts and osteoblasts interact in a paracrine
and autocrine fashion. Osteoblasts and newly formed
osteoid (Figure 1.20) line the region of recently resorbed
bone vacated by osteoclasts. Cancellous bone trabeculae
 increase in number and thickness and cortical bone may
 be added when increased forces are placed on the jaws.37
Osteoclasts are responsible for resorption of bone by
removing the hydroxyapatite and organic matrix. They
Figure 1.20 Remodeling of alveolar bone depicted by a line of
arise from hematopoietic cells of the monocyte/macro-
osteoblasts (OB——lower center) forming new bone (O—osteoid)
phage lineage of the bone marrow. Osteoclasts are large
with entrapped osteocytes (dark nuclei). A resorption bay is noted 
multinucleated cells that produce a variety of hydrolytic
 in top center with one multinucleated osteoclast (OC).
enzymes that are secreted into an acidic environment.
Osteoclasts are found in Howship's lacunae (Figure 1.21).
5% type III, V, Vl, XIl collagen.741 Osteopontin (OPN)
The ruffled border of a multinucleated osteoclast creates
and bone sialoprotein (BSP) are two non-collagenous
a microenvironment for bone resorption.
 proteins of bone and cementum that are present in the
 Osteoblasts produce bone matrix (both collagenous
interfibrillar spaces.' The collagenous matrix called
and non-collagenous), which is termed osteoid. Rapidly
 osteoid, secreted by osteoblasts, provides the scaffolding
forming bone (embryonic and juvenile growing bone, as
16 Understanding the Disease Process
 induction of the system increases them.′ Understanding
this functional system of the alveolar bone can allow
 development of targeted therapies for alveolar bone loss.
It should be noted that the RANK/RANKL/OPG system
is not the direct target of bisphosphonate compounds used
 in medicine. Bisphosphonates inhibit bone resorption by
has been bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws
 due to inhibition of osteoclasts in human patients. Yet at
Figure 1.21 A multinucleated osteoclast (OC) in Howship's
controlled local doses they may provide treatment of peri-
lacunae bay of resorption.
odontitis due to control of osteoclasts.45
Conclusion
well as bone involved in repair) is called woven bone.
 The periodontium is a dynamic system responding to
 pa seds e o se a ae a
attack from oral bacteria. Despite meticulous periodontal
mineral crystals and large numbers of osteocytes.
homecare and annual dental cleanings, periodontium is
Alkaline phosphatase, secreted by osteoblasts, starts the
lost over time. There is increased attachment loss of the
nucleation of hydroxyapatite crystals. More mature
-d siaar raa e paz ser aq re
Understanding the structure and function of the peri-
pendicular to one another with very little interfibrillar
odontium is necessary for understanding periodontal
space.4 Osteopontin and bone sialoprotein are expressed
 defense mechanisms, periodontal disease pathophysi-
 in alveolar bone.4 Osteopontin is located at cement lines
ology, periodontal treatments, and periodontal regener-
in bones and may play a role in integrating new and old
ation and repair. Regeneration implies reproduction or
bone together.4 Osteoblasts that do not undergo apo-
ptosis or remain on the bone surface can be trapped in
reconstitution of the tissues so they are completely
restored (as in embryological tooth development) versus
bone lacunae as osteocytes.41
repair, which implies healing without restoration.43
Bone formation and resorption are closely coordinated.
Osteoclasts are stimulated to resorb bone by parathyroid
Acknowledgment
hormone, parathyroid-related peptide, vitamin D, inter-
leukin-1, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-α, trans-
 Schematic diagrams depicted in Figures 1.5a and 1.11
forming growth factor-O, and prostaglandin-E, (PGE,)741
were illustrated by Ms. Sarah L. Mann, University of
Parathyroid hormone and vitamin D, influence osteo-
Minnesota student.
clasts indirectly by acting on osteoblasts. Osteoclasts are
 inhibited by calcitonin, transforming growth factor-β,
Box 1.2 Key points
stimulator of osteoclasts and bone resorption.
 The lining of the gingival sulcus is non-keratinized and is
An interesting new area of bone regulation is the
therefore more fragile than the outer coating of the
RANK
(receptor-activated
nuclear
factor
kβ)/
 attached gingiva. Care must be taken during subgingival
    
cleaning
OPG (osteoprotegrin) system in relation to osteoclast
 Dogs do not have proper interdental papillae.
regulation.' It is also necessary for macrophage-colony
 The normal gingival sulcus depths are < 3 mm in dogs and 
stirmulating factor to be present along with osteoblasts
<0.5 mm in cats.
and cell-to-cell contact for osteoclast regulation. RANKL/
However, in plaque-free dogs and/or when plaque is well
OPG balance in the bone microenvironment is crucial
controlled, the gingival sulcus has a minimal probing 
for osteoclast control. The stimulators of osteoclasts and
depth.
subsequent bone resorption work via this system.
 The periodontal ligament is continuous with the gingival
RANK is expressed on the plasma cell membranes of
tissues, anchors the tooth in jaw, acts as a shock absorber,
osteoclast precursor cells, whereas RANKL is expressed
and is active in maintenance of the periodontium.
Alveolar bone supports the tooth structure, helps
on the plasma cell membranes of osteoblasts. OPG pro-
distribute occlusal forces, and is continually remodeled as
duced by osteoblasts acts as a decoy receptor by binding
it responds to the forces of mastication
RANKL, thereby preventing activation of RANK The
· The alveolar bone is composed of plates of cortical (compact)
suppression of this system decreases development,
bone with spongy cancellous (trabecular) bone in between.
formation, and activity of osteoclasts, whereas an
The Structure and Function of the Periodontium  17
References
25. Attstrom R, Graf-de Beer M, Schroeder HE. Clinical and
histologic characteristics of normal gingiva in dogs. I Periodontal
1. Nanci A. Ten Cate's Oral Histology: Development, Structure, and
Res. 10(3):115-127, 1975.
Function. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby-Elsevier, 2008.
26. KyllarM, Witter K. Gingival thicknessin dogs: Association with age,
2. Ten Cate AR. The development of the periodontium—a largely
gender, and dental arch location. J Vet Dent. 25(2):106-109, 2008.
 eCtomesenchymally derived unit. Periodontol 2000 13:9-19, 1997.
27. Muller HP, Schaller N, Eger T, et al. Thickness of masticatory
3. Moss ML. Phylogeny and comparative anatomy of oral
mucosa. J Clin Periodontol. 27(6):431-436, 2000.
ectoderrmal-ectomesenchymal inductive interactions. I Dent Res.
28. Shoukry M, Ben Ali L, Abdel Naby M, et al. Repair of experimen-
48(5):732-737, 1969.
tal plaque-induced periodontal disease in dogs. J Vet Dent.
4. Gardner DG. Epulides in the dog: A review. J Oral Pathol Med.
24(3):152-165, 2007.
25(1):32-37, 1996.
29. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
5. Verstraete FJ, Ligthelm AJ, Weber A. The histological nature of
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
epulides in dogs. J Comp Pathol. 106(2):169-182, 1992.
Pp. 186-191.
6. Cho Ml, Garant PR. Development and general structure of the
30. Pollanen MT, Salonen JI, Uitto VJ. Structure and function of the
periodontium. Periodontol 2000 24:9-27, 2000.
tooth-epithelial interface in health and disease. Periodontol 2000
7. Bosshardt DD. Are cementoblasts a subpopulation of osteoblasts
31:12-31, 2003.
or a unique phenotype? J Dent Res. 84(5):390-406, 2005.
31. Satchell PG, Gutmann JL, Witherspoon DE. Apoptosis: An intro-
8. Beertsen W, McCulloch CA, Sodek J. The periodontal ligament: A
duction for the endodontist. Int Endod J. 36(4):237-245, 2003.
unique, multifunctional connective tissue. Periodontol 2000
32. Koulouri O, Lappin DF, Radvar M, et al. Cell division, synthetic
13:20-40, 1997.
capacity and apoptosis in periodontal lesions analysed by in situ
 9. Bath-Balogh M, Fehrenbach MJ. Gingival dentogingival junc-
hybridisation and immunohistochemistry. J Clin Periodontol.
tional tissues. In: Dental Embryology, Histology, and Anatomy.
26(8):552-559, 1999.
2nd ed. St. Louis: Elsevier-Saunders, 2006, pp. 151-160.
33. Lewis JR, Reiter AM. Management of generalized gingival
10. Fiorellini, J.P, Kim, D.M.,Ishikawa, S.O. The Gingiva. In: Carranza's
enlargement in a dog—case report and literature review. J Vet
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 46-67.
Dent. 22(3):160-169, 2005.
11. Bath-Balogh M, Fehrenbach MJ. Oral mucosa In: Dental Embry-
34. Meisel P, Schwahn C, John U, et al. Calcium antagonists and deep
ology, Histology, and Anatomy. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Elsevier-
gingival pockets in the population-based SHIP study. Br J Clin
Saunders, 2006, pp. 127-149.
Pharmacol. 60(5):552-559, 2005.
12. Kyllar M, Witter K, Tichy E Gingival stippling in dogs: Clinical
35. Seymour RA, Ellis JS, Thomason JM. Risk factors for drug-induced
and structural characteristics. Res Vet Sci. 88(2):195-202, 2010.
gingival overgrowth. J Clin Periodontol. 27(4):217-223, 2000.
13. Dale BA. Periodontal epithelium: A newly recognized role in
36. Matsson L, Attstrom R. Histologic characteristics of experimental
health and disease. Periodontol 2000 30:70-78, 2002.
gingivitis in the juvenile and adult beagle dog. J Clin Periodontol.
14. Bartold PM, Narayanan AS. Molecular and cell biology of healthy
6(5):334-350, 1979.
and diseased periodontal tissues. Periodontol 2000 40:29-49, 2006.
37. Fiorelini JP, Kim DM, Ishikawa SO.The tooth-supporting struc-
15. Nuki K, Hock J. The organisation of the gingival vasculature.
tures. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders,
J Periodontal Res. 9(5):305-313, 1974.
2006, pp. 68-92.
16. Scardina GA, Fuca G, Messina P. Microvascular characteristics
38. Saygin NE, Giannobile WV, Somerman MJ. Molecular and cell
of the human interdental papilla. Anat Histol Embryol. 36(4):
biology of cementum. Periodontol 2000 24:73-98, 2000.
266-268,2007
39. Evans HE. The Heart and Arteries. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
17. Scardina GA, Cacioppo A, Messina P. Anatomical evaluation of
Saunders, 1993, pp. 612-620.
oral microcirculation: Capillary characteristics associated with
40. Diekwisch TG. The developmental biology of cementum. Int
sex or age group. Ann Anat. 191(4):371-378, 2009.
J Dev Biol.45(5-6):695-706, 2001.
18. Matsuo M, Takahashi K. Scanning electron rmicroscopic observa-
41. Sodek J, McKee MD. Molecular and cellular biology of alveolar
tion of microvasculature in periodontium. Microsc Res Tech.
bone. Periodontol 2000 24:99-126, 2000.
56(1):3-14, 2002.
42. Saffar JL, Lasfargues JI, Cherruau M. Alveolar bone and the alve-
19. Lohinai Z, Szekely AD, Benedek P, et al. Nitric oxide synthase
olar process: The socket that is never stable. Periodontol 2000
containing nerves in the cat and dog dental pulp and gingiva.
13:76-90, 1997.
Neurosci Lett. 227(2):91-94, 1997.
 43. Bath-Balogh M, Fehrenbach MJ. Periodontium: Cementum, alveolar
20. Berggreen E, Haug SR, Mkonyi LE, et al. Characterization of the
p aos oqg i   d 
dental lymphatic system and identification of cells immunopositive
Anatomy. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Elsevier-Saunders, 2006, pp. 207-230.
to specific lymphatic markers. Eur J Oral Sci. 117(1):34-42, 2009.
44. Mohn KL, Jacks TM, Schleim KD, et al. Alendronate binds to tooth
21. Matsumoto Y, Zhang B, Kato S. Lymphatic networks in the
root surfaces and inhibits progression of feline tooth resorption:
periodontal tissue and dental pulp as revealed by histochemical
A pilot proof-of-concept study. J Vet Dent. 26(2):74-81, 2009.
study. Microsc Res Tech. 56(1):50-59, 2002.
45. Shinoda H, Takeyama S, Suzuki K, etal. Pharmacological topics of
22. Marchetti C, Poggi P. Lymphatic vessels in the oral cavity: Differ-
bone metabolism: A novel bisphosphonate for the treatment of
ent structures for the same function. Microsc Res Tech. 56(1):
periodontitis. J Pharmacol Sci. 106(4):555-558, 2008.
42-49, 2002.
 46. Hoffmann T, Gaengler P. Epidemiology of periodontal disease in 
23. Berglundh T, Lindhe J, Sterrett JD. Clinical and structural charac-
poodles. J Small Anim Pract. 37(7):309-316, 1996.
teristics of periodontal tissues in young and old dogs. J Clin
47. Hoffmann T, Gaengler P. Clinical and pathomorphological inves-
Periodontol. 18(8):616-623, 1991.
tigation of spontaneously occurring periodontal disease in dogs.
24. Wiggs, R.B, Lobprise, H.B. Chapter 4, Oral Examination and
J Small Anim Pract. 37(10):471-479, 1996.
 Diagnosis. In: Veterinary Dentistry, Principles and Practice.
48. Bosshardt DD, Sculean A. Does periodontal tissue regeneration
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,pp. 87-103.
really work? Periodontol 2000 51:208-219, 2009.
2
Etiology and pathogenesis
of periodontal disease
Introduction
made up almost entirely of oral bacteria, contained in a
matrix composed of salivary glycoproteins and extracel-
While there are many factors associated with the
-a ann e si uo  arrsod e
development of periodontal disease,the inciting etiologic
ronment in which nutrients (as well as oxygen) diffuse
agent is plaque bacteria.l- Research has shown that
 through the different layers, which supports changes in
inflammation will continue as long as the gingiva is
microbiotic composition.'5 In addition, there exists a
exposed to a bacterial biofilm and will resolve after its
series of fluid channels within the plaque biofilm that
removal.9+ In fact, one author emphatically states, “Forty
facilitate nutrient delivery and waste removals19 As
years of experimental research, clinical trials, and
 such, these channels act as a primitive circulatory system
 demonstration projects in different geographical and
for the biofilm. In essence, plaque is a unique organism.8
social settings have confirmed that effective removal of
dental plaque is essential to dental and periodontal
Adherence of plaque
health throughout life?11
The warm, moist, nutrient-rich environment of the oral
Periodontal disease is described in two stages, gingi-
cavity makes it an ideal breeding ground for bacteria.
vitis and periodontitis. Gingivitis is the initial, reversible
 Fortunately, many of these bacteria are swallowed or
stage of the disease process in which the inflammation is
"drooled” and therefore do not contribute to periodontal
confined to the gingival tissues.6.12 In other words, there
disease. For bacteria to initiate periodontal disease, they
is no inflammation involving the periodontal ligament
must remain attached to the oral tissues, and therefore
 or alveolar bone. The gingival inflammation, which is
adherence is an important aspect of periodontal disease.
initiated by plaque bacteria, may be reversed with a thor-
There are several niches for this to occur within the
 ough dental prophylaxis and consistent homecare.12.13
 Periodontitis is the later stage of the disease process
mouth, including the teeth, periodontium, buccal
and is defined as an inflammatory disease of the deeper
epithelium, tongue, and tonsils.'5 The first two are most
 important in the discussion of periodontal disease.
supporting structures of the tooth (periodontal ligament 
 and alveolar bone) caused by microorganisms.314 These
Although the periodontium is easily colonized by oral
bacteria, there appears to be individual variation bet-
conditions are discussed in detail in respective chapters.
ween animals as to the relative adherence of bacteria. In
This chapter will focus on the pathogenesis of both of
fact, it has been shown that bacterial adherence is
these diseases, which are often interrelated.
increased in those who are predisposed to periodontal
disease.? Fortunately, the high turnover rate of the oral
Plaque
 soft tissues limits the level of infection.
 Periodontal disease (both gingivitis and periodontitis) is
The major niche for bacterial colonization is the
initiated when oral bacteria adhere to the teeth in a sub-
teeth.'s Teeth are particularly prone to bacterial adher-
stance called plaque.126.10.15 Dental plaque is defined as a
 ence because they are hard, irregular, and non-shedding.
structured, resilient substance that adheres tenaciously
 They also create a unique and abrupt transition from the
 to intraoral hard tissues.1s-17 Plaque is a biofilm which is
 periodontal tissues. The combination of these factors
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
18
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease
19
(a)
Figure 2.1 Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a dog with
widespread enamel hypocalcification. Note the significant calculus
and gingival inflammation on the canine (white arrows), espe-
(b)
cially when compared with the second incisor and first premolars
(blue arrows), which are unaffected.
makes the teeth very efficient bacterial colonization sites.
Plaque adherence is further enhanced by many anatomic
or pathologic states that may either roughen the teeth or
inhibit plaque removal'5.2i Factors associated with a
roughened tooth surface include enamel hypocalcifica-
tion (Figure 2.1), tooth resorption or uncomplicated
crown fractures (Figure 2.2), wear (attrition or abrasion)
(Figure 2.3), or presence of calculus.? Conditions that
 inhibit plaque removal (normally achieved by either
natural means such as chewing or by homecare methods)
include crowding (Figure 2.4), periodontal pockets
(Figure 2.5), gingival foreign bodies (Figure 2.6), or gin-
Figure 2.2 (a) Intraoral dental picture of a feline patient with
gival hyperplasia (Figure 2.7).3 Therefore, these issues
tooth resorption and associated calculus. This has contributed to
should be addressed along with standard periodontal
the periodontal loss as demonstrated by the probe. (b) Intraoral
care. Additionally, gingival inflammation has been
picture of the left maxillary fourth premolar (208) of a dog that has
shown to increase plaque accumulation?2 (likely due to
an uncomplicated crown fracture (blue arrow). Note the significant
increased crevicular fluid production and the nutrients it
calculus present (white arrows).
supplies)."s This finding proves the critical importance of
 good oral hygiene.
of macromolecules. The physical and chemical nature of
the underlying surface significantly affects the properties
Plaque formation
of the pellicle.2324 In addition, these characteristics can be
The process of plaque formation is divided into three
 transferred through the pellicle layer and continue to
 major stages: formation of the pellicle, initial bacterial
affect bacterial adhesion.?5 Therefore, the surfaces of the
adhesion and attachment, and finally bacterial coloniza-
teeth have a significant influence on the formation of
tion and plaque maturation.'5
plaque.
The first stage is formation of the pellicle on the sur-
The second stage is the initial adhesion and attach-
face of the teeth, which starts within nanosoeconds of a
ment of bacteria, which occurs within seconds of a pro-
 prophylaxis.'s The pellicle is a thin, saliva-derived layer
 phylaxis.?6 This adhesion is not completely understood
including numerous proteins (such as glycoproteins),
but can be thought of as occurring in three phases.?7 It
enzymes, and other molecules that act as attachment 
should be noted that this system is similar to that in all
sites for bacteria. The initial pellicle differs from saliva
 aqueous environments from pipelines to cardiovascular
and therefore is thought to form by selective adsorption
devices. Phase 1 is transportation to the surface of the
20  Understanding the Disease Process
(a)
Figure 2.3 Intraoral picture of the mandibular right of a dog with
widespread abrasion (blue arrows). Note the periodontal pocket
as well as significant gingival inflammation (white arrows).
(b)
tooth, which occurs via random contacts, either through
Brownian motion, sedimentation, liquid flow, or active
bacterial movement (chemotaxis). Phase 2 is the initial
adhesion of bacteria through an interaction between the
bacteria and the tooth surface, which occurs when the
distance separating them is less than 50 nm. The forces
 responsible for the adhesion can be broken into long-
(between 2 and 50 nm) and short-range (< 1 nm) forces.
Long-range forces (van der Waals and electrostatic
repulsive) typically result in reversible binding. Short-
range forces (hydrogen bonding, ion pair formation,
steric interaction) do not often come into play (due to
the need for a very close association), but when they do,
they result in irreversible binding. Phase 3 is true bacte-
Figure 2.4 (a) Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a dog with
rial attachment by specific interactions (covalent, ionic,
cowding and rotation of the second through fourth premolars
or hydrogen bonding), which follows direct contact or
(blue arrows) and secondary periodontal disease as evidenced by
bridging. This bonding occurs between specific extra-
the gingival recession (white arrows). (b) Intraoral picture of the
cellular proteinaceous components (adhesions) on the
maxillary right of a dog with crowding and rotation of the second
through fourth premolars. Note the significant periodontal loss
bacteria and complementary receptors on the pellicdle
 involving the third premolar (107).
and is species specific.
It is important to note that bacteria are separated into
early and late colonizers. Early colonizers are gram-
 In humans at least, it appears that fusobacterium is a
positive aerobes that bind directly to the pellicle, while
 bridge between the early and late colonizers, as the late
secondary colonizers cannot bind to clean tooth surfaces,
colonizers appear to coaggregate mostly with it as
and thus bind only to the early colonizers. Streptococci8
 opposed to directly to early colonizers.34
and actinomyces are the typical early colonizers and each
The final step is colonization and plaque maturation,
bind to specific salivary molecules.29-3 Most of the early
which is actually a continuation of the initial attachment
colonizing streptococci offer receptor molecules to the
above. It is initiated when the attached microorganisms
oral flora.29
 multiply and create the microcolonies that make up the
It is critical to note that phase 3 attachment results in
biofilm. These microcolonies are made up of different
irreversible bonding much more readily on rough or
bacteria that typically exhibit coaggregation, defined as
irregular surfaces due to the fact that the bacteria are
cell-to-cell recognition of genetically distinct partner cell
protected from shear forces (see below).
types.293 In fact, almost all oral bacteria possess surface
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease  21
Figure 2.5 Intraoral picture of the left maxillary canine (204) of a
dog with a periodontal pocket as well as significant calculus
Figure 2.7 Intraoral picture of the left mandibular first molar
(309) of a dog with gingival enlargement. When the gingiva is
retracted, the significant underlying calculus is exposed. A gingi-
vectomy (see chapter 15) will ameliorate this condition (at least
temporarily).
results in a small amount of the tooth surface being
covered, which expands greatly until day 4, when the
maximum plaque coverage is attained. Mature plaque
(and calculus) can contain up to 100,000,000,000 bacteria
per gram.3637 After 4days, plaque does not grow but the 
flora changes from gram positive to gram negative. It is
this change in bacterial species that results in the initia-
tion of gingivitis.5 Importantly, plaque will return to
healthy levels and flora within a few days if a plaque
control regimen is established, and this in turn will result
Figure 2.6 Intraoral picture of the mandibular right of a dog with
in the resolution of gingivitis.49
an area of significant periodontal loss secondary to a gingival
foreign body (wood) (white arrow).
Bacterial behavior
It has been shown that 99% of all bacteria live within a
biofilm.3 Bacteria within a biofilm behave differently
secondary colonizers include pathogenic strains such as
than (and in fact are phenotypically distinct from) free
prevotella and porphyromonas.
 a  a rd,  !
This coaggregation is strong evidence of the bacterial
sigma factors, among other processes.* As a matter of
interdependency within a biofilm. Furthermore, the
fact, bacterial plaque is, in essence, an organism where
actions of the early colonizers (use of oxygen) and their 
the needs of the bacterial community are placed
byproducts (e.g., lactate, formate, and succinate) aid the
before the individual bacteria and the bacteria are there-
 periodontopathogenic secondary colonizers, such as
fore much more difficult to neutralize than individual
porphyrmonas. Finally, the host inadvertently provides
nutrients to the pathogenic species in the form of blood
film are 1,000 to 1,500 times more resistant to antibiotics
and crevicular fluid.
than their planktonic counterparts,15.17.1941 Furthermore,
All ofthe above processes take place within 24 hours if
this protection gives plaque bacteria resistance to con-
the plaque is not disturbed. This means that pathogenic
centrations of antiseptics up to 500,000 times what would
bacteria have already started colonizing the tooth 1 day
kill singular bacteria.4 This resistance is due to several
following a complete dental prophylaxis.26 This first day
factors including the "slime" layer, slower growth rate,
22  Understanding the Disease Process
 Box 2.1 Key dlinical point 
 The visible plaque on the tooth surface is known as
Supragingival plaque.615 Once it extends under the free
gingival margin and into the area known as the gingival
sulcus (between the gingiva and the teeth or alveolar bone).
it becomes known as subgingival plaque. 5.5 Supragingival
plaque is thought to affect the pathogenicity of the
subgingival plaque in the early stages of periodontal disease
by providing protection and reducing available oxygen.6.15
However, once the periodontal pocket forms, the effect of the
supragingival plaque and calculus is minimal. Therefore,
control of supragingival plaque alone is ineffective in
controlling the progresson of periodontal disease.346.47This is
one of the major reasons that "anesthesia-free dental
cleanings" are insufficient for periodontal therapy. Addressing
Figure 2.8 Intraoral picture of the maxillary right of a cat with
the subgingival plaque cannot be performed adequately
significant calculus.
without anesthesia. See Box 10.2 (Non-anesthetic Dentistry).
 concentration of antimicrobial enzymes (e.g., beta lacta-
mase), communication between the bacteria (quorum
sensing), and expressing genes for antibacterial resis-
tance343-5 Unfortunately, the vast majority of our
knowledge about bacteria (in general and in regards to a
particular patient) occurs from laboratory monocul-
tures. Therefore, it is likely not an accurate assessment of
the behavior of plaque bacteria. This needs to be taken
into account when considering the use of antimicrobials
 in periodontal therapy.
Initial plaque bacteria from healthy sites consists of pre-
 dominately non-motile, gram-positive, aerobic facultative
rods and cocci.61548.49 Gingivitis is caused by an increase in
Figure 2.9 Intraoral picture of the right maxillary canine (104) of
the overall numbers of bacteria, and this increase is
a dog with significant calculus.
primarily of motile gram-negative rods (approximately
poad paisa u s'sads sqoae pue (os
disease, gram-negative rods account for approximately
species is hydroxyapatite, and in cats is the only form
74% of the microbiotic flora.5 In fact, anaerobic organ-
encountered.s5 The minerals for calcification of the
isms compose over 90% of the bacterial species in chronic
 supragingival plaque are provided by the saliva, whereas 
 periodontal disease.49-51 Finally, elevated numbers of
 the subgingival calculus minerals are provided by the
 se 'sop go siod euopoad un pno are saiondss
 gingival crevicular fluid.s3 The organic component con-
compared to healthy sites.52 (See chapter 3 for a complete
sists of various protein-polysaccharide complexes, host
discussion of periodontal bacteriology.)
 cells, and microorganisms.56
Calculus typically attaches to the tooth surface via
Calculus
adhesion of a dental pellicle to the tooth enamel; how-
ever, it may also attach via mechanical interlocking and
Calculus (or tartar) is essentially bacterial plaque that
 develop under surface irregularities.s These findings
has become calcified by the minerals in saliva ( Figures 2.8
 help explain why calculus levels are higher on unpol-
and 2.9).53 This can occur on the first day of plaque
ished or damaged teeth. In addition, the level of calculus
formation (i.e., the day after a cleaning) as early as 4
e ons su u  e anb saa uo
hours after deposition ofthe plaque.54 Calculus is 70-90%
 genetic predisposition, which is certainly seen in veteri-
inorganic and is made up of various calcium salts, mostly
 nary patients as well In addition, it appears (at least in
 in a crystalline form.53 The most common form across all
humans) that calculus attains a maximum thickness in a
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease
23
mals with their domestic counterparts. The wild carni-
vores had significantly less calculus on their teeth, with a
similar level of periodontal disease.59-61 Furthermore,
 one human study found that clinical attachment gains
were not related to the degree of residual calculus; and
it has also been proven that complete calculus removal is
not possible, regardless of method used.63
Despite the fact that calculus is not inherently path-
ogenic, it is still critical to achieve as clean as possible
tooth surfaces. Calculus is coated with a thin layer of
plaque,§3 which keeps the key etiologic agent of
periodontal disease in close association with the gin-
giva, thus allowing for continued periodontal inflam-
mation.63.4 Furthermore, the presence of calculus
leads to more plaque accumulation by providing rough
Figure 2.10 Intraoral picture of the maxilary left of a dog with 
surfaces as well as creating protected areas for plaque
significant buccal calculus.
retention that both increase plaque attachment and
retention.
Other predisposing factors
Factors within the oral cavity
 In addition to dental calculus, there are several other
factors that increase plaque accumulation and therefore
hasten periodontal disease. The most important of these
factors is tooth roughness (especially in the subgingival
area)365.6 Tooth roughness can occur secondary to
 developmental problems (such as enamel hypocalcifica-
tion) or tooth trauma (such as attrition, abrasion, or
 fracture; see above). In addition, iatrogenic causes (such
hangs, or lack of/improper polishing following a dental
Figure 2.11 Intraoral picture of the left maxillary fourth premolar
 prophylaxis) can have a significant effect on periodontal
disease (Figure 2.17).36 These issues can usually be recti-
(208) of a dog with significant buccal calculus.
fied with a properly placed restoration and/or polishing.
The importance of proper polishing should be empha-
relatively short time (under 6 months).575s This maximum
sized, as the lack of this is one of the many reasons that
thickness is likely attributed to the fact that bulky calculus 
"anesthesia-free” cleanings are ineffective. Finally, gin-
may be removed by mechanical action (chewing)
gival recession will increase calculus deposition as the
 In veterinary patients, calculus typically accumulates
exposed cementum is rougher than normal enamel
faster and in larger amounts on the buccal surface of the
(Figure 2.18).
maxillary teeth (Figure 2.10).5" The reason for this is
 Oral malocclusions (especially crowding) may also dis-
 unknown, but it has been postulated that the action of
rupt natural cleaning ability and inhibit homecare, leading
the tongue dislodges plaque from the lingual surface.
to increased plaque accumulation (Figure 2.19).3.69.7 In
d  o e s e 
these cases, selective extractions or odontoplasty may be
susceptible to plaque and  calculus accumulation
 indicated to improve periodontal health.
(Figure 2.11)." This may be due to the fact that the
 Persistent deciduous teeth have also been proven to
parotid and zygomatic salivary ducts open over the
predispose thepatient to periodontaldisease,7 partially
tooth, or that the developmental groove on this tooth
due to the resultant crowding, which decreases natural
plays a part in plaque and calculus retention.
healing ability (as above) (Figure 2.20). In addition, the
Calculus in and of itself is relatively non-pathogenic,
deciduous tooth shares the same gingival collar as the
providing mostly an irritant effect (See Box 2.2).646 This
erupting permanent, thus not allowing for normal
was reported in several studies that compared wild ani-
 periodontal attachment development. The combination
24  Understanding the Disease Process
Box 2.2 The role of calculus in periodontal disease is overstated
The fact that supragingival calculus is only minimally pathogenic is a very important point, as the need for professional therapy is
typically determined by the calculus index, which may or may not be indicative of the level of disease present. For instance, patients
 ym esiaa aia pue (ziz anbig) aseas ieaiuins sueuis y inq sumo yooi up Aaaeiai ym uasaid Auoon
concentrations of calculus and yet little to no disease (Figure 2.13). In addition, one author asserts that subgingival calculus may be a
product rather than a cause of periodontal pockets.53 The thought is that the initial inflammation was caused by plaque, resulting in
of periodontal disease. Even this, however, can be difficult to interpret in patients with darkly pigmented gums (Figure 2.14).
Furthermore, evaluation of the lingual surfaces of the teeth and the molar teeth in a conscious (awake) patient is often insufficient,
especially for small and toy breed dogs (Figure 2.15). Consequently, regular exams under general anesthesia are required for
comprehensive periodontal care, regardless of the conscious exam findings.
(a)
(b)
(C)
(C)
Figure 2.12 (a) Intraoral picture of the mandibular right first and second molars of a dog with fairly normal-appearing dentition/gin-
giva. (b) When a periodontal probe is carefully introduced into the gingival sulcus, a deep periodontal pocket is identified. The significant
hemorrhage is indicative of the high level of inflammation. (c) The dental radiograph of the area reveals the significant alveolar bone
loss to 410 (blue arrow). In this case, it is vertical (angular loss) (see chapter 9 for a complete discussion of periodontal radiology).
Furthermore, note that the periodontal loss has resulted in a class Il perio-endo lesion and a non-vital and infected mandibular second
molar (410) (white arrows). (See chapter 6 for a complete discussion of these lesions as well as other significant local consequences of
periodontal disease.) (d) Intraoral picture of the maxillary left canine (204) in a cat with significant periodontal loss despite normal-
appearing gingiva. This image demonstrates the occurrence of this problem in cats as well. This severe infection in these cases would
not be elucidated without a complete oral exam (or radiographs) under general anesthesia. This underscores the importance of a
complete dental prophylaxis including periodontal probing on a regular basis, despite a fairly normal conscious oral exam.
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease
25
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.13 (a) Intraoral picture of the right maxillary fourth premolar (108) in a dog with significant calculus accumulation. However,
periodontal probing depths were normal. (b) The subsequent intraoral dental radiograph confirms no loss of alveolar bone (blue
arrows). (c) Intraoral picture of the right maxillary fourth premolar (108) in a cat with significant calculus accumulation. Periodontal
 probing depths were normal. (d) After professional scaling only 0.5 mm of gingival recession was noted.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.14 (a) Intraoral picture of the right mandibular incisors of a dog with fairly normal-appearing dentition and dark pigmented
 gingiva. (b) When a periodontal probe is carefully introduced in the gingival sulcus, a deep periodontal pocket is identified. The
significant hemorrhage is indicative of the high level of inflammation.
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.14 (cont'd) (c) Intraoral picture of the right mandibular first and second molars (409 and 410) of a dog with fairly normal-
appearing dentition and dark pigmented gingiva. However, when a periodontal probe is carefully introduced into the gingival sulcus,
(smoe anig) ssol auog eloaae juessubis ayi sieaaal eane aul jo ydeiboel jeluap aul (p) pauap! s! laypod jeiuopouad daap e
The severe infection evidenced by these images would not be elucidated without a complete oral exam (or radiographs) under general
anesthesia. This reinforces the importance of a complete dental prophylaxis including periodontal probing on a regular basis, despite
a fairly normal conscious oral exam.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.15 Intraoral images of the palatal surface of the right maxillary fourth premolar (a) and right mandibular first molar (b) revealing 
significant periodontal loss. Again, these lesions cannot be diagnosed without general anesthesia and periodontal probing
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.16 Intraoral images of the right maxillary fourth premolar (108) in a dog that received root canal therapy 6 months previously.
(a) In this preoperative image note the significant calculus on this tooth (blue arrows) as compared to the relatively clean second and third
premolars (106 and 107). (b) After the tooth was scaled, the rough restorative margins (red arrows), which contributed to the quick
deposition of calculus, can be appreciated.
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease
27
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.17 (a) Intraoral images of the maxillary right of a dog with significant calculus on the fourth premolar (108) who had been
receiving non-anesthetic dentistries every month for the last few years. The teeth were “dleaned" less than 3 weeks previously and the
patient was presented for mobile incisors. (b) Once the tooth was professionally scaled, the significant gouges were visible. The patient
had 23 teeth extracted due to advanced periodontal disease, demonstrating the inadequacy of non-anesthetic dentistry. (For a further
discussion of non-anesthesia dentistry, please see Box 10.2, chapter 10.)
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.18 Intraoral images of the maxillary left of a dog with
significant gingival recession. Note the large accumulation of
calculus on the exposed roots (white arrows) while the crowns are
relatively clean (blue arrows).
of these states predisposes the patient to periodontal
 disease within 2 weeks of permanent tooth eruption.
Next, direct gingival trauma initiates or worsens
periodontal disease (Figure 2.2l). This is a common
issue in veterinary patients who commonly damage their
gingiva secondary to maladaptive behaviors (e.g., cage/
fence biting from separation anxiety and chronic chewing
Figure 2.19 (a) Intraoral picture of the mandibular left of a dog
with crowded and rotated mandibular premolars with secondary
bodies such as hair result in a rapid onset of periodontal
significant calculus accumulation and periodontal disease. (b) The
disease (Figure 2.22).
corresponding dental radiograph confirms the severe alveolar
Radiation therapy for head and neck cancers has been 
bone loss (white arrows) as well as crowded, rotated, and
overlapping roots (blue arrows). Incidentally, an embedded 
addition, oral infections are more problematic for patients
mandibular first premolar is noted (red arrow).
28  Understanding the Disease Process
(a)
Hgure 2.20 Intraoral picture of the maxillary right of a dog with a
persistent deciduous canine and third premolar (504 and 507) result-
ing in crowding. Note the secondary significant calculus accumulation
and periodontal inflammation associated with these teeth as com-
pared to the teeth without persistent deciduous dentition.
(b)
Figure 2.22 (a) Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a dog with
Figure 2.21 Intraoral picture of the rostral mandibular left of a
a gingival foreign body (foxtail) (blue arrow) and significant
dog with significant gingival recession and bone loss secondary to
dhronic self-chewing from atopic dermatitis. Note the lack of
periodontal loss. (b) Intraoral picture of the left maxillary third and 
fourth premolars of a dog with significant periodontal inflammation
calculus and gingival inflammation. The remainder of the patient's
and gingival recession secondary to hair entrapment (white arrows).
dentition was relatively normal.
who have received head and neck radiation therapy.53 At
disease among individuals. In reality, it appears that
the same time, there is an increased incidence of surgical
bacterial infection in combination with host response
complications (e.g, osteonecrosis) in previously irradi-
determines the progression of disease and that an
ated sites. Therefore, the prudent practitioner will treat
 improper host response (weak or excessive) exacerbates
any oral disease/infection as definitively as possible prior
 the severity of disease.o>s It is critical to recognize that
to commencing radiation therapy While this type of
while many disease states may influence the severity of
therapy is still relatively rare in veterinary medicine, the 
 periodontal disease, they do not initiate if.
incidence is rising, and periodontal disease should be
It is also important to note that periodontal disease is
 considered when embarking on these forms of therapy.
much more common in small and toy breed dogs than
medium and large breeds.7 The complete reasoning
Systemic influences on the progression
behind this is unknown; however, decreased interdental
of periodontal disease
space (crowding), rotation of teeth, decreased oral
While the presence of certain pathogenic bacteria is
activity (recreational chewing), increased life span, and
required for the initiation and progression of periodontal
relatively short tooth roots all likely play a role in this
disease, it does not explain the significant variability of
condition.70
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease   29
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.23 (a) Intraoral picture of the mandibular right of a poorly controlled diabetic dog
with significant periodontal disease. Note the gingival recession and purulent discharge
(exa n de iede  (me ani sne e asa
the patient was well controlled with a much lower insulin dosage. (b) Intraoral picture of the
right mandibular canine (404) of a poorly controlled diabetic cat with significant periodontal
disease. Note the significant periodontal pocket and purulent discharge despite minimal
calculus and gingivitis. (c) The subsequent dental radiograph confirmed the severe alveolar
bone loss (red arrows). Following appropriate therapy (including extractions), the patient
was wellcontrolled with a much lower insulin dosage.
The most common systemic diseases that affect
accumulated glycation end products (AGEs), which are
periodontal health are endocrine diseases, primarily
responsible for many ofthe severe diabetic complications. 102
diabetes mellitus.
This includes making the periodontium more susceptible
to destruction.103
Diabetes Mellitus
 Conversely, periodontal health is better in well-
controlled diabetic patients versus patients who are poorly
Diabetes has long been known to negatively affect
periodontal health, and periodontal health is actually
controlled 104-108
now known as the “sixth complication of diabetes"
(Figure 2.23).10.7-s The main reason for this is the fact
Corticosteroids
that among other complications, diabetes results in
Another important systemic issue that may increase the
increased  susceptibility  to  infections  and decreased
severity of periodontal loss is excess corticosteroids, either
wound healing 9-98
endogenous or exogenous." Excessive amounts of these
It has been shown that diabetic humans actually have
hormones are known to decrease the immune response
higher glucose levels in their gingival crevicular fluids,99
 through numerous negative effects including suppression
which may affect the bacterial population. Furthermore,
of neutrophil activity (such as phagocytois), blocking the
patients with diabetes have altered collagen metabolism,
acquisition and expression of cell-mediated immunity,
which results in reduced collagen synthesis as well
affecting the maturation of Langerhans cells, inhibition of
as delayed renewal of diseased collagen,.mo.1oi Finally, a
dendritic cells, and decreasing the number of circulating
chronic hyperglycemic state results in the production of
lymphocytes.1o-13 A decreased immune response via
30  Understanding the Disease Process
these mechanisms leads to decreased host defense
being responsible for the attachment loss seen with
against infections, which likely includes periodontal
peridontal disease.32-13The specific plaque hypothesisis
 pathogens.14-1 Furthermore, if has been shown that
 based on the fact that just a few species of bacteria are
systemic administration of cortisone in experimental
seen in virtually all cases of established, chronic
animal subjects results in osteoporosis of alveolar bone,
periodontal disease."5 (See chapter 3 for a detailed
 degradation of collagen, and increased destruction of
discussion of the bacteriology of periodontal disease.)
periodontal tissues.7 Additionally, increased endogenous
steroid release during stress has been implicated in
increased risk of periodontal disease.o.u8.19
Periodontal inflammation
Finally,
corticosteroids have been shown to cause delayed wound
Once established, bacteria within the subgingival plaque
healing.12o while no studies currently show a relationship
secretes toxins as well as metabolic products that initiate
between hyperadrenocorticoism and periodontal disease,
inflammation.72 Also produced are cytotoxins and bacte-
 the immune suppression that is known to occur with this
 rial endotoxins that can directly invade tissues, resulting
disease state is likely to cause similar issues.
 in inflammation to the gingiva and periodontium.?
Cytokines induce and enhance the production of a
Hematologic derangements, neoplasia,
destructive family of enzymes, known as MMPs, that
and chemotherapy
break down gingival tissue.4.13 This inflammation causes
Hematologic derangements can negatively affect the
damage to the gingival tissues, initially resulting in gingi-
periodontal health of human patients. Leukemia
vitis. If left untreated, the inflammation can lead to peri-
reportedly exacerbates periodontal disease by the
odontitis, which is defined as destruction of the attachment 
between the periodontal tissues and the teeth.6
processes of direct leukemic infiltration, increased gin-
 In addition to direcly stimulating inflammation, the
gival bleeding, and increased incidence of oral ulcera-
bacterial metabolic byproducts also elicit an inflammatory
tion and infection secondary to a deranged immune
-onau sapiosi tdonnau aue ope u o uaisas
response from the animal. White blood cells and other
 penia, agranulocytosis, Chediak-Higashi syndrome,
inflammatory mediators migrate out of the periodontal soff
 and others) or antibody deficiency results in decreased
tissues and into the periodontal space due to increased
immunity and may exacerbate periodontal disease.'0
vascular permeability and increased space between the cre-
Chemotherapeutic regimens can also have significant
vicular epithelial cells.13 White blood cells fight the infec-
oe  n  q d  
consequences such as mucosal ulceration, immune sup-
release enzymes to destroy the bacterial invaders either by
 design or after their death.47 When released into the gin-
pression, and xerostomia. Furthermore, proper dental
 e    s   
 gival sulcus, these enzymes further inflame the delicate
complications associated with cancer therapy.126-1zs3
gingival and periodontal tissues. The progression of
 periodontal disease is determined by the virulence of the
Therefore, cancer patients and/or those on chemothera-
 peutic protocols should receive optimum periodontal care.
Additional systemic conditions that have been impli-
tssues.6135.37(Foracomplete discussionoftheinflammatory
include hyperparathyroidism,12 nutritional deficiencies
reaction and progression of disease, see chapters 4 and 5.)
(mostly vitamin deficiencies), and female sex hormones
Despite this, patients with deficient immune systems
(especially pregnancy).10
typically have more severe periodontal disease than
those individuals in good health.6.136 HIV, diabetes, and
stress are significant risk factors for severe periodontitis
Periodontal disease theories
in humans and could likely be extrapolated to our animal
Classically, periodontal disease was thought to arise from
 patients.'36 Modulating these host responses may repre-
an increase in the overall numbers of bacteria. The non-
 side s) aan ruad o a a js
specific plaque hypothesis was based on the fact that
 In the progression from gingivitis to periodontitis, the
periodontal disease is generally associated with an
 inflammation (produced by the combination of the sub-
increased level of plaque and calculus.5,3 This theory
 gingival bacteria and the host response) damages the soff
 proposes that low levels of plaque bacteria are controlled
tissue attachment of the tooth and decreases the bony
by the host response, and moreover research found that
support via osteoclastic activity.7 This causes the
the concentration of bacteria in periodontally diseased
 periodontal attachment of the tooth to move apically
sites is twice as high as in healthy sites.'31 Recent studies,
(toward the root tip).614 As periodontal disease prog-
however, point to a few virulent strains of bacteria as
resses over time, the attachment loss continues in a
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease 31
non-linear pattern as active stages of destruction are fol-
14. Novak Ml. Classification of diseases and conditions affecting the
lowed by quiescent phases (burst pattern).13s The end
periodontium. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
Saunders,2006, pp. 100-109.
stage of periodontal disease is tooth loss; however, the
15. Quirynen M, Teughels W, Kinder Haake S, Newman MG. Micro-
disease has created significant problems prior to tooth
biology of periodontal diseases. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodon-
exfoliation (see chapters 6 and 7).
tology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 134-169.
16. Bowen WH. Nature of plaque. Oral Sci Rev. 9:3, 1976.
17. Socransky SS, Haffajee AD. Dental biofilms: difficult therapeutic
targets. Periodontol 2000 2002;28:12-55.
Box 2.3 Key points
18. DuPont GA. Understanding dental plaque: Biofilm dynamics.
J Vet Dent 14(3):91-93, 1997.
Periodontal disease is initiated by bacteria within the 
19. Pavlica Z. Biofilm: Microbial communities and periodontal dis-
ease. 2006 World Congress (WSAVA).
plaque biofilm
 20. Isogai E, Isogai H, Sawada H,et al. Bacterial adherence to gingival
 Plaque starts forming on teeth within seconds of a
epithelial cells of rats with naturally occuing gingivitis. I Peri-
professional cleaning.
odontol. 57:225, 1986.
+It is the subgingiva/ bacteria that cause the disease.
 21. Perry DA, Schnid MO, Takei HH. Phase I periodontal therapy. In:
"Anesthesia-free" cleanings are insufficient to control
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
disease.
pp. 722-727.
 Systemic diseases that affect the immune system tend to
22. Ramburg P, Axelsson P, Lindhe J. Plaque formation at healthy and
worsen periodontal disease.
 inflamed gingival sites in young individuals. J Clin Periodont.
21:51, 1994.
23. Baier RE, Glantz PO. Characterization of oralin vivo films formed
on different types of solid surfaces. Acta Odontol Scand.
References
36(5):289-301, 1978.
 24. Ruan MS, Di Paola C, Mandel ID. Quantitative immunochemistry
1. Lindhe J, Hamp S, Loe H. Plaque induced periodontal disease in
of salivary proteins adsorbed in vitro to enamel and cementum
from caries-resistant and caries-susceptible human adults. Arch
cal study. J Perio Res. 10:243-255, 1975.
Oral Biol. 31(9):597-601, 1986.
2. Boyce EN, Ching RJ, Logan EI, Hunt JH, Maseman DC,
25. Pratt-Terpstra IH, Weerkamp AH, Busscher HJ. The effects of
Gaeddert KL, King CT, Reid EE, Hefferren JI. Occurrence of
pellicle formation on streptococcal adhesion to human enamel
gram-negative black-pigmented anaerobes in subgingival plaque
and artificial substrata with various surface free-energies. J Dent 
during the development of canine periodontal disease. Clin Infect 
Res. 68(3):463-7, 1989.
Dis. 20 Suppl 2:S317-9, 1995.
26. Ronstrom A, Edwardsson S, Atistrom R. Streptococcus sanguis
3. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
and streptococcus salivarius in early plaque forrmation on plastic
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
films. J Periodontal Res. 12(5):331-339, 1977.
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
 27. Scheie AA. Mechanisms of dental plaque formation. Adv Dent
4. Loe H, Theilade E, Jensen SB. Experimental gingivitis in man.
Res. 8:246-253, 1994.
J Periodontol. 36:177, 1965.
 28. Kolenbrander PE, London J. Ecological significance of coaggre-
 5. Fiorellini JP, Ishikawa SO, Kim DM. Gingival inflammation. In:
gation among oral bacteria. Adv Microb Ecol. 12:183-217,
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
1992.
Pp. 355-361.
 29. Kolenbrander PE, London J. Adhere today, here tormorrow: Oral
6. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
bacterial adherence.J Bacteriol. 175(11):3247-3252, 1993.
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
Pp. 186-231.
MK, Donkersloot JA, Cisar JO. Molecular basis of bacterial adhe-
7. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Rationale for periodontal treatment. In:
sion in the oral cavity. Rev Infect Dis. 9 Suppl 5:S467-474, 1987.
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
 31. Scannapieco FA, Torres GI, Levine MJ. Salivary amylase promotes
pp. 630-635.
adhesion of oral streptococci to hydroxyapatite. J Dent Res.
8. Van Dyke TE, Serhan CN. Resolution of inflammation: A new
74(7):1360-1366, 1995.
paradigm for the pathogenesis of periodontal diseases. J Dent Res.
32. Hallberg K, Hammarstrom KJ, Falsen E, Dahlén G, Gibbons RJ,
82:82-90,2003.
Hay DI, Stromberg N. Actinomyces naeslundi genospecies 1 and
9. SilnessJ, Loe H. Periodontal disease in pregnancy II Correlation
2 express different binding specificities to N-acetyl-beta-D-
between oral hygiene and periodontal condition. Acta Odontol
galactosarmine, whereas Actinomyces odontolyticus expresses a
Scand. 22:121, 1964.
different binding specificity in colonizingthe human mouth. Oral
10. Klokkevold PR, Mealey BL. Influence of systemic disorders and
Microbiol Immunol. 13(6):327-336, 1998.
stress on the periodontium. In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontol-
33. Nyvad B, Killian M. Microbiology of the early colonization of
ogy. St Louis: Saunders, 2006,pp. 228-250, 284-310.
human enamel and root surfaces in vivo. Scand J Dent Res.
95:369-380, 1987.
Control, Chicago, 1998. Quintessence.
 34. Kolenbrander PE, Andersen RN, Moore LV. Coaggregation of
12. Merin RL. Results of periodontal treatment. In: Carranza's Clinical
Fusobacterium nucleatum, Selenomonas flueggei, Selenomonas
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 1206-1214.
infelix, Selenomonas noxia, and Selenomonas sputigena with
13. Grove TK. Periodontal disease. Compendium of Cont Educ
strains from 11 genera of oral bacteria. Infect Immun. 57(10):
4(7), 1982.
3194-3203, 1989.
32 Understanding the Disease Process
35. Kolenbrander PE, Ganeshkumar N, Cassels FJ, Hughes CV. Coag-
external odontoclastic resorption lesions and mandibular thicking.
gregation: Specific adherence among human oral plaque bacteria.
J Comp Pathol. 115(3):283-297, 1996.
FASEB J. 7(5):406-413, 1993.
60. Carke DE, Cameron A. Relationship between diet, dental
36. Schroeder HE, DeBoever J. The structure of microbial dental
calculus, and periodontal disease in domestic and feral cats in
 plaque. In: Dental Plaque. Edinburgh: Livingstone, 1970, p. 49.
Australia. Aust Vet J. 76(10):690-693, 1998.
37. Loesche WJ, Grossman NS. Periodontal disease as a specific,
61. Steenkamp G, Gorrel C. Oral and dental conditions in adult
albeit chronic, infection: Diagnosis and treatment. Clin Microbiol 
African wild dog skulls: A preliminary report. J Vet Dent. 16:
Rev. 14:727-752, 2001.
65-68, 1999.
38. Coghlan A. Slime city. New Scientist 2045:32-36, 1996.
62. Sherman PR, Hutchens LH Jr, Jewson LG. The effectiveness of
 39. Costerton JW, Lewandowski Z, Caldwell DE, Korber DR, Lappin-
subgingival scaling and root planing. II. Clinical responses related
Scott HM. Microbial biofilms. Annu Rev Microbiol. 49:711-745,
to residual calculus. J Periodontol. 61(1):9-15, 1990.
1995.
63. Jahn CA. Sonic and ultrasonic instrumentation. In: Carranzas
40. Shearer BJ. Biofilm and the dental office. J Am Dent Assoc.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 828-835.
127:181-189, 1996.
64. Bellows J. Periodontal equipment, materials, and techniques. In:
41. Elder MJ, Stapleton F, et al. Biofilm related infections in ophthal-
Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Techniques,
mology. Eye 9(1):102-109, 1995.
a Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2004, pp. 115-173.
42. Williams JE. Microbial contamination of dental lines. In: Current 
 65. Silness J. Fixed prosthodontics and periodontal health. Dent Clin
and Future Trends in Veterinary Dentistry: Proceedings of the
North Am. 24(2):317-329, 1980.
Upjohn  Worldwide Companion Animal Veterinary Dental
Forum, 1995, pp. 8-11.
Spontaneous progression of ligature induced peri-implantitis at
43. Costerton JW, Lewandowski Z, Caldwell DE, Korber DR,
implants with different surface roughness: An experimental study
Lappin-Scott HM. Microbial biofilms. Annu Rev Microbiol.
in dogs. Clin Oral Implants Res. 18(5):655-661, 2007.
1995, 49:711-745.
67. Bjorn AL, Bjorn H, Grkovic B. Marginal fit of restorations and its
44. Page RC. Periodontal diseases: A new paradigm. J Dent Educ.
relation to peridontal bone level. I. Metal fillings. Odontol Revy.
62:812-821, 1998.
20(3):311-321, 1969.
45. Williams JF, Molinari JA, Andrews N. Microbial contamination of
68. Jeffcoat MK, Howell TH. Alveolar bone destruction due to over-
dental unit waterlines: Origins and characteristics. Compendium
hanging amalgam  in periodontal disease. J Periodontol.
of Cont Educ in Dentistry 17(6):538, 1996.
51(10):599-602, 1980.
46. Niemiec BA. Periodontal disease. Top Companion Anim Med.
69. Buckley LA. The relationship between malocclusion and
23(2):72-80, 2008.
periodontal disease. J Periodontol. 43(7):415-417, 1972.
47. Westfelt E, Rylander H, Dahlen G, Lindhe J. The effect of suprag-
70. Bellows J. Equipping the dental Ppactice. In: Small Animal Dental
ingival plaque control on the progression of advanced periodontal
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
disease. J Clin Periodontol. 25(7):536-541, 1998.
Blackwell,2004, pp. 13-55.
48. Harvey CE. Anatomy of the oral cavity in the dog and cat. In:
 71. Hobson P. Extraction of retained primary canine teeth in the dog.
Veterinary Dentistry (Harvey CE ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders,
J Vet Dent. 22(2):132-137, 2005.
1985.
72. Harvey CE, Emily PP. Periodontal disease. In: Small Animal Den-
49. Hennet PR, Harvey CE. Anaerobes in periodontal disease in the
tistry. St. Louis: Mosby, 1993, pp. 89-144.
dog: A review. J Vet Dent. 8(2):18-21, 1991.
73. Blanton PL, Hurt WC, Largent MD. Oral factitious injuries. J Peri-
50. Listgarten MA, Hellden L. Relative distribution of bacteria at clin-
odontol. 48(1):33-37, 1977.
74. Epstein JB, Lunn R, Le N, Stevenson-Moore P. Periodontal attach-
Periodontol. 5(2):115-132, 1978.
 ment loss in patients after head and neck radiation therapy. Oral Surg
51. Slots J. Subgingival microflora and periodontal disease. J Clin
Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 86(6):673-677, 1998.
Periodontol. 6(5):351-382, 1979.
75. Lang NP, Mombelli A, Attstrom R. Dental plaque and calculus.
         
In: Clinical Periodontology and Implant Dentistry (Lindhe J,
IG. Detection of pathogen-related oral spirochetes, Treponema
Karring T, Lang NP eds.). 3rd ed. Copenhagen: Munksgaard, 2002,
denticola, and Treponema socranski in dental plaque from dogs.
pp. 102-134.
JVet Dent. 13(4):135-138, 1996.
76. Hamp SE, Hamp M, Olsson SE, Lindberg R, Schauman P. Radiog
53. Hinrichs JE. The role of dental calculus and other predisposing
raphy of spontaneous periodontitis in dogs. J Periodontal Res.
factors. In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saun-
32(7):589-597, 1997.
ders, 2006, pp. 170-192.
77. Loe H. Periodontal disease: The sixth complication of diabetes
 54. Tibbitts L, Kashiwa H. A histochemical study of early plaque
mellitus. Diabetes Care 16:329-334, 1993.
mineralization. Abstract #616, J Dent Res. 19:202, 1970.
78. Schlosman M, Knowler WC, Pettitt DJ, Genco RJ. Type 2 diabetes
 55. Clarke DE. The crystalline components of dental calculus in the
mellitus and periodontal disease. J Am Dent Assoc. 121:532-536,
domestic cat. J Vet Dent. 16(4):165-168, 1999.
1990.
56. Mandel I. Biochemical aspects of calculus formation. I Periodontal
 79. Collin HL, Uusitupa M, Niskaken L, Kontturi Narhi V, Markkanen
Res. 4 (Supp):7-8, 1957.
 H, Koivisto AM, et al. Periodontal findings in elderly patients with
57. Conroy CW, Sturzenberger OP. The rate of calculus formation in
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. J Periodontol. 69:
adults. J Periodontol. 39(3):142-144, 1968.
962-966, 1998.
58. Volpe AR, Kupczak LJ, King WJ, Goldman HM, Schulman SM In 
 80. Bartolucci EG, Parkes RB. Accelerated periodontal breakdown in
vivo calculus assessment. IV. Parameters of human clinical studies.
uncontrolled diabetes: Pathogenisis and treatment. Oral Surg Oral
J Periodontol. 40(2):76-86, 1969.
Med Oral Pathol 52:387, 1981.
59. Verstraete FJ, van Aarde RJ, Nieuwoudt BA, et al. The dental
 81. Emrich LJ, Slossman M, Greco RJ. Periodontal disease in non-
pathology of feral cats on Marion Island, part II: Periodontitis,
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. J Periodontol. 62:123, 1991.
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Periodontal Disease  33
82. Canpus G, Salem A, Uzzau S, Baldoni E, Tonolo G. Diabetes and
103. Schmidt AM, Weidrman E, Lalla E. Advanced glycation endprod-
periodontal disease: A case-control study. J Periodontol.
ucts (AGEs) induce oxidant stress in the gingiva, a potential
76(3):418-425, 2005.
mechanism underlying accelerated periodontal disease associ-
83. Papapanou PN. World workshop in clinical periodontics.
ated with diabetes. J Periodontal Res. 31:508, 1996.
Periodontal diseases: Epidemiology. Ann Periodontol. 1:1-36,
104. Tervonen T, Knuuttila M. Relation of diabetes control to
1996.
periodontal pocketing and alveolar bone level. Oral Surg Oral
84. Salvi GE, Yalda B, Collins JG, Jones BH, Smith FW, Arnold RR,
Med Oral Pathol 61:346-349, 1986.
105. Tsai C, Hayes C, Taylor GW. Glycemic control of type 2 diabetes
for periodontal diseases in insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
and severe periodontal disease in US adult population.
patients. J Periodontol. 88:127-315, 1997.
Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 30:182-192, 2002.
 85. Cianciola LJ, Park BH, Bruck E, Mosovich L, Genco RJ. Preva-
106. Christgau M, Palitzsch KD, Schmalz G, Kreiner U, Frenzel S.
lence of periodontal disease in insulin dependent diabetes
 Healing response to non-surgical periodontal therapy in patients
mellitus (juvenile diabetes). J Am Dent Assoc. 104:653-660,
with diabetes mellitus: Clinical, microbiological and immuno-
1982.
logic results. J Clin Periodontol. 25:112-124, 1998.
 86. Firatli E. The relation between clinical periodontal status and
107. Stewart JE, Wager KA, Friedlander AH, Zadeh HH. The effect of
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. J Periodontol. 68:136-140,
a m sd  o o   
1997.
2 diabetes mellitus. J Clin Periodontol. 28:306-310, 2001.
 87. Tervonen T, Karjalainen K, Knuuttila M, Huumonen S. Alveolar
108. Westfelt E, Rylander H, Blohme G, Jonasson P, Lindhe J. The
bone loss in type 1 diabetic subjects. J Clin Periodontol.
effect of periodontal therapy in diabetics. Results aer 5years.
27:567-571, 2000.
J Clin Periodontol. 23:92-100, 1996.
88. Taylor GW, Burt BA, Becker MP, Genco RJ, Shlossman M,
-sas aun aul ioae ieui suse rao pue sia d piezil '601
Knowler WC, et al. Non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
tem. In: Veterinary Immunology, an Introduction. Philadelphia:
and alveolar bone loss progression over 2 years. J Periodontol. 69:
Saunders, 2000, pp. 426-433.
76-83, 1998.
110. Boothe DM, Mealey KA. Glucocorticoid therapy in the
89. Rosenberg Cs. Wound healing in the patient with diabetes
dog and cat. In: Small Animal Clinical Pharmacology and
mellitus. Nurs Clin North Am. 25(1):247-261, 1990.
Theraputics (Boothe DM ed). Philadelphia: Saunders, 2001,
90. Feldrman EC, Nelson RW. Canine diabetes mellitus. In: Canine
Pp. 313-319.
and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. Philadelphia:
111. Auphan N,
DiDonato JA, Rosette C, 1
Helmberg A,
Saunders, 2004, pp. 486-538.
Karin M. Immunosuppression by glucocorticoids: Inhibition of
91. Ferringer T, Miller F 3rd. Cutaneous manifestations of diabetes
NF-kappa B activity through induction of I kappa B synthesis.
mellitus. Dermatol Clin. 20(3):483-492, 2002.
270(5234):286-290, 1995.
92. Delamaire M, Maugendre D, Moreno M, Le Goff MC, Allannic
112. Stary G, Klein I, Baurer W, et al. Glucocorticosteroids modify
H, Genetet B. Impaired leucocyte functions in diabetic patients.
Langerhans cells to produce TGF-b and expand regulatory T
Diabet Med. 14(1):29-34, 1997.
cells. J Immunol. 186:103-112, 2011.
93. Wysocki J, Wierusz-Wysocka B, Wykretowicz A, Wysocki H.
113. Vanderheyde N, Verhasselt V, Goldman M, Willems E. Inhibition
The influence of thymus extracts on the chemotaxis of poly-
 of human dendritic cell functions by methylprednisolone. Trans-
morphonuclearneutrophils (PMN) from patients with insulin
plantation 67:1342-1347, 1999.
dependent diabetes mellitus (IDD). Thymus 20(1):63-67,
114. Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Glucocorticoid therapy. In: Canine
1992.
and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. Philadelphia:
94. Blakytny R, Jude E. The molecular biology of chronic wounds and
Saunders,2004, pp.464-483.
delayed healing in diabetes. Diabet Med. 23(6):594-608, 2006.
115. Calvert CA, Greene CE, Hardie EM. Cardiovascular infections
95. Schubert S, Heesemann J. [Infections in diabetes mellitus].
in dogs: Epizootiology, clinical manifestations, and prognosis.
Immun Infekt 23(6):200-204, 1995.
JAVMA 187(6):612-616, 1985.
96. Velander P, Theopold C, Hirsch T,et. al. Impaired wound healing
116. Zen M, Canova M, Campana C. The kaleidoscope of glucorti
in an acute diabetic pig model and the efects of local hypergly-
coid effects on immune system. Autoimmun Rev. 9, 2011.
cemia. Wound Repair Regen. 16(2):288-293, 2008.
117. Glickman I, Stone IC, Chawla TN. The effect of cortisone
97. Hirsch T, Spielmann M, Zuhaili B, et al. Enhanced susceptibility to
acetate upon the periodontium of white mice. J Periodontol.
infections in a diabetic wound healing model. BMC Surg. 8:5, 2008.
24:161, 1953.
98. Lerman O, Galiano R, Armour M, Levine J, Gurtner G. Cellular
118. Genco RJ. Current view of risk factors for periodontal diseases.
dysfunction in the diabetic fibroblast: Impairment in migration,
J Periodontol. 67 (Suppl):1041, 1996.
vascular endothelial growth factor production, and response to
119. Croucher R, Marcenes WS, Torres MC, Hughes F, Sheiham A.
hypoxia. Am J Pathol. 162:303-312, 2003.
The relationship between life-events and periodontitis. A case-
99. Ficara AI, Levin MP, Grover MF, et al. A comparison of the
control study. J Clin Periodontol. 24(1):39-43, 1997.
glucose and protein contentof gingival fluid from diabetics and
120. Papich MG. Saunders Handbook of Veterinary Drugs. 2nd ed.
nondiabetics. J Periodontal Res. 10:171, 1975.
St. Louis: Saunders, 2007, pp. 551-554.
100. Grossi SG, Zambon JI, Ho AW, et al. Assesment of risk for
121. Sonis ST, Sonis AL, Lieberman A. Oral complications in patients
 periodontal diease. I. Risk indicators for attachement loss. J Peri-
receiving treatment for malignancies other than of the head and
odontol. 65:260, 1994.
neck. J Am Dent Assoc. 97(3):468-472, 1978.
101. Schnier M, Imberman M, Ramamurthy N, et al. Streptozotocin-
122. Jensen SB, Mouridsen HT, Bergmann OJ, Reibel J, Brinner N,
induced diabetes and the rat periodontium: Decreased relative
Nauntofe B. Oral mucosal lesions, microbial changes, and taste
collagen production. Coll Relat Res. 8:221, 1998.
disturbances induced by adjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer
102. Brownlee M. Glycation and diabetic complications. Diabetes 43:
 patients. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod.
836, 1994.
106(2):217-226, 2008.
34  Understanding the Disease Process
123. El-Housseiny AA, Saleh SM, El-Masry AA, Allam AA.
131. Socransky SS, Gibbons RJ, Dale AC, et al. The microbiota of the
Assessment of oral complications in children receiving chemo-
 gingival crevice area of man (I). Total microscopic and viable
therapy. J Clin Pediatr Dent. 31(4):267-273, 2007.
counts and counts of specific organisms. Arch Oral Biol.
124. Fayle SA, Curzon ME. Oral complications in pediatric oncology
8:275-280, 1963.
patients. Pediatr Dent. 13(5):289-295, 1991.
132. Newman MG Socransky Ss. Predominant cultivable microbiota
125.1
 Fleming P. Dental management of the pediatric oncology patient.
in periodontal disease.J Periodontal Res. 12(2):120-128, 1977.
Curr Opin Dent. 1(5):577-582, 1991.
133. Isogai H, Kosako Y, Benno Y, Isogai E. Ecology of genus Porphy-
126. Sonis S, Jensen SB, Mouridsen HT, Bergmann OJ, Reibel J,
romonas in canine periodontal disease. Zentralbl Veterinarmed
Brinner N, Nauntofte B. Kunz A. Impact of irmproved dental
B. 46(7):467-473, 1999.
services on the frequency of oral complications of cancer therapy
134. Hardham J, Dreier K, Wong I, Sfintescu C, Evans RT. Pigmented-
 for patients with non-head-and-neck malignancies. Oral Surg
anaerobic bacteria associated with canine periodontitis. Vet
Oral Med Oral Pathol. 65(1):19-22, 1988.
Microbio. 106(1-2):119-128, 2005.
127. Levy-Polack MP, Sebelli P, Polack NL. Incidence of oral compli-
135. Scannapieco FA. Periodontal inflammation: From gingivitis to
 cations and application of a preventive protocol in children with
systemic disease? Comp Cont Educ Dent. 25:16S-25S, 2004.
acute leukemia. Spec Care Dentist. 18(5):189-193, 1998.
136. Nisengard RJ, Kinder Haake S, Newman MG, Miyasaki KT.
128. Cheng KK, Molassiotis A, Chang AM, Wai WC, Cheung SS.
Microbial interactions with the host in periodontal diseases. In:
Evaluation of an oral care protocol intervention in the preven
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
tion of chemotherapy-induced oral mucositis in paediatric can-
Pp. 228-250.
cer patients. Eur J Cancer. 37(16):2056-2063, 2001.
137. Thoden Van Velzen SK, Abraham-Inpijin L, Modrer WDR.
129. Svanmberg G, Lindhe J, Hugoson A, et al. Effect of nutritional
Plaque and systemic disease: A reappraisal ofthe focalinfection
hyperparathyroidism on experimental periodontitis in the dog.
concept. J Clin Periodontol. 11:209-220, 1984.
Scan J Dent Res. 81:155, 1973.
138. Goodson IM, Tanner AC, Haffajee AD,et al. Patterns of progres-
130. Loesche WJ. Chemotherapy of dental plaque infections. Oral Sci
sion and regression of advanced destructive periodontal disease.
Rev. 9:65-107, 1976.
J Clin Periodontol. 9:472, 1982.
3
Bacteriology of periodontal disease
Colin E. Harvey
Periodontal disease is caused by accumulation of dental
disease in clinical patients; the cultured organism must
plaque in the space adjacent to the gingiva, as shown in a
cause disease when introduced into a healthy host; and the
classic 4-year study in dogs.4 The causative bacteria
organism must be reisolated from the inoculated,diseased
develop in the complex biofilm that forms on the exposed
experimental host and identified as being identical to the
surfaces of teeth,22 which in the absence of effective
 original specific causative agent.
oral hygiene leads to gingival and connective tissue
Because the dental plaque biofilm is a complex mix of
inflammation. This inflammation leads to soft tissue and
bacteria, it is impossible to apply Koch's postulates to
alveolar bone destruction and eventual loss of teeth, as
 prove pathogenicity of a particular species.
described in detail elsewhere in this book.
Culturing and identifying bacteria in gingival fluid
 The bacterial content of plaque and gingival fluids in
samples is notoriously challenging and expensive, given
dogs, and to a much lesser extent cats, has been studied
the fastidious nature of many of the species present.
Change in the constituents of the biofilm as the gingiva
in microbiological methodology and in the names
moves from health to disease can be assessed by the
       
checkerboard DNA-DNA hybridization technique.23-25
reading reports and textbooks on this topic.
Using this technique, and recognizing that periodonto-
There is a well-studied sequence of development of
 pathogens do not develop without a supportive micro-
dental plaque following a professional scaling in both
bial milieu, periodontal microbiologists have identified
humans and dogs.  Following scaling, a glycoprotein pel-
"clusters" of oral organisms associated with particular
licle is deposited on the tooth surface from salivary fluid,
disease states in humans.2326 Socransky's postulates
which acts like flypaper. Bacteria in oral fluid, initially
(Box 3.1) have been adopted as an alternative to Koch's
small cocci, become attached to the pellicle and colonies
 postulates to account for the bacterial complexity at the
develop. These colonies provide a rough surface that
site of periodontal infection.4 Specific bacteria are
enhances attachment of rod-shaped bacteria. The mixed-
species biofilm initially consists of aerobic organisms.
 on Socransky's postulates. The studies identifying
However, in the absence of effective oral hygiene, the
periodontopathogens have provided additional under-
standing of the complex bacterial biology occurring in
 24 hours following scaling, the layer closest to the inert,
the unique periodontal ecological niche.
non-vascularized tooth surface is sufficiently anaerobic
 Many of the bacteria recognized as human periodon-
to support growth of anaerobes and microaerophilic
 topathogens have been isolated from gingival samples in
species caught within the biofilm.? (See chapter 2 for a
dogs and cats,125.8.916-1.2728 and a study using a human
complete discussion of the pathogenesis of periodontal
DNA-DNA test panel in dog samples has shown that
disease.)
this technique is applicable in dogs.? However,
Proof of an infectious cause of disease results from
assuming that human periodontopathogens are also
fulfillment of Koch's postulates: The microorganism must
carnivore periodontopathogens is overly simplistic. For
be found and isolated in pure culture from the site of
example: Porphyromonas gingivalis is a primary human
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
35
36  Understanding the Disease Process
P. gulae, and it is commonly isolated from diseased
Box 3.1 Socransky's postulates-—human periodontal
canine gingival sites. There are several other
microbiology
 Porphyromonas spp., which are also catalase positive,
To be recognized as a periodontopathogen, a bacterial
that occur in canine or feline samples but that have yet to
be reported in studies of human samples.49.13.15 One pos-
species must meet the following criteria:
 sible explanation for these differences in periodonto-
· Association: The causative agent must be found in
pathogenic bacteria between humans and carnivores is
active "sites" in higher numbers than in non-active sites.
the difference in the mean oral pH (6.5-7 in humans,
Elimination: The elimination of the agent must stop the
progression of disease.
and 7.5-8 in dogs and cats). A list of putative canine and
feline periodontopathogens is shown in Table 3.1.
● Host response: The cellular or humoral immune
response must validate the specific role of the agent in the
Spirochetes are found in gingival samples from
disease.
●Virulence factors: The agent must possess virulence
However, although they meet the epidemiological cri-
factors that are relevant for the initiation and progression
 teria for recognition as putative periodontopathogens,
of the disease.
little else is known about their pathogenic role in dogs
● Animal modeis: The pathogenicity of the agent in an
and cats because of the difficulty of culturing these
animal model must provide conclusive evidence that it can
organisms.
cause periodontitis.
Box 3.2 Key points
Table 3.1 Putative Periodontopathogens in Dogs and Cats,
Based on Culture and Epidemiological Evidence.
·Periodontal disease is caused by accumulation of dental
plaque in the space adjacent to the gingiva.
 Organism
Reference
Because dental plaque is a complex mix of bacteria, it is
impossible to prove pathogenicity of a particular species.
Gram-negative, non-motile anaerobes of the black-pigmented
 Spirochetes are found in gingival samples from periodon-
Bacteroides group:
tally diseased dogs in large numbers.
Bacteroides denticanium
 Gram-negative non-motile anaerobes of the black-
8
pigmented Bacteroides group are thought to be the
Porphyromonas cangingivalis
4.8
most common periodontopathogens.
Porphyromonas canoris
8.15
Porphyromonas cansulci
8.4
Porphyromonas denticanis
8
Porphyromonas endodontalis
8.9
References
Porphyromonas gingivalis
2,9.20
Porphyromonas gulae
8
1. Allaker RP, de Rosayro R, Young KA, Hardie JM:. Prevalence of
 Porphyromonas and Prevotella species in the dental plaque of dogs.
Porphyromonas salivosa
2.8
Vet Rec. 140:147-148, 1997.
Prevotella intermedia (intermedius)
2.9,20
2. Allaker RP, Young KA, Langlois T, de Rosayro R, Hardie JM. Dental
Tannerella forsythensis (forsythia)
8.20
plaque flora of the dog with reference to fastidious and anaerobic
 Other organisms:
bacteria associated with bites. J Vet Dent. 14:127-130, 1997.
 3. Boyce EN, Ching RJ, Logan EI, Hunt JH, Maseman DC, Gaeddert
Campylobacter rectus
9.20
KL, King CT, Reid EE, Hefferren JJ. Occurrence of gram-negative
Peptostreptococcus anaerobius
9
black-pigmented anaerobes in subgingival plaque during the
Peptostreptococcus micros
development of canine periodontal disease. Clin Infect Dis.
9
20 Suppl 2:S317-319, 1995.
Streptococcus constellatus
9.20
4. Collins MD, Love DN, Karjalainen J, Kanervo A, Forsblom B,
Treponema denticola
20,29
Willems A, Stubbs S, Sarkiala E, Bailey GD, Wigney DI,
Jousimiessomer H. Phylogenetic analysis of members of the genus
Porphyromonas and description of Porphyrormonas-cangingivalis
periodontopathogen.?6 Initially, this 
organism
was
sp-nov and Porphyrormonas-cansulci sp-nov. Int J System Bact.
identified in feline gingival samples'7 and subsequently
44:674, 1994.
canine samples, although it was recognized as being
 5. Elliott DR, Wilson M, Buckley CM, Spratt, DA. Cultivable oral
microbiota of domestic dogs. J Clin Microbiol. 43:5470-5476,
  rd  e  
2005.
canine samples has shown this catalase-positive variant
6. Feng Z, Weinberg A. Role of bacteria in health and disease of
of P. gingivalis to be a separate species, now classified as
periodontal tissues. Periodontology 40:50-76, 2006.
Bacteriology of Periodontal Disease  
37
7. Fournier D, Mouton C, Lapierre P, Kato T, Okuda K, Menard C.
denticola, and Treponerma socranskii in dental plaque from dogs.
Porphyromonas gulae sp. nov., an anaerobic, gram-negative coc-
J Vet Dent. 13:135-138, 1996.
cobacillus from the gingival sulcus of various animal hosts. Int
20. Rober M, Quirynen M, Haffajee AD, Schepers E, Teughels W.
J Syst Evol Microbiol. 51:1179-1189, 2001.
Intra-oral microbial profiles of beagle dogs assessed by checker-
 8. Hardham J, Dreier K, Wong I, Sfintescu C, Evans RT. Pigmented-
board DNA-DNA hybridization using human probes. Proc
anaerobic bacteria associated
1 with canine periodontitis.
ECVD, 2006, 2007. Vet Microbiol. 127:79-88, 2008.
Vet Microbiol. 106:119-128, 2005.
 21. Sarkiala E, Harvey C. Systemic antimicrobials in the treatment of
9. Harvey CE, Thornsberry C, Miller B. Subgingival bacteria-
 periodontitis in dogs. Sem Vet Med Surg. 8:197-203, 1993.
comparison of culture results in dogs and cats with gingivitis.
 22. Soames IV, Davis RM. The structure of sub-gingival plaque in a
J. Vet Dent. 12:147-150, 1995.
beagle dog. I Perio Res. 9:333, 1974.
10. Hennet PR, Harvey CE. Aerobes in periodontal disease in the 
 23. Socransky SS, Haffajee AD. Periodontal microbial ecology.
dog: A review. J Vet Dent. 8:9-11, 1991.
Periodontol. 38:135-187, 2005.
11. Hennet PR, Harvey CE. Anaerobes in periodontal disease in the
24. Socransky SS, Haffajee AD, Smith C, Martin L, Haffajee JA,
dog: A review. J Vet Dent. 8:18-21, 1991.
Uzel NG, Goodson JM. Use of checkerboard DNA-DNA hybrid-
12. Hennet PR, Harvey CE. Spirochetes in periodontal disease in the
ization to study complex microbial ecosystems. Oral Microbiol
dog: A review. I Vet Dent. 8:16-17, 1991.
Immunol. 19:352-362, 2004.
13. Isogai H, Kosako Y, Benno Y, Isogai E. Ecology of genus Porphy-
25. Socransky SS, Smith C, Martin L, Paster BJ, Dewhirst FE, Levin
romonas in canine periodontal disease. Zentralbl Veterinarmed B.
AE. “Checkerboard" DNA-DNA hybridization. Biotechniques
46:467-473, 1999.
17:788-792,1994.
14. Lindhe J, Hamp S, Loe H. Plaque induced periodontal disease in
26. Socransky SS, Tanner AC, Goodson JM, Haffajee AD, Walker CB,
beagle dogs: A4-year clinical, roentgenographicaland histometri-
Ebersole JL, Sornberger GC. An approach to the definition of
cal study. J Perio Res. 10:243-255, 1975.
periodontal disease syndromes by cluster analysis. J Clin Peri-
15. Love DN, Karjalainen J, Kanervo A, Forsblom B, Sarkiala E, Bailey
odontol. 9:460-471, 1982.
GD, Wigney DI, Jousimiessomer H. Porphyromonas canoris
27. Syed SA, Svanberg M, Svanberg G. The predominant cultivable
sp-nov, an asaccharolytic, black-pigmented species from the
dental plaque flora of beagle dogs with gingivitis. J Periodontal
gingival sulcus of dogs. Int J System Bact. 44:204-208, 1994.
Res. 15:123-136, 1980.
16. Mager DL, Xirmenez-Fyvie LA, Haffajee AD, Socransky SS. Distri-
28. Syed SA, Svanberg, M, Svanberg G. The predominant cultivable
bution of selected bacterial species on intraoral surfaces. J Clin
dental plaque flora of beagle dogs with periodontitis. J Clin Peri-
Periodontol. 30:644-654, 2003.
odontol. 8:45-56, 1981.
17. Mallonee DH, Harvey CE, Venner M, Hammond BE Bacteriology
29. Valdez M, Haines R, Riviere KH, Riviere GR, Thomas DD.
of periodontal disease in the cat. Arch Oral Biol. 33:677-683,
Isolation of oral spirochetes from dogs and cats and provisional
1988.
identification using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis
18. Norris JM, Love DN. Associations amongst three feline Porphy-
specific for hurman plaque Treponema spp. J Vet Dent. 17:23-26,
rormonas species from the gingival margin of cats during
2000.
periodontal health and disease. Vet Microbiol. 65:195-207, 1999.
 30. Wunder JA, Briner WW, Calkins GP. Identification of the cultiva-
19. Riviere GR, Thompson AJ, Brannan RD, McCoy DE, Simonson
ble bacteria in dental plaque from the beagle dog. I Dent Res.
LG. Detection of pathogen-related oral spirochetes, Treponema
551097-1102, 1976.
SECTION2
The progression of disease
Gingivitis
Introduction
Gingivitis is defined as any inflammation to the gingival;
however, it is classically thought of as the inflammation
induced by plaque bacteria.12 In fact, research has shown
 that inflammation will continue as long as the gingiva is
exposed to a bacterial biofilm and will resolve after its
removal.3
 It is important to be familiar with normal gingival fea-
tures in order to identify abnormal findings. Normal
gingival tissues are coral pink in colors (allowing for
normal pigmentation), and have a thin, knife-like edge,
and a smooth, regular texture (Figure 4.1).6 The
coloration is produced by the vascularity and modified
by the overlying keritinazation. There should be no
demonstrable plaque or calculus on the dentition. In
Figure 4.1 Normal gingival tissues. The gingiva is coral pink
human dentistry, this lack of inflammation is defined as
(except where pigmented). There is no evidence of gingival
gingival index (o).’ The American Veterinary Dental
inflammation or plaque/calculus on the teeth.
College does not utilize a gingival index per se; rather
gingivitis and periodontitis scoring is combined in the
Gingival inflammation is hastened by factors that
 periodontal disease classification, where no inflamma-
 enhance plaque accumulation. These may include crowd-
tion is known as PDo.*
ing' (Figure 4.2), roughened teeth (due to fracture
[Figure 4.3], enamel hypoplasia [Figure 4.4], or aggressive
Etiology
scaling'4), or faulty restorations (Figure 4.5),is.16 In
While multifactorial in nature, gingivitis is initiated by
addition, diseases (e.g., diabetes and Cushing's) and
the bacteria in dental plaque.129-11 The bacteria and their
drugs (e.g., corticosteroids and cancer chemotherapeutic
metabolic byproducts directly create inflammation.?9
agents) that alter the host inflammatory response may
However, not only are these products directly injurious,
 predispose the patient to the development ofgingivitis. 7-2
they also elicit an inflammatory response from the host,
further damaging the delicate oral tissues. This initial
Gingival defense
periodontal inflammation is due to an overall increase in
There are several players involved in gingival defense.
the numbers of bacteria, which consists mostly of
These include gingival crevicular fluid (GCF), saliva,
 gram-negative anaerobes.'2 (See chapters 2 and 3 for a
and white blood cells. Gingival crevicular fluid was first
more detailed description of the pathogenesis and bacte-
studied in the 1950s and was initially considered to be
riology of gingivitis).
transudate.24-26 However, it is produced in only very
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
41
42  The Progression of Disease
Figure 4.2 Intraoral picture of the maxillary right of a dog with
Figure 4.4 Intraoral picture of the maxillary right of an 11-month-
cowding and rotation of the second through fourth premolars,
old dog with widespread enamel hypocalcification. Note the
and secondary periodontal disease as evidenced by the depth of
significant calculus and gingival inflammation.
the periodontal probe.
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 4.5 Intraoral images of the right maxillary fourth premo-
lar (108) in a dog that received root canal therapy 6months
previous. (a) The preoperative image reveals the significant
calculus on this tooth (blue arrows) as compared to the relatively
Figure 4.3 (a and b) Intraoral pictures of the left maxillary fourth
dean second and third premolars (106 and 107). (b) After the
premolars (208) of two dogs that have an uncomplicated crown
tooth was scaled, the rough restorative margins (red arrows).
fractures (blue arrows). Note the significant calculus present 
which contributed to the quick deposition of calculus, can be
(white arrows).
appreciated.
Gingivitis   43
 Box 4.1 Key clinical point 
Gingivitis is typically associated with calculus on the involved dentition but is primarily elicited by pfaque and thus can be seen in
the absence of calculus (Figure 4.6).23 Alternatively, wicdespread supragingival calculus may be present with little to no gingivitis
(Figure 4.7). It is critical to remember that calculus acts as an irritant as well as a rough surface for plaque attachment, but is in and
of itself essentially non-pathogenic. 4.23 Therefore, the degree of gingival inflammation (not the amount of calculus) should be used 
 to judge the need for professional therapy. This is a radical change in thought, but this is a much more accurate measure of
disease. (See chapter 2 for a complete discussion of calculus.)
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6 (a) Intraoral picture of the left maxillary third and fourth premolars (207 and 208) in a dog with severe gingival inflamma-
 tion that affects the entire attached gingiva (blue arrows) despite the presence of minimal calculus. (b) Intraoral picture of the maxillary
right in a cat with severe hyperplastic gingival inflammation despite the presence of minimal calculus.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7 Intraoral photographs of a maxillary fourth premolar of a dog (a) and cat (b) with severe dental calculus covering the entire
 rown as well as extending over the gingiva. Note, however, that there is minimal gingival inflammation. There was no periodontal
pocketing or alveolar bone loss on subsequent exam and radiographs.
minute amounts (if any) in normal gingiva increasing
numerous products, including enzymes that may be of 
with inflammation, and in some cases correlating with
host or bacterial origin. The most protective constitu-
the degree of inflammation.272 Therefore, GCF is con-
ents of GCF are antibodies, although their exact role is
sidered an inflammatory exudate, which is produced in 
currently unknown.32 In addition, some antibiotics
reaction to bacterial‘ infection.2-31 GCF contains
(such as tetracyclines and metronidazole) are secreted
44   The Progression of Disease
in the GCF, which may prove beneficial as a treatment
 movement into the oral cavity is known as the orogranu-
modality.33.34
locytic migration rate.29
Saliva plays a protective role, as it maintains the oral
Features and clinical signs of the stages
sn sad i iis oonoid rdod e n sns
of gingivitis
 the bacterial acids, and acting as a mechanical cleaning
The level of gingival inflammation is broken down into
 agent.2" In this way, saliva exerts a significant influence
several stages. However, these stages are somewhat
on plaque and  calculus accumulation as well
as
arbitrary and gingivitis proceeds through them in a fluid
 periodontal disease. Xerostomia (decreased to absent
fashion, with no clear demarcations." This is especially
 saliva) is a well-known promoter of periodontal disease
 true when it comes to the line between normal gingiva
 in humans.3 This was also evidenced in an animal study
and the initial stages of gingivitis.52 The majority of
where the removal of the salivary glands caused an
biopsies from “normal" gingiva contain leukocytes, the
 increase in periodontal disease.35
majority of which are T cells.s These cells do not appear
There are numerous antibacterial products in saliva.
to create inflammation but rather are responsible for the
These products include enzymes such as lysozyme, lac-
daily maintenance of gingival health. Thus, there is a
toferrin, lactoperoxidase-thiocynate, and myeloperoxi-
constant stream of WBCs migrating through the junc-
dase, which all have been shown to have antimicrobial
 tional epithelium, and then through the sulcus, and
 properties.36-3 In addition, saliva contains antiproteases
finally into the oral cavity.54
such as the cathepsins and tissue inhibitors of metallopro-
teinases (TIMPs), which inhibit the degradatory effects
Stage I (initial gingivitis)
of proteolytic enzymes.441 Salivary glycoproteins appear
 The initial events in gingivitis are actually changes in
to have both protective and promotive functions, as they
 the gingival vasculature, specifically increased blood
may inhibit pathogenic alterations and help to move
flow through dilated capillaries.? These capillary
bacteria out of the oral cavity." However, these glycopro-
changes occur within 7 days (but can start as soon as 48
teins concurrently facilitate plaque accumulation.42.43
hours) after plaque has been allowed to accumulate.556
Saliva also contains a significant amount of antibodies,
PMNs move through these widened spaces and then
with IgA being the most prevalent.2 These antibodies
migrate through the walls and congregate in the
 appear to be synthesized locally, as they react with oral
connective tissue, junctional epithelium, and gingival
bacteria but not with bacteria from the Gl tract.43
N     m s -s
Furthermore, these antibodies in saliva may impair the
clinically evident,? and therefore is known as subclinical
ability of bacteria to attach to the oral surfaces.43
gingivitis.60
Finally, the saliva plays an important role in buffering
 In addition to changes within the vasculature, the
the salivary pH against bacterial-induced changes via the
junctional epithelium and the connective tissue matrix
bicarbonate-carbonic system.2944 This keeps the oral envi-
become slightly altered.? This takes the form of
 ronment at a proper physiologic pH for optimum health.
exudation and fibrin deposition in the involved areas.52
White blood cells ( WBCs) also play a role in the defense
 It is important to note that the host response at this
mechanisms of the gingiva. Leukocytes are present in the
point determines the disease course. An appropriate
saliva but generally enter the oral cavity via the gingival
 response causes the lesion to resolve quickly, while an
sulcus.45 The vast majority ofleukocytes in the oral cavity
inappropriate one results in the creation of a localized
are polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), with a small
chronic inflammatory state.9
-o jo (sq u o xd) ud
cytes.2 These PMNs are active WBCs with phagocytic
and killing abilities,4647 and they are actually attracted by
Stage Il (the early lesion)
plaque bacteria.4 Therefore, the WBCs represent 
This stage occurs approximately 1 week following the initi-
a
significant weapon in the fight against the extension of
 ation of plaque accumulation.561 There is no distinct line
 plaque into the gingival sulcus.29
between this level and stage I, as it is essentially an intensifi-
There are a small number of leukocytes present in the
cation of the same changes seen in the initial lesion.61-63 The
gingival sulcus ofhealthy and even germ-free gingiva.4950
 PMNs that have migrated through the vessel walls will
The leukocyte numbers are increased with gingivitis,
 o aa  pe a a n a
with some indication that the degree of increase is related
 pocket area.? They are then chemotactically drawn to the
to the severity of the gingival inflammation. Therefore,
bacteria and ingest them (phagocytosis),” resulting in
leukocyte numbers can be used as a marker of gingival
release of lysozymes4 by design or after cell death.23 This
 inflammation.5 The WBCs in the gingival crevicular
local inflammation, and the patient's continued response to
fluid are known as orogranulocytes and the degree of
ift, causes the fibroblasts to begin showing cytotoxic
Gingivitis   45
alterations, leading to a decrease in collagen production 
capillaries as well as formation of capillary loops.? This
and  an increase in collagen destruction.636 The
 stage of gingivitis may be present with or without demon-
 combination of these processes leads to early tissue changes.
strable plaque and calculus. This initial level of gingivitis
Classically, the first clinical sign of gingivitis was
 is classified as gingival index (G1) 1.
 believed to be a color change caused by erythema of the
 In addition to being an early marker for gingivitis,
gingival
margin,  termed
“marginal gingivitis"
bleeding on probing can also be used subjectively as a
(Figure 4.8).'67 This is caused by the proliferation of
measure of the severity of inflammation. It has been
shown that the degree of bleeding corresponds to the
level of inflammation.* Furthermore, bleeding on prob-
ing is believed to be a sign of active tissue destruction,
and in humans has been shown to occur as soon as 2 days
after cessation of homecare.
Gingivitis leads to gingival bleeding via dilation and/
or engorgement of the capillaries and also thinning or
ulceration of the sulcular epithelium. This inflamma-
tion and/or thinning of the capillaries results in rupture
and bleeding, which can occur secondary to previously
 innocuous stimuli (such as brushing or chewing).
 Chronic inflammation secondary to plaque bacteria is
by far the most common cause of gingival bleeding.70
However, gingival bleeding can also result secondary to
uremia,7 multiple myeloma,7 and clotting disorders4
such as thrombocytopenia, hemophilia, and vitamin K
Figure 4.8 Intraoral picture of the left maxillary fourth premolar
antagonism (rodenticide toxicity). In patients with
(208) in a dog with early "marginal gingivitis" (blue arrows)
significant or spontaneous gingival bleeding, practitioners
Box 4.2 Key clinical point
While color change is a reliable sign of disease, it is now known that increased gingival bleeding on probing (Figure 4.9)
occurs prior to a color change.4.68 Although it is difficult to perform this on awake patients and therefore is not commonly
used as a screening test in practice, clients may notice bleeding during brushing orafter chewing hard/rough toys.12369 f this
is discovered, a diagnosis of early gingivitis can be made despite a lack of demonstrable color change. In fact, this is a more
objective measure of inflammation than identifying a subtle color change! Practitioners should consider carefully probing or
brushing a tractable patient's teeth on conscious exam to demonstrate the level of inflammation to hesitant owners.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9 Intraoral pictures of the left maxillary third premolar (a) and left mandibular canine (b) in a dog with bleeding induced by
probing. Note that the gingiva appears normal and there is minimal calculus.
46   The Progression of Disease
 should consider performing a coagulation profile prior
relatively healthy.
Stage Ill gingivitis (Established)
If left untreated, the established lesion eventually
 develops. In humans this generally occurs after about
 2-3 weeks without homecare.* Stage IlI gingivitis is char-
acterized by a further increase in the level of plasma
cells.ss In addition, B cells are seen in high numbers and
are typically of the IgG variety (specifically types 1
and 3).52 The junctional epithelium shows widened intra-
cellular spaces and often contains lysosomes from PMNs,
which can further damage the delicate gingival tissues.
Increased inflammation results in increased collagen-
Figure 4.10 Intraoral picture of the right maxillary fourth pre-
olysis in the area. This is caused by the increased produc-
tion of collagenase (by bacteria and PMNs),73 as well as
molar/first molar in a dog with severe gingival inflammation, as
 evidenced by the intense erythema (blue arrows)
numerous  other  inflammatory/destructive enzymes
such as esterases, aminopeptidase,74 cytochrome oxi-
dase, and B-galactocidase. In fact, an inverse relation-
cells and the amount of intact collagen.76
Increased levels of inflammation also intensify the
vascular changes, resulting in engorged and congested
vessels, impaired venous return, and sluggish blood flow.
 In addition, some red blood cells (RBCs) may become
extravasated into the connective tissue, where the
 breakdown products further affect the gingiva.9
Clinically, the vascular changes and congestion inten-
sify the color changes to the gingiva, which can be seen
 as deeper shades of red (Figure 4.10). With increasing
chronicity and levels of inflammation, more of the gin-
 giva becomes affected; eventually the entire attached gin-
giva may be involved (Figure 4.11). Extravasated RBCs
Fgure 4.11 Intraoral picture of the right maxillary canine (104) in a
and their breakdown products can also further intensify
dog with severe gingival inflammation that affects the entire attached
 the color changes. In some cases of severe inflammation,
gingiva (blue arrows) despite the presence of minimal calculus.
a bluish tinge may become superimposed on the red-
dened gingiva (anoxemia) (Figure 4.12).77
 In addition to color changes, as the inflammation
 progresses gingival edema will occur (Figure 4.13).3 In
advanced cases, gingival bleeding may be spontaneous.23
Finally, although halitosis is more commonly associated
with periodontal disease, it can also be noted as a sequela
 of significant gingivitis.23
Stage IV gingivitis (Advanced)
This stage of gingivitis is defined as extension into the alve-
olar bone, causing periodontal breakdown.63 It is therefore
more truly defined as early periodontitis.865 (This is
discussed in detail in the next chapter.) Interestingly, not
Figure 4.12 Intraoral picture of the mandibular left premolars in
all cases of severe gingivitis will progress into periodonti-
a dog with anoxemia of the gingiva over the mandibular third
tis, as the patient must be susceptible. However, active
premolar (307) (green arows). Note the purulent discharge
 periodontitis (periodontal inflammation) is never seen
around the first and second premolars (white arrow).
Gingivitis 
47
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13 (a and b). Intraoral pictures of the maxillary left in two dogs with periodontally induced gingival enlargement.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.14 Intraoral picture of severe periodontal loss of the right mandibular first molar (409) (a) and the left maxillary canine (204) in
 a cat (b). Note there is minimal current gingivitis.
without concurrent gingivitis.? However, alveolar bone
utilize the severity to communicate more accurately the
loss may be present from past destruction (Figure 4.14).
level of disease. There are two indices commonly used in
human dentistry. The first relies on probing and therefore
Gingivitis scoring index
 is more appropriate to the anesthetized exam, whereas
the second (modified) version does not rely on probing
 In the interest of standardizing gingival evaluations,
and  therefore  should be  the  preferred  method  for
gingival indices have been developed. The AVDC
veterinary patients, as it can be completed on most
currently  does  not  have  an  approved/standardized
conscious patients.
gingivitis index. At this point it is included in the
periodontal disease classification as PD1. However,
●Loe,196778
gingival indices are utilized by human dentists and may
● Gl 0=Normal gingiva.
be valuable to veterinarians as well as we advance in our
● GI 1= Mid inflammation: slight color change and
dental knowledge, since there is a significant difference
 edema. No bleeding on probing.
between gingivitis grades 1 and 4. Therefore, a prudent 
● Gl 2= Moderate inflammation: redness, edema, and
practitioner will record the degree of gingivitis and
 glazing. Bleeding on probing.
48  The Progression of Disease
● GI 3= severe inflammation: marked redness and edema
 as well as ulceration. Tendency for spontaneous bleeding-
● Lobene, 198679
● GI 0 =Absence of inflammation (Figure 4.15).
● Gl 1=Mid inflammation. Slight change in color
(Figure 4.16). Little change in texture of any portion,
 but not the entire marginal gingival.
● GI 2=Mild inflammation as above but involving
entire marginal gingiva (Figure 4.17).
● Gl 3=Moderate inflammation.
Glazing, redness,
edema, and/or hypertrophy of the marginal gingival
unit (Figure 4.18).
● Gl 4=Severe inflammation. Marked redness, edema,
 and/orhypertrophyofthe marginal gingiva, spontaneous
Figure 4.17 Gingival index two (2), mild to moderate inflamma-
bleeding, congestion, ulceration (Figure 4.19).
 tion of the entire marginal gingiva.
Therapy
 The basis of treatment for gingivitis is strict plaque
control1.3.14.23.s.s1 This is classically accomplished via a
combination of homecare and professional dental
cleanings (prophylaxis)
performed under general
Figure 4.18 Gingival index three (3). moderate inflammation
with edema and hemorrhage.
Figure 4.15 Gingival index zero (0), lack of inflammation, normal
gingiva.
Figure 4.16 Gingival index one (1), mild marginal gingivitis.
Figure 4.19 Gingival index four (4), severe inflammation with
Involves most but not all of the marginal gingiva.
 purulent discharge and spontaneous hemorrhage.
Gingivitis 
49
anesthesia.114.23 In addition, correction of any predispos-
12. Quirynen M, Teughels W, Kinder Haake S, Newman MG.
  ss on o se ns s 
Microbiology of periodontal diseases. In: Carranzas Clinical
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,pp. 134-169.
hyperplasia should also be performed.s2 In general, if
13. Buckley LA. The relationship between malocclusion and
these steps are meticulously and consistently performed,
periodontal disease. J Periodontol. 43(7):415-417, 1972.
gingivitis should be controlled. It should be noted, how-
14. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
ever, that without homecare gingival infection and
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
inflammation will quickly recur.1483 Since there is no
pp. 186-231.
attachment loss present with gingivitis,
15. Bjorn AL, Bjorn H, Grkovic B. Marginal fit of restorations and its
further
relation to periodontal bone level. I. Metal fillings. Odontol Revy.
professional therapy (such as periodontal surgery or
20(3):311-321, 1969.
extraction) is not necessary. (For further information on
16. Jeffcoat MK, Howell TH. Alveolar bone destruction due to over.
complete dental cleaning or homecare, please see chap-
hanging amalgam in periodontal disease. J Periodontol.
ters 10 and 13, respectively.)
51(10):599-602, 1980.
17. Nisengard RJ, Kinder Haake S, Newman MG, Miyasaki KT.
Microbial interactions with the host in periodontal diseases. In:
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
Box 4.3 Key points
pp. 228-250.
18. Emrich LJ, Slossman M, Greco RJ. Periodontal disease in non-
 Gingivitis is a local infection secondary to plaque bacteria.
insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. J Periodontol. 62:123, 1991.
 Gingivitis is reversible and preventable with proper care.
19. Bartolucci EG, Parkes RB. Accelerated periodontal breakdown in
 Calculus, while an indicator, is NOT an accurate marker as
uncontrolled diabetes: Pathogenesis and treatment. Oral Surg
to the level of disease.
Oral Med Oral Pathol 52:387, 1981.
20. Gickman I, Stone IC, Chawla TN. The effect of cortisone acetate
Gingival bleeding is the first sign of gingivitis
upon the periodontium of white mice. J Periodontol. 24:161, 1953.
 Plaque control via professional cdeanings and homecare is
 the idleal form of therapy.
21.
 Genco RJ. Current view of risk factors for periodontal diseases.
J Periodontol. 67(Suppl):1041, 1996.
22. Hinrichs JE. The role of dental calculus and other predisposing
factors. In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders,
2006, pp. 170-192.
References
23. Niemiec BA. Periodontal disease. Top Companion Anim Med.
23(2):72-80, 2008.
1. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
24. Brill N, Krasse B. The passage of tissue fluid into the clinically
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
healthy gingival pocket. Acta Odontol Scand. 16:233-245, 1958.
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
25. Brill N. The gingival pocket fluid. Studies of its occurrence,
2. Loe H, Theilade E, Jensen SB. Experimental gingivitis in man. J
composition and effect (thesis). Copenhagen, 1962.
Periodontol 36:177, 1965.
26. Brill N. Effect of chewing on flow of tissue fluid into human
3. Silness J, Loe H. Periodontal disease in pregnancy II. Correlation
gingival pockets. Acta Odontol Scand. 17:277-284, 1959.
between oral hygiene and periodontal condition. Acta Odontol
27. Shapiro L, Goldman H, Bloom A. Sulcular exudate flow in gingival
Scand. 22:121, 1964.
inflammation. J Periodontol. 50(6):301-304, 1979.
 4. Fiorellini JP, Ishikawa SO, Kim DM. Clinical features of fingivitis.
28. Orban JE, Stallard RE. Gingival crevicular fluid: A reliable pre-
In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
dictor of gingival health? J Periodontol. 40(4):231-235, 1969.
Pp.362-372.
 29. Bulkacz J, Carranza FA. Defense mechanisms of the gingiva. In:
5. Fiorellini JP, Kim DM, Ishikawa SO. The gingiva. In: Carranza's
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
Clinical Periodontology St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 46-67.
pp. 344-354.
6. Niemiec BA. Periodontal disease. Top Companion Anim Med.
30. Loe H, Holm-Pedersen P. Absence and presence of fluid
23(2):72-80, 2008.
from normal and inflamed gingivae. Periodontics 149:171-177,
 7. Beck JD, Arbes SJ. Epidemiology of gingival and periodontal dis-
1965.
eases. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders,
31. Weinstein E, Mandel ID, Salkind A, Oshrain H, Pappas G. Studies
2006, pp. 110-131.
of gingival fluid. Periodontics 5:161-166, 1967.
8. AVDC Nomenclature Committee. www.AVDC.org. Accessed
32. Lamster IB, Celenti R, Ebersole J. The relationship of serum IgG
Jan 1, 2001.
antibody titers to periodontal pathogens to indicators of the host
9. Fiorellini JP, Ishikawa SO, Kim DM. Gingival inflammation. In:
response in gingival crevicular fluid. J Clin Periodontol. 17:419,
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
1990.
Pp. 355-361.
33. Eissenberg L, Suchow R, Coles RS, et al. The effects of metronida-
10. Lindhe J, Hamp S, Loe H. Plaque induced periodontal disease in
zole administration on clinical and microbiologic parameters of
beagle dogs: A 4-year clinical, roentgenographical and histomet-
periodontal disease. Clin Prev Dent. 13:28, 1991.
rical study. J Perio Res. 10:243-255, 1975.
34. Bader HJ, Goldhaber P. The passage of intravenously adminis
11. Boyce EN, Ching RJ, Locbgan EI, Hunt JH, Maseman DC,
tered tetracycline in the gingival sulcus of dogs. J Oral Ther. 2:324,
Gaeddert KL, King CT, Reid EE, Hefferren JI. Occurrence of
1966.
gram-negative black-pigmented anaerobes in subgingival plaque
35. Gupta OH, Blechman H, Stahl SS. The effects of desalivation
during the development of canine periodontal disease. Clin Infect
on periodontal tissues of the Syrian hamster. Oral Surg. 13:
Dis. 20 Suppl 2:S317-319, 1995.
470, 1960.
50   The Progression of Disease
36. Iacono VC, Bolot PR, Mackay JB, et al. Lytic sensitivity of
60. Lindhe J, Socransky SS, Loe H. Experimental gingivitis in the
beagle dog. Int Dent J. 23:232, 1973.
40:773, 1983.
 61. Page RC. The role of inflammatory mediators in the pathogenesis
 37. Muhlemann HR, Schroeder H. Dynamics of supragingival
of periodontal disease. J Periodontal Res. 26:230, 1991.
calculus formation. Avd Oral Biol. 1:175, 1964.
62. Gavin JB. Ultrastructural features of chronic marginal gingivitis.
38. Kalmar JP, Arnold RP. Killing of Actinobacillus actinomycetoco
J Periodontal Res. 5:19, 1970.
mans by human lactoferrin. Infect Immun. 56:2552, 1988.
63. Lindhe J, Schroeder HE, Page RC, et al. Clinical and stereologic
39. Miyasaki KT, Wilson ME, Genco RJ. Killing of Actinobacillus
analysis of the course of early gingivitis in dogs Periodontal Res.
actinomycetocomans by the human peroxide chloride system.
9.314, 1974.
Infect Immun. 53:161, 1986.
 64. Lange D, Schroeder HE. Cytochemistry and ultrastructure of
40. Isemura S, Ando K, Nakashizoka T, et al. Cystatin S: A cystein-
gingival sulcus cells. Helv Odontol Acta. 15:65, 1971.
proteinase inhibitor of human saliva. J Biochem. 96:1311, 1984.
65. Page RC, Simpson DM, Ammons WE Host tissue response in
41. Drouin L, Overall CM, Sodek J. Identification of matrix metallo.
chronic inflammatory periodontal disease. IV. The periodontal and
endoproteinase inhibitor (TIMP) in human parotid and subman-
dental status of a group of aged great apes. J Periodontol 46:144
dibular saliva: Partial purification 
 and characterization.
1975.
J Periodontal Res. 23:370, 1988.
66. Flieder DE, Sun CN, Schneider BC. Chemistry of normal and
42. Ellen RP, Gibbons RJ. Protein associated adherence of strepto-
 inflamed human gingival tissues. Periodontics 4:302, 1966.
a   s a  sd 
67. Fiorellini JP, Ishikawa SO, Kim DM. Clinical features of gingivitis.
Infect Immun. 5:826, 1972.
 In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
43. Gibbons RJ, van Houte J, Liljemark WE. Some parameters that
pp.362-372.
affect the adherence of S. Salivarius to oral epithelial surfaces.
 68. Meitner SW, Zander H, Iker HP, et al. Identification of inflamed
J Dent Res. 51:424, 1972.
gingival surfaces. J Clin Periodontol. 6:93, 1979.
44. Mandel I. Relation of saliva and plaque to caries. J Dent Res.
69. Amato R, Canton J, Polson A,etal. Interproximal gingival inflam-
53(Suppl):246, 1974.
 mation related to the conversion of a bleeding to a non-bleeding
45. Schlott CR, Loe H. The origin and variation in the number of
state. J Periodontol. 57:63, 1986.
leukocytes in the human saliva. J Periodontal Res. 4(Supp):24, 1969.
 70. Milne AM. Gingival bleeding in 848 army recruits: An assessment.
46. Passo SA, Tsai CC, McArthur WP, et al. Interaction of
Br Dent J. 122:111, 1967.
inflammatory cells and oral microorganisms. IX. The bacterial
71. Merril A, Peterson LJ. Gingival bleeding secondary to uremia:
effect of human PMN leukocytes on isolated plaque organisms.
Review and report of a case. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol.
J Periodontal Res. 15:470, 1980.
29:530, 1970.
47. Renggli HH. Phagocytosis and killing by crevicular neutrophils.
72. Benett JH, Shankar S. Gingival bleeding as the presenting feature
In: The Borderland between Caries and Periodontal Disease
of multiple myeloma. Br Dent J. 157:101, 1984.
(Lehner T ed.). New York: Grune and Stratton, 1977.
73. Hancock EB, Cray RJ, O'Leary TJ. The relationship between
48. Kahnberg KE, Lindhe J, Helden J. Initial gingivitis induced by
gingivalcrevicular fluidand gingivalinflammation:A clinicaland
topical application of plaque extract: A histrometric study in dogs
histologic study. J Periodontol. 50:13, 1979.
with normal gingiva. J Periodontal Res. 11:218, 1976.
74. Quintarelli G. Histochemistry of the gingiva. III. The distribution
49. Attstrom R, Egelberg J. Emigration of blood neutrophils and
of amino-peptidase in normal and inflammatory conditions.
monocytes into the gingival crevices. J Periodontal Res. 5:48, 1970.
Arch Oral Biol. 2:271, 1960.
50. Rovin S, Costich ER, Gordon HA. The influence of bacteria and
75. Burstone MS. Histochemical study of study of cytochrome oxi-
irritation in the initiation of periodontal disease in germfree and
dase in normal and inflamed gingiva. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
conventional rats. J Periodontal Res. 1:193, 1966.
Pathol. 15:123, 1988.
 51. Skougaard MR, Bay I, Kilnkhammer JM. Correlation between gin-
 76. Simpson DM, Avery BE. Histopathologic and ultrastructural
givitis and orogranulocytic migratory rate. J Dent Res. 48:716, 1994.
features of inflamed gingiva in the baboon. J Periodontol. 45:
52. Page RC. Gingivitis. J Clin Periodontol. 13:345, 1986.
500, 1974.
53. Seymour GJ, Powell RN, Cole KL, et al. Experimental gingivitis in
 77. Hanioka T, Shizukuishi S, Tsunemitsu A. Changes in hemoglobin
humans: A histochemical and an immunological characterization of
concentration and oxygen saturation in human gingiva with
the lymphoid cell subpopulations. J Periodontal Res. 18:375, 1983.
decreasing inflammation. J Periodontol. 62:366, 1991.
54. Ryder Ml. Histological ultrastructural characteristics of the
 78. Loe H. The gingival index, the plaque index and the retention
periodontal syndrome in the rat. I. General light microscopic
index systems. J Periodontol. 38(6):Suppl:610-616, 1967.
observations and ultrastructural observations of
initial
79. Lobene RR, Weatherford T, Ross NM, Lamm RA, Menaker L. A
inflammatory changes. J Periodontal Res. 15:502, 1980.
modified gingival index for use in clinical trials. Clin Prev Dent.
55. Payne WA, Page RC, Olgolvie AL, et al. Histopathologic features
8(1):3-6, 1986.
of the initial and early stages of experimental gingivitis in man.
 80. Perry DA. Plaque control for the periodontal patient. In:
 J Periodontal Res. 10:51, 1975.
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006.
56. Hock J, Nuki K. A vital microscopy study of the morphology of
 81. Hellstrom MK, Ramberg P, Krok L, Lindhe J. The effect of supra-
normal and inflamed gingiva. J Periodontal Res. 6:81, 19771.
gingival plaque control on the subgingival microflora in human
57. Attstrolm R. Studies on neutrophil polymorphonuclear leuko-
periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol. 23(10):934-940, 1996.
cytes at the dentogingival junction in gingival health and disease.
 82. Perry DA, Schnid MO, Takei HH. Phase I periodontal therapy. In:
J Periodontal Res. 8(Suppl):1, 1971.
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
58. Schroeder HE, Graf-de Beer M, Attstrom R. Initial gingivitis in
pp. 722-727.
dogs. I Periodontal Res. 10:128, 1975.
83. Rober M. Effect of scaling and root planing without dental
59. Attstrom R. The roles of gingival epitheliurm and phagocytizing
homecare on the subgingival microbiota. Proceedings of the 16th
leukocytes in gingival defense. I Clin Periodontol. 2:25, 1975.
European Congress of Veterinary Dentistry, 2007, pp. 28-30.
Periodontitis
Introduction
alveolar bone loss due to osteoclastic activity and can
Quite often the terms periodontitis and periodontal
discussion of the pathogenesis of periodontal disease, see
disease are used interchangeably, which is not accurate.
chapter 2).
Partially it is because these terms have not been strictly
 Periodontal disease is an extremely common problem
defined by the American Veterinary Dental College or in
in small animal veterinary patients.25 In fact, it has been
any true reference. A poll of veterinary dentists has
J0 %0z pue s8op jo %08 se jo siea47 4q 1eu1 pajoda1
resulted in the following definitions:
cats have some form of periodontal disease.° Small and
 Periodontal disease is a plaque-induced pathology of
 toy breed dogs are particularly susceptible.7
any part of the tissues that hold the tooth in the mouth,
commonly known as the periodontium (gingiva,
Clinical signs
 periodontal ligament, alveolar bone, and cementum). It
can spread along the periodontal ligament space toward
As gingivitis progresses to periodontitis, the oral
the root apex, causing loss of alveolar bone as it prog-
 inflammatory changes (erythema, edema, hemorrhage)
resses. It can include current inflammation or evidence
intensify (Figure 5.1).
 of alveolar bone loss without current inflammation.
The hallmark clinical feature of established peri-
Periodontal disease may be separated into two clinical
odontitis is attachment loss.° In other words, the
conditions:
 periodontal attachment to the tooth migrates apically.
Gingivitisis an inflammation of the gingiva WITHOUT
 As periodontitis progresses, alveolar bone is lost via
 periodontal tissue inflammation/destruction.
osteoclastic activity. Periodontal loss is generally con-
Periodontitis is defined as “an inflammatory disease of
sidered to be irreversible, meaning that lost bone cannot
the supporting tissues of the teeth caused by specific
be regained without advanced regenerative surgeries
 microorganisms or groups of specific microorganisms,
(see chapter 18).28
resulting in progressive destruction of the periodontal
There are two different clinical presentations of
ligament and alveolar bone with pocket formation, reces-
attachment loss. In some cases, the apical migration
sion, or both? The clinical feature that distinguishes ift
results in gingival recession while the sulcal depth
from gingivitis is the presence of clinically detectable
remains the same. Consequently, tooth roots become
attachment loss. 23
exposed and the disease process may be easily identified
The bacteria that cause this disease are primarily
on conscious exam (Figure 5.2). In other cases, the gin-
 gram-negative anaerobic bacteria, particularly the black-
giva remains at the same height while the area of attach-
pigmented species.? A recent study has identified three
ment moves apically, thus creating a  periodontal
species of Porphyromanas (gulae, salivosa, and denticanis)
pocket.? This form is typically diagnosed only under
as present in the vast majority of periodontal pockets in
general anesthesia with a periodontal probe (Figure 5.3).
the dog.* (For a detailed discussion of periodontal bacteria,
It is important to note that both presentations of attach-
see chapter 3.) This inflammation leads to progressive
ment loss can occur in the same patient, as well as the
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
51
52  The Progression of Disease
(a)
(b)
(c)
[d]
erythema and edema. (c) Intraoral dental picture of a cat also with significant gingivitis as evidenced by erythema and edema. (d) This
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.2 (a and b) Gingival recession: Intraoral dental pictures of the (a) mandibular incisors and (b) maxillary left in two dogs with
advanced periodontal disease as evidenced by significant gingival recession.
same tooth (Figure 5.4). As attachment loss progresses,
Patterns of bone loss
alveolar bone loss continues (Figure 5.5), until tooth
exfoliation in some cases. After tooth exfoliation occurs,
There are two common patterns of alveolar bone loss,
the area typically returns to an uninfected state, but the
horizontal and vertical (or angular).61o The pattern of
bone loss is permanent.
 bone loss is determined by several factors, including
Periodontitis
53
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3 Periodontal pocketing: (a and b) Intraoral dental pictures of two dogs with periodontal bone loss as evidenced by the
periodontal probe depth, despite fairly normal gingival appearance. (c) Intraoral dental picture of the mandibular left in a dog with nor-
alveolar bone loss was confirmed via dental radiographs. These cases are not unusual and reinforce the necessity of anesthetized exams
on a regular basis regardless of the clinical appearance
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4 Intraoral dental pictures of the right mandibular canine (404) in a dog (a) and left maxillary canine (204) in a cat (b) that show
examples of gingival recession and periodontal pockets on the same tooth
54  The Progression of Disease
(b)
(a)
(d)
(c)
Figure 5.5 (a and b) Intraoral pictures of the maxillary right in a dog (a) and the right mandibular canine (404) in a cat (b) with significant
alveolar bone loss. (c and d) Intraoral dental radiographs of the left mandibular fourth premolar (308) of a dog (c) and the left mandibular
third premolar and first molar of a cat (d) that reveal severe alveolar bone loss (red arrows)
the thickness of the surrounding bone, the alignment
this are the palatine surface of the maxillary canines and
of teeth, and the root anatomy and position, as well as 
 the distal root of the mandibular first molars, where
the proximity of other teeth. The most important of
 vertical (angular) pockets are common.
 these factors is the thickness of the surrounding bone,
Vertical (or angular) bone loss (Figure 5.7) is
that is, the interdental septa, lingual, and vestibular 
 diagnosed when there is an area of bone that is signifi-
plates. For example, vertical (angular) loss rarely
 cantly apical to the surrounding bone on a particular
occurs in thin plates of bone (like the mandibular
 tooth.6.1o.11 This is the most common type of bone loss in
incisors), and horizontal loss is unlikely in areas of
 human patients but is not often seen in veterinary
 relatively thick bone (as seen on the palatine surface of
 patients, other than in the places mentioned above.
the maxillary canines).
It is important to note that these two patterns may be
Horizontal bone loss (Figure 5.6) is the most common
seen in the same patient as well as on the same tooth
s i s isd   ss aq jo d
(Figure 5.8).
when the bony defect is at approximately the same level
Vertical bone loss is further defined by the number of
across the arcade (or a portion of it). This may also be
 bony wall surrounding the root.1o A four-walled (or
called a 0 (zero) walled pocket (see below). Exceptions to
 cup) pocket occurs as a defect surrounded by bone
Periodontitis
55
(b)
(a)
Figure 5.6 Horizontal bone loss: Intraoral dental radiographs of the maxillary left (a) and maxillary incisors (b) of two dogs with
periodontally induced alveolar bone loss. Note the bone is at approximately the same level across the arcade (red arrows).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.7 Vertical (angular) bone loss: (a and b) Intraoral dental radiographs of the mandib-
ular left of a dog (a) and right of a cat (b) with significant vertical bone loss. This is seen with
the nadir of the bone in the deep pockets by the red arrow, as compared to the relatively
normal bone height elsewhere (blue arrows). (c) Intraoral dental radiograph of the right
maxillary canine (104) of a dog with vertical bone loss on the palatine aspect (red arrows).
This is a very common presentation in chrondrodystrophic breeds and is responsive to guided
tissue regeneration (see chapter 18). If untreated, this lesion will eventually result in an
oronasal fistula.
56  The Progression of Disease
Figure 5.8 Intraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular left of
a dog with periodontal disease. Note this patient has horizontal
bone loss in the premolars (orange arrows), within the same
quadrant of a significant area of angular bone loss on the man-
dibular first molar (yellow arows). There is an additional finding 
of a hook-shaped tip on the mesial root of the first molar as wel
as a very thin mandibular ventral cortex (red arrow), both of
Figure 5.9 Intraoral picture of the left maxillary canine (204) in a
which will complicate extraction.
dog. In this case, the gingiva is at a normal level, which means the
periodontal pocket depth (5 mm) is essentially the same as attach-
 around its circumference. This lesion has a good prog-
ment loss. Note, however, that some periodontal pocketing (up to
nosis for cure with regenerative osseous surgery. A
3 mm in dogs) is considered "normal."
three-walled pocket has bone surrounding the defect
except on the exposed surface of the root. This type of
depth, since gingival recession and/or enlargement is
defect also has a good prognosis with regenerative sur-
taken into account. Attachment loss is measured either
gery. 0.1z When an additional wall is missing (either ves-
 from the CEJ or from an area of clinically normal gingiva
tibular, lingual-palatal, or interdental), a two-walled
(if available). In cases of gingival recession, attachment
d  e s po  ai s e s los
loss is the depth of the periodontal pocket plus the
for healing with regenerative surgery.61z A one-walled
amount of gingival recession (Figure 5.10). In contrast,
pocket is created when bone remains only on one aspect
 in cases of gingival enlargement it is the periodontal
of the pocket (either vestibular or lingual-palatal). A
pocket depth minus the amount of enlargement
zero-walled pocket has no bone between the roots of
(Figure 5.11).
adjacent teeth (also called horizontal bone loss above).
Furthermore, the staging of periodontal disease is
 Both zero-walled and one-walled pockets have a very
expressed in a percentage of attachment loss rather than
 poor prognosis for a positive outcome with periodontal
 a strict measurement (in millimeters), which is more
surgery.6.i2 (See chapter 9 for a further discussion of
appropriate because of the tremendous variation in root
bony defects.)
length between teeth and breeds. For example, 3 mm of
attachment loss on the incisor of a Yorkshire Terrier is
severe, whereas 5 mm of attachment loss on the canine of
Staging periodontal disease
 a Rottweiler is only mild (Figure 5.12). Attachment loss
There are numerous indices that strive to define the level 
 should be determined by a combination of periodontal
of periodontal disease present. These are quite often very
 probing and dental radiology as each modality has its
subjective and therefore difficult to compare between
 benefits and limitations (Figure 5.13).6.14.15 Below is the
patients and operators. The main clinical determination 
 American Veterinary Dental College accepted staging of
for degree of periodontal disease is attachment loss.
 periodontal disease (Box 5.1). It is critical to note that a
Aftachment loss is defined as the distance between the
whole mouth score for periodontal disease is an estimate
cementoenamel junction (CEJ) and the current gingival
 at best. This is because the severity of periodontal disease
attachment (Figure 5.9).13
relates to a single tooth and virtually all patients have
Attachment loss is a much more accurate determina-
teeth at different stages of periodontal disease. For
tion of the level of disease than is periodontal pocket
example, most patients with PD4 teeth will still have
Periodontitis  57
(b)
(a)
Figure 5.10 Intraoral pictures of canine patients with gingival recession and periodontal pockets. (a) Left maxillary fourth premolar (208)
with significant recession and a pocket. In this case the periodontal pocket is 7 mm (yellow arrow), but there is additional recession of
4 mm, which gives an attachment loss of 11 mm (white arrow). (b) Right mandibular canine (404) with only a 5 mm periodontal pocket
(blue arrow), which normally would require only cdosed root planning. However, there is additional recession of 4 mm, resulting in an
attachment loss of 9 mm (purple arrow), which is very significant in a small breed dog. This illustrates the importance of attachment loss
as a measurement of periodontal health
Figure 5.12 An extracted mandibular canine from a Labrador
Retriever and a mandibular second incisor from a Yorkshire Terrier. A
periodontal probe is added for perspective. Note the amount of alve-
olar loss (as indicated by the subgingival calculus), which created
Figure 5.11 Intraoral picture of the right maxillary canine (104) in
mobility (and required extraction) of the toy breed's incisor tooth but
a dog with gingival enlargement. The probing depth is 7 mm
would have minimal effect on the canine tooth of the large breed dog.
(white arrow), which is significant. However, the measurement to
the CEJ is almost the same (yellow arrow). This means that there
is actually no attachment loss, regardless of the probing depth.
Other clinical signs of diagnostic and/or
prognostic importance in periodontal disease
some teeth that are PD0 (Figure 5.14), and some patients
with normal-appearing mouths overall often have one or
Furcational exposure
more significantly diseased teeth (especially distal
The apical movement of the alveolar bone often results
molars) (Figure 5.15). Therefore, each tooth must be
 in exposure of the area between the roots of multirooted
evaluated individually.
teeth. This area is known as the “furcation” and this
58The Progression of Disease
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.13 (a) Intraoral picture of the right maxillary canine (104) in a dog. The probe reveals a 9mm periodontal pocket on the palatal
surface. (b) The subsequent dental radiograph is relatively normal, as the narrow defect is obscured by the summation of the tooth and
buccal plate of bone. This case demonstrates the limitations of dental radiographs in diagnosis of periodontal disease. (c) Intraoral dental
picture of the left mandibular first and second molar (309 and 310) in a dog. The gingiva appears normal and there is no probing depth.
Note, however, that the probe cannot enter the interproximal space due to the tight contact. Moreover, the lack of probing depth is not
accurate and may result in missed pathology. (d) The corresponding intraoral dental radiographreveals moderate alveolar bone loss(blue
pue boz) jelow puonas pue isy Aelixew yal aul jo ainpid jeluap jeloeul (a) (smone uaaib) snjmje jeaibuibqns se lam se (smoue
210) in a dog. The gingiva appears normal and there is no probing depth. Note, however, that the probe cannot enter the interproximal
space due to the tight contact. Therefore, the lack of probing depth is not accurate and may result in missed pathology. (f) The
corresponding intraoral dental radiograph reveals moderate alveolar bone loss (yellow arrows), which has likely caused a class Il perio-
endo lesion on the second molar (red arrow). These cases demonstrate the limitation of probing in certain situations. It is thus recommended
to use both modalities for complete and proper diagnosis.
Periodontitis  59
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.14 (a) Intraoral dental picture of the maxillary left of a dog. Note the significant gingival recession and purulent discharge asso-
ciated with the third and fourth premolars (207 and 208) (blue arrows), whereas the second premolar (206) is essentially normal (white
arrow). (b) Intraoral dental radiograph of the maxillary left, which reveals severe vertical (angular) bone loss to the palatine surface of the
maxillary canine (204), resulting in an oronasal fistula (red arrows) as well as severe horizontal bone loss to the second premolar (blue
arrows). However, the first premolar (205) is essentially normal (white arrow).
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.15 (a) Intraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular left of a dog that has a severely diseased second premolar (310) (red
arrow), despite the remainder of the arcade having normal bone height. (b) Intraoral dental picture of the maxillary left of a dog, which
reveals a severe periodontal pocket on the canine (204), despite the fact that the rest of the teeth in the area are normal. These cases
illustrate the fact that all teeth need to be carefully evaluated individually.
condition is called furcational exposure.6 While furca-
Note that some dentists (human and veterinary)
tional exposure occurs late in the disease course in
 recognize a fourth stage (F4), where the probe passes all
human periodontology owing to the significant amount
the way through to the other side of the furcation without
of “reserve" crown, it actually occurs fairly early in small
 soft tissue obscuring the communication.18
 a ia s s isd ea 
Once the furcation is exposed, it allows for increased
cats and small breed dogs, where as little as 1 mm of 
plaque, calculus, and food accumulation and therefore
alveolar bone loss can create this condition (Figure 5.21).
There are several furcation exposure (FE) indices, but
 more, it inhibits the homecare efforts of clients. Finally, it
 the one most commonly used in veterinary dentistry and
is very difficult to effectively clean during the initial
that is accepted by the AVDC nomenclature committee
 scaling procedure, requiring direct visualization offered
is as follows:16
by periodontal flaps for stage II or II defects.19
60  The Progression of Disease
Box 5.1 Periodontal disease classification16
Normal (PDO): Clinically normal; no gingival inflammation or periodontitis clinically evident (Figures 5.16a and b)
● Stage 7 (PD1): Gingivitis only, without attachment loss. The height and architecture of the alveolar margin are normal (Figure 5.17).
● Stage 2 (PD2): Early periodontitis;: less than 25% of attachment loss, or at most there is a stage 1 furcation involvement in 
multirooted teeth. There are early radiographic signs of periodontitis. The loss of periodontal attachment is less than 25% as 
measured either by probing of the clinical attachment level or radiographic determination of the distance of the alveolar margin
from the cementoenamel junction relative to the length of the root (Figures 5.18a-c).
● Stage 3 (PD3): Moderate periodontitis: 25-50% of attachment loss as measured either by probing of the clinical attachment
level or radiographic determination of the distance of the alveolar margin from the cementoenamel junction relative to the
length of the root, or there is a stage 2 furcation involvement in multirooted teeth (Figures 5.19a-c).
● Stage 4 (PD4): Advanced periodontitis: more than 50% of attachment loss as measured either by probing of the clinical 
attachment level or radiographic determination of the distance of the alveolar margin from the cementoenamel junction relative
to the length of the root, or there is a stage 3 furcation involvement in multirooted teeth (Figures 5.20a-c).
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.16 (PD0) Normal: (a) Intraoral dental picture of the mandibular right in a dog with normal gingival tissues. Note the gingiva
is coral pink in color, with no erythema or edema. Furthermore, there is no plaque or calculus on the teeth. (b) Intraoral dental radio-
graph of the mandibular right of the patient in Figure 5.16a. This is a normal dental radiograph where the alveolar bone completely
fills the furcations (red arrows) and comes to the cementoenamel junctions (blue arrows). The area of lucency (yellow arrow) is the
middle mental foramina (a normal anatomical landmark).
ou si aaui saiuh ym bp e jo (sot) jejowand quno Aeixew su ayi jo anpid jeou :sahu (ia) l's ane
abnormal probing depth and the radiographs are normal.
Periodontitis
61
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.18 (PD2) Mild periodontitis: (a) Intraoral picture of the left mandibular canine (304) of a dog with a 6 mm periodontal pocket
on the lingual surface. (b) Intraoral picture of the left maxillary canine (204) of a cat with a 4 mm periodontal pocket on the palatal
surface. (c) Intraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular left premolars of a dog. There is approximately 10% alveolar bone loss
between the second and third premolars (306-307) (white arrow). There is also a smaller amount between the third and fourth 
(307-308) (yellow arrow).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.19 (PD3) Moderate periodontitis: (a) Intraoral dental picture of the right mandibular first molar (409) of a dog with a 4 mm
periodontal pocket and 2 mm of gingival recession. This is 6 mm of attachment loss. (b) Dental radiograph that reveals approximately
33% bone loss to the distal root (red arrow) and a lesser amount mesially (yellow arrow). (c) Intraoral dental picture of the mandibular 
left of a dog with the third and fourth premolars and first molar (307-309) all having dass Il furcation exposure (halfway through).
(a)
(b)
(c)
ai aon aseas euooad aaas ym bop e jo yal lenguew aui o ainid leoel (e soad aaas tad 's an
gingival recession and purulent discharge. (b) Corresponding intraoral dental radiograph confirming severe alveolar bone loss
(> 50%). (c) Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary third premolar (207) in a dog. This tooth has grade Ill furcation exposure 
(through and through).
62
 The Progression of Disease
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.21 (a and b) Intraoral pictures of the mandibular right third premolar (407) in a dog. (a) The gingiva appears to be healthy with 
ww z uey ssal s! aayi yhnoyn uaaa '(ll jaaai uoeiny aui yhnoyi sassed agond ayi 'iaamoh (g) ssol suawupene no uoewweui ou
of pocketing. (c) Cadaver picture of the mandible of a large breed dog with the soft tissue retracted in order to reveal how coronal the
furcation is even in large breed canines.
Box 5.2 Furcation involvement/exposure
(a)
 Stage 0 (FO): No furcational exposure (Figure 5.22).
 Stage 1 (F1): Exists when a periodontal probe extends
less than halfway under the crown in any direction of a
multirooted tooth with attachment loss (Figures 5.23a
and b).
● Stage 2 (F2): Exists when a periodontal probe extends
 greater than halfway under the crown of a multirooted
tooth with attachment loss, but not through and through
(Figures 5.24a-d).
● Stage 3 (F3): Exists when a periodontal probe extends
under the crown of a multirooted tooth, through and 
through, from one side of the furcation out the other
(Figures 5.25a and b).
[b]
Figure 5.23 (F1) (a) Intraoral pictures of the left mandibular
and (b) right maxillary second premolar in dogs with early
Figure 5.22 (F0) Intraoral picture of the mandibular right of a
furcational exposure. Notice that the probe barely enters the
dog with normal periodontal tissues. Note that the probe does 
furcation. Also note the furcation can be exposed on the buccal
not enter the soft tissue at all.
(a) as well as palatal/lingual (b) sides of the teeth
Periodontitis
63
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
Figure 5.24 (F2) Intraoral pictures of class Il furcational defects in several patients. (a) Reveals the furcation exposure from the buccal
au uaamag) aepns jeisaw woy ansodxa uoeiny aui saiesuowaa (g) bop e u (aoz) ejow isy Aexew yal aul jo aens 
ansodxa jeuojeiny ll ssep jo ainpid p) bop e u! (ao t) selowaid yunoj Aelliew ybu jo (siooi auejed-oisaw pue jeonq-oisaw
 from the buccal surface of the left maxillary fourth premolar (208) of a cat. (d) Shows the furcation exposure from the palatal aspect
of a maxillary left fourth premolar (208) of a dog. These pictures (as well as those in Figure 5.23 above) demonstrate the importance
of careful evaluation of all sides of the teeth.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.25 (F3) Intraoral pictures of through and through furcation exposure in a dog. (a) Very common presentation of a maxillary
premolar. (b) More unusual presentation of a maxillary first molar.
64   The Progression of Disease
To further complicate this issue, the teeth that most
d o paa ssn auoq jo junoe a
commonly develop furcational defects are the more distal
mobility to occur depends on a host of variables,
teeth, which are also the most difficult to maintain with
including the length of the root and quality of the sup-
homecare.2 Therefore, teeth (especially three-rooted
porting alveolar bone. For example, mandibular bone is
maxillary molar teeth) with furcational exposure are
 denser than maxillary bone, and distal bone is harder
 often best treated with extraction. However, mesial pre-
than rostral.?4 This can be extrapolated to show that
molar teeth with gingival recession ( which creates a more
 (ad q e isn ne n) ss aq a
open furcation for cleaning) can often be salvaged if the
necessary to create mobility in distal mandibular teeth
than rostral mandibular or maxillary teeth. This is most
more treatment options for furcational exposure.)
notable in the area of the mandibular first incisors,
where the placement of the teeth near or within the
Mobility
fibrous symphyisis results in  hypermobility  with
The apical migration of the alveolar bony attachment
minimal, and occasionally no, alveolar bone loss (espe-
eventually leads to mobility in the affected teeth.6
cially in bracheocephalic breeds).6 Therefore, it is
Additional minor causes of mobility include infla-
 important to interpret the degree of periodontal loss in
mmatory changes extending from the gingiva as well as
light of radiographic and periodontal probing depth, in
the periapex (periapical lesion), occlussal trauma, and
 addition to mobility.
pregnancy (at least in humans).21z2 Although the
There are numerous mobility indices, but the defini-
inflammatory changes and trauma  can  often be 
 tion and nomenclature accepted by the American
corrected,2 and tooth mobility associated with preg-
Veterinary Dental College is as follows:16
nancy is self-limiting, stabilizing the tooth by increasing
Tooth mobility is not only evidence of the degree of
the amount of bony attachment is rarely achieved.
 periodontal disease, it is also an important prognostic
Box 5.3 Key clinical point
Additional causes of tooth mobility are pathologic processes of the jaw, such as neoplasia (most common), osteomyelitis, root
fractures, and hyperparathyroidism "rubber jaw."21 Practitioners should keep these processes in mind when mobile teeth are
encountered, especially where the level of mobility does not correspond to the level of the periodontal disease in either the affected 
area or of the mouth in general. Dental radiographs will help distinguish between periodontal disease and neoplasia (Figure 5.26),
but histopathology should be performed in any questionable cases
(b)
(a)
Figure 5.26 Intraoral dental radiographs of mobile teeth. (a) Classic, severe periodontally induced alveolar bone loss on the mandib-
ular left of a dog. Notice that all teeth, but especially the first and third premolars (blue arrows), have minimal support remaining. This
has resulted in mobility. The fact that the bone lossis complete (as opposed to mottled [below]) and that the teeth are in the correct
sannd peidoau e Ag pasnen uonsap Aog au Aa panpu Agow jo ase y (g) ssaoid peuooad e jo aaeui si uosod
(squamous cell carcinoma) of the rostral mandible of a dog. Note that the loss is not regular and the teeth are being moved.
Periodontitis  65
indicator. The ability to decrease mobility is inversely
sign of advanced periodontal disease, which means there
 proportional to thelevel ofalveolar boneloss. In addition,
 is significant infection within the body. Therefore, clients
some studies show that mobile teeth may respond less
 [eou LoN s! anq ssop, iel palasuno aq pinous
favorably to therapeutic measures than similar non-
and is an indication for professional therapy. The typical
mobile teeth." Additional treatment modalities for mo-
“"rotten egg" odor from periodontal disease is the result
bile teeth are discussed in chapter 18.
of increased production of volatile sulfur compounds
(VSCs).° These VSCs are almost exclusively produced by
tissue destruction and putrefaction of amino acids by
gram-negative bacteria.6273 Finally, the degree of hali-
 Box 5.4 Tooth mobility
tosis is positively correlated to the level of periodontal
Stage 0 (MO): Normal physiologic mobility of up to
inflammation.31.32
0.2mm.
Furthermore, it is known that these VSCs exacerbate
· Stage 1 (M1): The mobility is increased in any direction 
the existing periodontal inflammation by several
other than axial over a distance of more than 0.2 mm
methods.? First, by increasing vascular permeability, the
and up to 0.5 mm.
underlying connective tissue is exposed to toxic bacterial
Stage 2 (M2): The mobility is increased in any direction
byproducts. In addition, one common VSC (methyl
 other than axial over a distance of more than 0.5 mm
mercaptan) directly enhances the effects of collagenase
and up to 1.0mm.
as well as other proinflammatory products.3334 Finally,
· Stage 3 (M3): The mobility is increased in any direction 
 this same product impedes wound healing and negatively
other than axial over a distance exceeding 1.0 mm or
affects human fibroblasts.3s Therefore, control of hali-
any axial movement.
tosis should be part of the treatment plan for any
periodontal patient.
Halitosis measurement can be performed subjectively
 on a scale from 0 to 33 or objectively measured using a
Other clinical signs
commercially available sulfide monitor.18.37
Halitosis is a very common finding in small animal
Aditional clinical signs of periodontal disease
veterinary patients. It can occur secondary to a number 
include oral pain, periodontal abscesses (Figure 5.27),
of disease states including ketoacidosis, uremia, chronic
s a) (eisg eso e o) es ies
 liver disease, sinusitis, chronic bronchitis, Gl disease,
and even mandibular fractures (Figure 5.29).2 These
ischemic necrosis, necrotic oral tumors, or an infected
conditions are covered in detail in chapters 6 and 8.
 oral foreign body (e.g., wood or food).s.26 However in
 These conditions are severe and very late ramifications
the vast majority of cases, halitosis is caused by
of periodontal disease and should not be relied upon to
periodontal disease.2z-2 In fact, halitosis is typically a
diagnose the disease. Conversely, it is critical to keep
a)
[b)
Figure 5.27 Intraoral pictures of periodontal abscesses. (a) On the right maxillary canine (104) of a cat. (b) The right mandibular second
wun nauen jeuopad e jo jeidai s! ypiym 'ubiew jeaihunh aui on jeuoo ae snn buuep aui seui anon bop e un (got) nejowaid
endodontic origin. Dental radiographs should be exposed to confirm the diagnosis prior to therapy. (See chapter 8.)
66   The Progression of Disease
periodontal disease on the rule-out list when these
been historically affected. In addition, dental radio-
conditions are encountered.
 graphs should be exposed to ensure that these teeth are
A final clinical sign of advanced periodontal disease
truly missing, as they could have retained roots or be
is missing teeth that have been exfoliated or extracted
impacted.
due to the advanced state of disease.238 while these
 Finally, significant widespread periodontal disease
teeth are no longer creating infection for the patient,
can cause generalized lethargy.? This happens because
they should be taken into account when assessing the
the patient is using so much energy fighting off the
 n an   a p p p
significant oral infection. This lethargy or “low-energy
, se s p  st 
older?" It can be and most often is reversed with proper
 periodontal therapy, anecdotally resulting in a marked
increase in energy and activity.2 This author gets common
remarks from owners that "rmy dog is acting like a puppy
again."
Treatment
At the time of this writing, the basic treatment for
periodontal disease is meticulous removal of plaque and
calculus and consistent plaque control (homecare).628
However, once attachment loss is present, it requires
more than routine scaling and polishing to clear the
infection from the root surfaces.23 Depending on the
level of attachment loss, as well as other confounding
factors (furcational exposure, mobility, inaccessible
areas, etc.), additional therapy is required. The most
Figure 5.28 Intraoral picture of the maxillary right of a dog with
 common form of therapy is closed root planing, which is
an oronasal fistula of the maxillary canine (104). Note the probe is 
 also known as non-surgical root debridement (see
over 13 mm deep on the palatine surface of the tooth and there is 
nasal hemorrhage induced by the probing. Notice that the teeth/
 chapter 11), which may be employed when periodontal
gums appear outwardly very healthy. This case further demon-
 pockets are less than 6 mm and without evidence of other
strates the value of an anesthetized oral exam regardless of out-
confounding conditions listed above.2 Closed root plan-
ward appearance. (See chapter 6 for a complete discussion of 
 ne rd e a po q a 
oronasal fistulas.)
chapter 12).
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.29 (a) Intraoral dental picture of the right mandibular first molar of a dog with a pathologic fracture. (b) Intraoral dental radio-
graph of the mandibular right of a dog with a pathologic mandibular fracture at the level of the fourth premolar (408) (red arrow). Note
the significant alveolar loss (blue arrows), which caused marked bone weakening and resulted in a jaw fracture from mild trauma (dog 
fight). (See chapter 6 for a complete discussion of pathologic fractures.)
Periodontitis  C
67
Once the pockets extend beyond 5-6 mm, or other
References
problems are present (particularly furcation level 11 or
1. Armitage GC. Development ofa classification system for periodontal
II1), then direct visualization is required to properly
diseases and conditions. Ann Periodontol. 4(1):1-6. 1999.
clean the teeth.40-42 There are some experts, however,
2. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
who support the use of ultrasonic scalers in these deep
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
 pockets, which is discussed in chapter 11. Direct visual-
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
ization of the root surface is achieved via periodontal
3. Novak MJ. Classification of disease and conditions affecting the
 periodontium. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
flap surgery. After the flap is raised, the root is cleaned
Saunders,2006, pp. 100-109.
via surgical root debridement and the flap is sutured
4. Hardham J, Dreier K, Wong J, Sfintescu C. Pigmented-anaerobic
closed. Additional therapies (barrier membranes and
bacteria associated with canine periodontitis. Veterinary Microbi-
 bone augmentation) may be performed prior to flap clo-
ology 106(1-2):119-128, 2005.
sure if indicated (see chapters 16-18).
5. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB (1997). Oral exam and diagnosis. In:
The client must be instructed on the necessity of
Veterinary Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1997, pp. 87-103.
consistent homecare prior to the performance of
6. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
advanced periodontal therapy. If the client is unwilling
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
 or unable to perform this task and/or unable/willing to
pp. 186-231.
return for regular professional cleanings, then tooth
S  a     
salvage via periodontal surgery may not be in the
investigation of spontaneously occurring periodontal disease in
dogs. J Small Anim Pract. 37:471-479, 1996.
 patient's best interest.
8. Shoukry M, Ali B, Naby MA, Soliman A. Repair of experimental
New and future directions of periodontal therapy
plaque-induced periodontal disease in dogs. J Vet Dent.
include laser therapy bone morphogenetic proteins,
24(3):152-165, 2007.
stem cell therapy, and host modulation. Some of these
9. West-Hyde L, Floyd M. Dentistry. In: Textbook of Veterinary
 modalities, which will be available in the near future, are 
Internal Medicine (Etinger SJ, Feldman EC eds.). 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1995, pp. 1097-1123.
 discussed in chapters 18 and 20.
10. Bellows J. Periodontal equipment, materials, and techniques. In:
Depending on the level of disease, the client's wishes,
Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a
 and the health status of the patient, a treatment plan is
Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell,2004, pp. 115-173.
devised. In scenarios where the periodontal disease is
11. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Bone loss and patterns of bone destruc-
severe, the client is unwilling/unable to perform
tion. In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders,
 homecare due to time or the patient's temperament, or
2006, p 452-466.
12. Sims TN, Ammons W. Resective osseous surgery. In: Carranza's
the patient is geriatric or at a higher anesthesia risk,
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 950-967.
extraction may be the best alternative. Although
13. Beck JD, Arbes SJ. Epidemiology of gingival and periodontal
extreme, extraction is the true cure of periodontal dis-
diseases. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
ease and allows the body to permanently clear the
Saunders, 2006, pp. 110-131.
infection.643
14. Niemiec BA. Case based dental radiology. Top Companion Anim
Med. 24(1):4-19, 2009.
15. Tetradis S, Carranza FA, Fazio RC, Takei HH. Radiographic aids
in the diagnosis of periodontal disease. In: Carranzas Clinical
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 561-578.
16. AVDC Nomenclature Committee. www.avdc.org.
17. Page RC, Schroeder HE. Spontaneous chronic periodontitis in adult
Box 5.5 Key points
dogs. A clinical and histologic survey. J Periodontol. 52:60-73, 1981.
18. Huffman LJ. Oralexamination. In: Small Animal Dental, Oral and
●The hallmark clinical sign of periodontal disease is
Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niermiec BA ed.).
attachment loss.
London: Manson, 2010, pp. 39-61.
 Attachment loss is best expressed as a percentage
19. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Phase II periodontal therapy. In:
rather than straight measurements due to the great
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
variability in tooth size in veterinary patients.
pp. 881-886.
 Halitosis is not normal; it is a sign of established oral
 20. Capik I. Periodontal health vs. different preventative means in toy
disease.
breeds—clinical study. Proceedings of the 16t European Congress
Furcation exposure occurs early in the course of the
of Veterinary Dentistry, 2007, pp. 31-34.
21. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Clinical diagnosis. In: Carranza's Clinical
disease in animal patients and typically requires advanced
surgical therapy.
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 540-560.
22. Novak KF Goodman SE, Takei HH. Determination of prognosis.
General anesthesia, periodontal probing, and dental
In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
radiography are necessary for the proper diagnosis and
pp. 614-625.
therapy of periodontal disease.
23. Morris ML. The diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of loose
tooth. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 6(9):1037-1046, 1953.
68   The Progression of Disease
24. Huja SS, Fernandez SA, Hill KJ, Gulati P. Indentation modulus of
34. Lancero H, Niu J, Johnson PW. Exposure of periodontal ligament
the alveolar process in dogs. J Dent Res. 86:237-241, 2007.
25. Fleszar TJ, Knowles JW, Morrison EC, Burgett FG, Nissle RR,
cell migration. J Dent Res. 75(12):1994-2002, 1996.
 I adenaun iead pue aqou yoi ds pio
35. Brunette DM, Ouyang Y, Glass-Brudzinski J, et al. Effects of
Periodontol. 7(6):495-505, 1980.
rmethyl mercaptan on hurman gingival fibroblast shape, cytoskele-
26. Quirynen M, van Steenberghe D. Oral malodor. In:
ton and protein synthesis and the inhibition of its effects
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
by Zn++. In: Bad Breath, a Multidisciplinary Approach
Pp.330-342.
(vanSteenberghe D, Rosenberg M eds.). Leuven, Belgium: Leu-
27. Persson S, Claesson R, Carlsson J. The capacity of subgingival mi-
ven Universiy Press, 1996.
crobiotas to produce volatile sulfur compounds in human serum.
 36. Jensen L, Setser C, Sirmone A, Smith M, Suelzer M. Assessment of
Oral Microbiol Immunol. 4(3):169-172, 1989.
oral malodor in dogs. J Vet Dent. 11(2):71-74, 1994.
 28. Yaegaki K, Sanada K. Biochemical and clinical factors influencing
 37. Davot JL, Delille B, Hennet P. Oral malodor in dogs: Measurement 
oral malodor in periodontal patients. J Periodontol. 63(9):783-789,
using a sulfide monitor. I Vet Dent. 12(3):101-103, 1995.
1992.
 38. Pavlica Z, Petelin M, Juntes P, et al. Periodontal disease burden 
29. Lee CH, Kho HS, Chung SC, Lee SW, Kim YK. The relationship
and pathological changes in the organs of dogs. I Vet Dent.
between volatile sulfur compounds and major halitosis-inducing
25(2):97-108, 2008.
factors. J Periodontol. 74(1):32-37, 2003.
39. Holmstrom SE, Frost PF, Eisner ER. Periodontal therapy and
30. Tonzetich J. Production and origin of oral malodor: A review of
surgery. In: Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal
 mechanisms and methods of analysis. J Periodontol. 48(1):13-20,
Practitioner. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 233-290.
1977.
 40. Caffesse RG, Sweeney PL, Smith BA. Scaling and root planing
31. Yaegaki K, Sanada K. Volatile sulfur compounds in mouth air
with and without periodontal flap surgery. I Clin Periodontol.
from clinically healthy subjects and patients with periodontal dis-
13(3):205-210, 1986.
ease. J Periodontal Res. 27:233-238, 1992.
 41. Perry DA, Schmid MO, Takei HH. Phase I periodontal therapy.
32. Persson S. Hydrogen sulfide and methyl mercaptan in periodontal
 In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
pockets. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 7(6):378-379, 1992.
Pp. 722-727.
33. Ratkay LG, Tonzetich J, Waterfeild JD. The effect of methylmer-
42.
 Zetner K, Rothmueller G. Treatrment of periodontal pockets with
captan on the enzymatic and immunological activity leading to
doxycycline in beagles. Vet Ther 3(4):441-452, 2002.
 periodontal tissue destruction. In: Bad Breath, a Multidisciplinary
43. Danser MM, van WinklehoffAJ, de Graff J, et al. Short term effect
Approach (vanSteenberghe D, Rosenberg M eds.). Leuven,
of full mouth extraction on periodontal pathogens colonizing the
Belgium: Leuven Universiy Press, 1996.
oral mucous membranes. J Clin Periodontol. 21:484, 1994.
Local and regional consequences
of periodontal disease
Introduction
 In addition to tooth loss, there are many other potential
serious local consequences of periodontal disease. These
maladies are generally caused by the significant bone loss
that occurs with chronic periodontal disease. It is impor-
tant to note, however, that these problems may present in
young patients, especially in small and toy breed dogs.
These conditions include oronasal fistula, osteomyelitis,
mandibular fracture, and oral neoplasia.
Oronasal fistulas
Oronasal fistulas (ONFs) are the most common of the
local consequences of periodontal disease. This problem
Figure 6.1 Intraoral picture of the maxillary right of a dog with an
is generally seen in older, small breed dogs (especially
oronasal fistula of the maxillary canine (104). Note that the probe
chondrodystrophic breeds such as Dachshunds and
is over 13 mm deep on the palatine surface of the tooth and there
Basset Hounds), but they can occur in any breed as well
is nasal hemorrhage induced by the probing. Importantly. how-
as felines.12 ONFs are typically created by the apical pro.
ever, note that the buccal surface of the teeth appears normal.
gression of periodontal disease on the palatal surface of
This highlights the importance of an anesthetized oral exam in all
the maxillary canines"3 however, any maxillary tooth is
patients, regardless of outward appearance.
a candidate).? This will eventually result in the destruc-
tion of the maxillary bone causing a communication
between the oral and nasal cavities, thus leading to a
periodontal tissues are relatively healthy, including other
chronic infection (sinusitis).2
 surfaces of the affected tooth (Figure 6.7). Appropriate
Clinical signs of an ONF include chronic nasal dis-
treatment of an ONF requires extraction of the tooth and
charge (Figure 6.1), sneezing, and occasionally anorexia
closure of the defect with a mucogingival flap.16.7
and halitosis.?4 Occasionally, a large fistula may be noted
Alternatively, if a deep periodontal pocket is discovered
on conscious exam (especially one that has resulted from
prior to development ofa fistula (Figure 6.8), periodontal 
an extraction) (Figure 6.2), but definitive diagnosis of an
surgery with guided tissue regeneration can be per-
oronasal fistula typically requires general anesthesia.
formed to save the tooth2s (see chapter 18).
The diagnosis is made by introducing a periodontal
probe into the periodontal space on the palatal surface of
Class ll perio-endo lesion
the tooth (Figures 6.3 through 6.6). Interestingly, ONFs
These infections are another potential consequence of
can occur even when the remainder of the patient's
periodontal disease that can be seen in multirooted
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
69
70  The Progression of Disease
(a)
Figure 6.2 (a) Intraoral picture of the maxillary right of a dog with a large oronasal fistula from the extraction of the canine (104). This
condition is easily diagnosed on conscious oral exam. Note the scar tissue on the flap (blue arrows), which is the result of four previous
surgical attempts to cdlose the fistula. Proper surgical correction of oronasal fistulas is challenging. and thus hands-on instruction is recom-
mended (see appendix 4 for a list of classes). Additionally, there is calculus on the exposed root of the maxillary third incisor (yellow
arrow), indicating the chronicity of the condition. This tooth requires extraction as part of the treatment plan. (b) Intraoral picture of the
maxillary right of a dog with a large oronasal fistula from the extraction of the fourth premolar (1o8) (blue arrow). This case demonstrates
that care must be taken to properly close all extraction sites.
Figure 6.4 Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a cat with an
oronasal fistula of the canine (204). Note the probe is not that
deep, but the addition of the gingival recession was sufficient for
Figure 6.3 Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a dog with an
the creation of an ONF. Note also the lack of gingival inflamma-
oronasal fistula of the canine (204). Note that the probe did not
tion, yet there is bleeding induced by probing. This highlights the
reach the bottom of a pocket on the palatine surface of the tooth.
importance of an anesthetized oral exam in all patients, regardless
Importantly. however, note the lack of gingivitis in this area as
of outward appearance.
well as the surrounding teeth. This again highlights the impor-
tance of an anesthetized oral exam in all patients, regardless of
outward appearance.
contamination.1o-12 Due to the relative rarity of non-
 apical ramifications (blood supply other than at the apex)
teeth.s11 This condition occurs when the periodontal
 in veterinary patients,3 these infections typically occur
-pa arl oi sanne sus pue Aeide sassnoid sso
 via the apex. The endodontic infection subsequently
odontic system through what used to be the blood
 spreads though the tooth via the common pulp chamber
supply, thereby causing endodontic disease via bacterial
 and causes periapical ramifications on the other root(s)
Local and Regional Consequences of Periodontal Disease   71
Fgure 6.5 Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a dog with an
Fgure 6.7 Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a dog with an oro-
oronasal fistula of the fourth premolar (208). Note that the probe did 
nasal fistula of the canine (204). Note the probe is over 9mm deep on
not reach the bottom of a pocket on the palatine surface of the tooth.
the palatine surface of the tooth; however, the buccal surface of the
teeth appears normal. This highlights the importance of an anesthe-
tized oral exam in all patients, regardless of outward appearance
Figure 6.6 Intraoral picture of the left maxillary premolar (208) of
a cat with an oronasal fistula
Figure 6.8 Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a dog with a
deep periodontal pocket on the palatal surface of the canine
(204). Note the probe is over 9 mm deep on the palatine surface
(Figure 6.9).1112 However, the infected tooth may be held
of the tooth but has not entered the nasal cavity yet. This case is
in position by the large surface area of the other roots(s).11
likely a good candidate for periodontal flap surgery and guided
The most common site for class II perio-endo lesions
tissue regeneration. See Chapters 16 and 18.
in small animal patients is the distal root of the mandib-
ular first molar (Figure 6.10), but any multirooted tooth
(especially the area of the canines and first molars) due
is a candidate. This problem occurs most commonly in
to chronic periodontal loss that weakens the bone in
older small and toy breed dogs, but this author has
affected areas (Figures 6.11 and 6.12).5 Again, this
treated a case in a Labrador Retriever and also in several
condition is more common in small breed dogs,14 owing
 patients as young as 3 years of age.
mostly to the fact that their teeth (especially the man-
dibular first molar) are larger in proportion to their
Pathologic fracture
mandible  in comparison to large breed  dogs
One of the most significant local consequences of
(Figure 6.13).'5 Therefore, small breed dogs have a very
minimal amount of bone apical to the tooth root,
These fractures typically occur  in the mandible
 putting this area at high risk of fracture when apical
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.9 Intraoral dental radiographs of class Il perio-endo lesions on various teeth. (a) Left maxillary third premolar (207). Note that
the endodontic system is exposed and affected (yellow arrow), yet no radiographically identifiable lucency to the mesial root is present
[nna leisaw aul jo ainsodxa pasne sey ssol auog juopad aui anaym (aol) senow isy Aexew iuoiy (g) (moe ang) sunod siui ie
root (yellow arrow). Bacteria entered the endodontic system via the apex of this root and spread to the palatal root, resulting in periapi-
cal disease, which is evidenced by the rarefaction (red arrow). Note, this patient was treated for a "carnassial abscess" by the extraction
of 108 without radiographs. When the procedure failed, it was referred for radiographs, which documented the cause of the abscess. 108
was likely not the cause of the infection in the first place, and the extraction was unnecessary. This case highlights the need for intraoral
dental radiographs in all abscess cases. (c) Severe class Il perio-endo lesion of a left mandibular second molar (310). The mesial root was
coated in calculus, while the distal root was clean other than granulation tissue
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.10 (a and b) Intraoral dental radiographs of the mandibular left of a dog revealing the classic appearance and location of a class
Il perio-endo lesion. The mandibular first molar (309) is affected. These are identical images: (a) is without identifiers to allow for easier
viewing. The periodontal disease progressed apically all the way down the distal root (blue arrows) to enter the endodontic system via
the apical foramina (yellow arrow). The infection then spread via the common pulp chamber (green arrows), to create infection and rar-
eae jeisaw ayl pue (xade aui le idanxa) Ayeay Aeiuopoad s! lool jeisaw aui aion (mane panj nooi jeisaw aul jo xade aul ie uoea
of the furcation is not affected. This patient is a candidate for tooth resection/root canal of the mesial root (after extraction of the distal).
See Figure 16.19 and Chapter 19. Finally, note the apex of the mesial root of the second molar (310) appears to be involved (pink arrow).
Local and Regional Conseguences of Periodontal Disease  73
(a)
(b)
e
Figure 6.11 Intraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular canines
in a dog with advanced periodontal disease. Note the significant
amount of bone destruction that has resulted in marked weakening
of the alveolar bone (yellow arrows). There is a high risk of fracture
of the mandible in these areas. Further note that there is minimal
bone around the apex of these teeth (red arrow), which makes
extraction of these teeth challenging even in healthy patients.
Figure 6.13 Comparison of small/toy and large breed dog man-
dible. Dental radiographs of the left mandible of (a) a Yorkshire
Terrier and (b) a Labrador Retriever. Note the minimal amount
(less than 1 mm) of alveolar bone on the ventral cortex of the
Yorkshire Terrier at the mesial root of the first molar (yellow
arrow). This arrangement predisposes to pathologic mandibular
fracture. In contrast, the same area in the Labrador has significant
bone ventral to the apex (blue arrows), which would support the
jaw even if the alveolar loss continued to the apex. There is an
incidental finding of tooth resorption in Figure 6.13b (green
arrow). Finally, the mesial root of the Yorkshire Terrier has a
significant curve "hook" at the apex (red arrow), which would 
further complicate the extraction process.
Figure 6.12 Intraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular right in a
dog with advanced periodontal disease. Note the significant amount
of bone destruction (blue arrows) that has resulted in marked weak-
bone loss occurs.'5 In addition, they tend to have more
ening of the alveolar bone in the area of the mesial root of the first
severe periodontal disease than medium to large breed
molar (409) (yellow arrow). This measured as 0.3 mm of bone. There
dogs.16 Finally, small and toy breed dogs tend to enjoy a
is a high risk of fracture of the mandible in this area. Further note that
the third premolar is completely denuded of bone and is actually
longer life span than larger breeds, allowing for more
being held in only by a "calculus bridge" to the fourth premolar (red
advanced periodontal disease in geriatric years.
arrow). (Reprinted from the "lmportance of Dental Radliographs"
 Pathologic jaw fractures typically occur as a result
client educational poster, www.vetdentalrad.com, 2006.)
of mild trauma, and oftentimes during dental
74   The Progression of Disease
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.14 (a) Intraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular left of a dog. The mandible was fractured during an extraction attempt of
the fourth premolar (308) (yellow arrow). Note that the tooth was not sectioned, which likely contributed to the iatrogenic fracture.
(b) Postoperative dental radiograph of the mandibular left of a dog. The mandible was fractured (yellow arrow) during the extraction of
the first molar (309). The bone was weakened due to the periodontal disease that is evidenced by the ragged bone in the alveolus of the
mesial root (blue arrows).
(a)
(b)
E
Figure 6.15 (a) Postoperative dental radiograph of the patient in Figure 6.14a. The diseased teeth were extracted, the fracture reduced.
and a circummandibular wire used as fixation. Note the reduction is excellent without directly invading the bone. (b) Postoperative dental
radiograph of the patient in Figure 6.14b. Due to the large defect, two forms of stabilization were necessary. These consisted of an inter-
osseous wire in the ventral cortex (yellow arrow) and an intraoral acrylic splint (supported with interdental wire) (blue arrow). Note that
despite the large bony defect, the reduction is excellent (red arrow). Finally, note that once the diseased teeth were removed, this
relatively non-invasive fixation was sufficient for healing, as compared to bone plates and KE apparatus (see Figure 6.16a)
extraction procedures (Figure 6.14). However, some
due to lack of remaining bone, low oxygen tension in the
dogs have suffered fractures while simply eating. This
 area, and difficulty in rigidly fixating the caudal man-
is typically considered a disease of older patients, but
 dible.' There are numerous options for fixation, but the
this author has treated several cases in dogs less than
use of wires, pins, or plates is generally required
3 years of age.
(Figure 6.15). Regardless of the method of fixation, the
Pathologic fractures carry a guarded prognosis for
po paoexa aq ysn (sioou paseas euopod
several reasons.17 Adequate healing is difficult to obtain
healing to occur (Figures 6.16 and 6.17).5.17
Local and Regional Consequences of Periodontal Disease   75
tissues in jeopardy (Figure 6.20).2122 In cats (especially
brachycephalic breeds), the apices of the maxillary
canine teeth lie in this area and can create similar
issues.52 Finally, severe iatrogenic eye trauma can occur
 during extraction attempts of maxillary molars if care is
not taken, which may result in loss of the eye.z
Oraf cancer
 Recent studies in human dentistry have linked chronic
periodontal disease to an increased risk of oral cancer
(Figure 6.21),.23-2 The association in this case is likely
 due to the chronic inflammatory state that exists with
periodontitis. Since neoplasia typically requires a pro-
 moter to propagate, it is typically controlled in patients
Figure 6.16 Intraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular left in
with healthy gingival tissues. 27 The significant inflamma-
a patient with a bilateral mandibular fracture. This is a recheck
tion associated with periodontal disease acts as a con-
radiograph of the third KE apparatus placed at a referral surgical
founder to the body's defenders, much in the same way
facility. Note the significant alveolar bone loss (yellow arrows) as
that smoking increases the incidence of lung cancer.28
well as the bony sequestra (red arrow) in the surgical area. This
fracture would have likely responded to therapy had the diseased
tooth/roots been extracted. Finally, note the significant amount of
Osteomyelitis
bony damage caused by the distal pin (blue arrow). Veterinary
Alveolar osteomyelitis is defined as an area of dead,
dentists feel that invasive means of fixation for mandibular
infected bone.?" Periodontal disease and other dental
fractures are typically excessive.
infections are the most common cause of mandibular or
maxillary osteomylitis.5.172 Furthermore, once an area of
bone is necrotic, it does not respond effectively to antibi-
Ocular damage
otic therapy. 173 This is because the pockets of dead bone
 Another local consequence of severe periodontal disease
and the associated microorganisms are protected from
results from inflammation close to the orbit, which can
the antibiotics. Therefore, definitive therapy generally
potentially lead to ocular inflammation, naso-lacrimal
 requires aggressive surgical debridement of all necrotic
disease, retrobulbar abscesses, and possibly blindness.5.20.21
tissue.31-34
The proximity of the tooth root apices of the maxillary
 In some cases, the bacterial infection may also result
 molars and fourth premolars places the delicate optic
in a septicemia. In one case treated by this author, the
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.17 Successfully managed pathologic left mandibular fracture. (a) Preoperative dental radiograph revealing a pathologic fracture
at the distal aspect of the distal root of the first molar (309) (blue arrows). Also note the small area of periapical rarefaction on the mesial
root (yellow arrow). Finally, there are free bone pieces (red arrow). (b) Postoperative image of a case where the tooth has been sectioned
and the distal root extracted; the endodontic system of the mesial root cleaned, medicated, and temporarily sealed; and the facture
reduced and fixed with an interosseous wire and intraoral acrylic splint. Note that despite the large bony defect, the reduction is ade-
paj bueay pue uonpan jualaxa ai anon uoengo jeue poon pue jeaowan uds bumolog ydeiboen jeiuap yauay () aienb
arrows) and good endodontic obturation (green arrows). The periapical lucency responded to endodontic therapy and was healed at the
6-month recheck.
76 The Progression of Disease
Box 6.1 Key clinical point
jo aueup jaleaib uaaa ue si aaui Aueay Aeuopoad s! yoo paloonu papae ue jo jooi auo jl (otg ainbi) sainpaoid
sase asaul of saweail jo wot ateuane uv tr's loai ayeay aui peixa di papaau aot paseaui aui oi anp ainpe sengue
pou Ayeay Aeiuooad ai uo adenaui jeuen jooi woad pue 'oo paseas Aieiuooad aun pexa yooi au uoas oi s!
s leou sl o auen lenqu a h Aepadsal papou si ss auq leloe alaas aiaya sae ul trsu (l'g ainii
jo uoexa budwane it joud anpe mel suaone! ue jo Aqssod aul jo saumo aui woju ot papuawwoal s! l! (papae
the offending tooth.5
(a)
(b)
■
Fgure 6.18 Intraoral dental radiographs of canine patients with significant periodontally induced alveolar bone destruction. (a) Left
mandibular first molar of a small breed dog with advanced loss on the mesial root. There is less than 1 mm of bone remaining (yellow
arrow). (b) Mandibular canine region of a dog, revealing the minimal bony support at the apex of the canine teeth. Both of these areas are
at high risk for iatrogenic mandibular fracture during an extraction attempt. Extreme care and patience must be exercised for a positive
outcome. Moreover, referral to a veterinary dentist would allow the best opportunity for a successful extraction
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.19 (a) Intraoral dental radiograph of a patient with ad vanced alveolar bone loss on the distal root of the left mandibular first 
molar (309). Note, there is severe disease to the distal root (blue arrows), while the mesial root is periodontally normal. (b) The 2-year
recheck radiograph of the patient who was treated with extraction of the distal root and root canal therapy of the mesial root. Note the
relative stability of the periodontal health of the mesial root (red arow) and lack of periapical rarefaction (yellow arrow) indicating suc-
 cessful therapy.
Local and Regional Consequences of Periodontal Disease
77
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.20 (a) Picture of a Pug with a chronic, severe ocular infection and retrobulbar abscess of the left eye. This eventually led to
enudleation of the eye. (b) Subsequent dental radiographs (due to continued problems) revealed periapical lucency to the maxillary first
molar (209) (green arrow), which caused the facial swelling and likely the ocular infection. (c) Picture of a patient who had a severe and
chronic draining abscess below the left eye. (d) Intraoral dental radiograph of the patient in Figure 6.20c, confirming the periapical rare-
faction from the first molar (209) (red arrows) at the orbit as outlined by the zygomatic arch (green line). (Figure 6.20 reprinted with
permission from Emergency Veterinary Dentistry. Practical Veterinary Publishing. 2012.)
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.21 (a and b) Intraoral pictures of the maxillary right of two different dogs with significant periodontal disease and oral neoplasia.
78   The Progression of Disease
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.22 Intraoral picture of the small inflammatory/fistulat-
 ing tract on the mandibular right of a dog with chronic systemic
disease. Note that several premolars are missing, but that the area
is not inflamed and the canine tooth appears relatively normal.
Figure 6.24 (a) Intraoral dental picture of a patient with severe
osteomyelitis of the left hemi-mandible. (b) Piece of necrotic bone
from the patient in Figure 6.24a. Note that the alveoli are not
healed, indicating the bone has been non-vital since the extrac-
tions performed 8 months previous.
Figure 6.23 Intraoral dental radiograph of the patient in
 debridement of the necrotic bone. Histopathology was
Figure 6.22. Note the significant bony destruction as well as peri-
consistent with osteomylitis and following surgery and a
osteal reaction. Histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of osteo-
course of antibiotics, the patient did not relapse.
myelitis. Subsequent rostral mandibulectomy proved curative
 In another case treated by this author, the patient pre-
sented with an entire hemi-mandible that was necrotic
secondary to osteomylitis (Figure 6.24). In this case, the
patient had white blood cell counts of> 50,000 on several
 dental radiograph (Figure 6.25) revealed bony prolifera-
 occasions, which responded transiently to antibiotics.35
   s    oi
However, each time the antibiotics were discontinued
required a complete mandibulectomy.
 the infection recurred. On presentation, the patient had
halitosis but no obvious dental disease other than a small
Conclusion
fistulous tract (Figure 6.22). An intraoral dental radio-
graph revealed bony proliferation with significantly
Chronic periodontal disease in veterinary patients can
 mottled bone in the area (Figure 6.23), indicative of bony
have disastrous consequences within the oral cavity.
reaction and suspect for osteomyelitis.3136 The radio-
 Furthermore, many of these disease processes will not
graphic  appearance  prompted  aggressive  surgical
 have obvious clinical signs until very late in the disease
Local and Regional Consequences of Periodontal Disease  79
dogs. In fact, a homecare discussion should take place at
the initial visit to the practice (e.g., a well puppy exam);
don't wait until periodontal disease is established.
Appropriate client education should increase compli-
ance with oral health care recommendations and help to
avoid these significant disastrous consequences.
References
1. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Exodontics In: Veterinary Dental
Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998, pp. 215-254.
2. Niemiec BA. Pathologies of the oral mucosa. In: Small Animal
Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook
(Niemiec BA ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 183-198.
3. Marretta SM, Smith MM. Single mucoperiosteal flap for oronasal
fistula repair. J Vet Dent. 22(3):200-205, 2005.
4. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: SmallAnimal Dental,
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
5. Niemiec BA. Periodontal disease. Top Companion Anim Med.
23(2):72-80, 2008.
6. Harvey CE, Emily PP. Oral surgery. In: Small Animal Dentistry.
St. Louis: Mosby, 1993, pp. 312-377.
7. Marretta SM, Smith MM. Single mucoperiosteal flap for oronasal
Figure 6.25 Intraoral dental radiograph of the patient in
fistula repair. J Vet Dent, 22(3):200-205, 2005.
 8. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
Figure 6.24. Note the significant bony destruction (blue arrows)
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
and periosteal reaction (yellow arrows) on the left side, compared
Pp. 186-231.
with the normal mandible on the right. A left-sided mandibulec-
9. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Basic endodontic therapy In: Veterinary
tomy proved curative.
Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
Raven, 1997, pp. 280-324.
10. Debowes LJ. Problerms with the dental hard tissues. In: Small
course, if ever. Obtaining a definitive diagnosis often
Animal Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook
requires careful evaluation under general anesthesia.
(Niemiec BA ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
11. DuPont GG. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
Finally, it is important to note that all of these conditions
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
can be prevented with standard, routine periodontal
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 127-157.
care. These problems (as well as the systemic issues
12. Wang HL, Glickman GN. Endodontic and periodontic interrelation-
covered in the next chapter) should be discussed with
ships. In: Pathways of the Pulp St. Louis: Mosby, 2002, pp. 651-664.
ALL clients, especially owners of small and toy breed
13. Gioso MA, Knobl T, Venturini MA, Correa HL. Non-apical root
canal ramifications in the teeth of dogs. J Vet Dent. 14(3):89-90, 1997.
14. Mulligan TW, Aller S, Williams CE. Trauma. In: Atlas of Canine
and Feline Dental Radiography. Trenton, NJ: Veterinary Learning
Systems, 1998,pp.176-13.
Box 6.2 Key points
15. Gioso MA, Shofer F, Barros PS, Harvery CE. Mandible and man-
dibular first molar tooth measurements in dogs: Relationship of
● Periodontal dlisease has numerous severe local effects:
radiographic height to body weight. I Vet Dent. 18(2):65-68.
o Oronasal fistulas
16. Bellows J. Equipping the dental practice In: Small Animal Dental
o Class Il perio-endo abscesses
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
o Pathologic mandibular fracture
Blackwell, 2004, p. 13-55.
o Eye damage and possible blindness
17. Taney KG, Smith MM. Problerms with muscles, bones, and joints.
o Increased risk of oral cancer
In: Small Animal Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color
Handbaok (Niemiec BA ed.). London: Manson,2010,pp. 199-204.
o Osteomyelitis
18. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Advanced endodontic therapy. In:
●Small and toy breed dogs are most prone; however, any
breed as well as cats can suffer from these maladlies.
Veterinary Dentistry Principles and Practice. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1997, pp. 325-350.
●These are typically, but not exclusively, seen in older
19. Niemiec BA. Treatment of mandibular first molar teeth with
patients.
●Use these examples to improve compliance with treatment
2001.
options.
20. Anthony JMG, Sammeyer LS, Laycock AR. Vet Opthamol.
13:106-109, 2010.
80   The Progression of Disease
21. Ramsey DT, Marretta SM, Hamor RE, et al. Ophthalmic manifes-
29. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry, Principles and
tations and complications of dental disease in dogs and cats. J Am
Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,pp. 128, 163.
Anim Hosp Assoc. 32(3):215-224, 1996.
 30. Bubenik LJ, Smith MM. Orthopaedic infections. In: Textbook of
22. Smith MM, et al. Orbital penetration associated with tooth extrac
Small Animal Surgery (Slatter DH ed). 3rd ed. Philadelpia:
tion. J Vet Dent. 20(1):8-17, 2003.
Saunders, 2003,pp.1862-1875.
23. Rosenquist K. Risk factors in oral and oropharengeal squamous
 31. Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Bouquot JE. Pulpal and peri-
cell carcinoma: A population-based case-control study in
apical disease. In: Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 2nd ed.
southern Sweden. Swed Dent I Suppl. 179:1-66, 2005.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002, pp. 107-137.
24. Rosenquist K, Wennerberg I, Schildt EB, et al. Oral status, oralinfec-
 32. Lu JD, Wang XD, Shen GF. Diagnosis and treatment of osteope-
tions and some lifestyle factors for oral and oropharengeal squamous
trosis complicated by osteomyelitis in maxilla and mandible:
cell carcinoma. A population-based case-controlled study in
Report of two
cases. Shanghai Kou Yi Xue. 16(5):
southern Sweden. Acta Otolaryngol. 125(12):1327-1336, 2005.
551-554, 2007.
25. Zheng TZ, Boyle P, Hu HF, et al. Dentition, oral hygiene, and risk
 33. Prasad KC, Prasad SC, Mouli N, Agarwal S. Osteomyelitis of the
of oral cancer: A case-control study in Beijing, People's Republic
head and neck. Acta Otolaryngol. 127(2):194-205, 2007.
of China. Cancer Causes Control. 1:235-241, 1990.
 34. Verstraete FM. In: Textbook of Small Animal Surgery (Slatter DH
26. Graham S, Dayal H, Rohrer T, et al. Dentition, diet, tobacco, and
ed.). 3rd ed. Philadelpia: Saunders, 2003.
alcohol in the epidemiology of oral cancer. I Natl Cancer Inst.
35. Niermiec BA. Osteomyelitis secondary to periodontal disease.
59:1611-1618, 1977.
Proceedings of the American Veterinary Dental Forum.
27. Trosko JE. Commentary: Is the concept of "tumor promotion" a
Albuquerque, NM, 2000.
useful paradigm? Mol Carcinog. 30:131-137, 2001.
36. Mulligan, T Aller, S, and Williams, C. Atlas of Canine and Feline
28. Jerbi G, et al. Melanoma arising in burn scars: Report of three obser-
vations and literature review. Arch Dermatol. 135:1551-1553, 1999.
1998, pp. 176-183.
Systemic manifestations
of periodontal disease
Introduction
 Even after the teeth are completely cleaned during a
 dental prophylaxis, bacteria start colonizing the tooth
 Infections of the teeth and the periodontium have long
surfaces within seconds,' and mature plaque forms on
been thought to have a negative effect throughout the
the tooth surfaces within 24 hours, growing rapidly for
body. It was reported that Hippocrates cured a patient of
the first 4 days.&12 In humans, Cessation of homecare for
arthritis by extracting an infected tooth.' This theory
as little as I week can result in gingivitis in some patients,
 d ya e a sod i sm
and affer 3 weeks leads to gingivitis in all patients.13
Hunter, in i9oo. Following this, Frank Billings
 Furthermore, some authors report that gingivitis (at least
introduced the concept of focal infections to American
histologic if not clinical) may occur after only a few days
physicians.? Since then, the role of oral infections in
of missed homecare.1415 Finally, one veterinary study
regard to systemic health has been accepted as well as
found that pockets were reinfected within 2 weeks of a
rejected, depending on the current state of research.45
 dental cleaning if homecare was not performed. 6
 Recent research, however, utilizing the evidence-based
These findings prove that professional cleanings alone
approach has accepted several systemic ramifications of
are grossly insufficient for periodontal disease control.
periodontal disease. While true cause-and-effect studies
They also illustrate that the periodontium is often
may be minimal, the correlations and connections are
continually inflamed, in turn allowing for almost consis-
numerous and convincing. These conditions have been
tent systemic infections. Based on this information, it
well documented in both human and animal studies.
can be inferred that the majority of veterinary patients
While the majority of studies have involved human
are infected at least 50 weeks a year if annual cleanings
patients, we can expect correlations to generally hold
are performed (which is often not the case). This is
 true for our animal patients. (In fact, there are many
certainly not an acceptable level of disease control.
 medical beliefs held for humans that have been extrapo-
Therefore, we should strive to educate our clients on the
lated from animal studies in the same fashion.)
importance of consistent and effective homecare as well
as professional care.
Prevalence of periodontal disease
Periodontal disease is the number one diagnosed med-
ical problem in small animal veterinary patients.67 In 
Pathogenesis of systemic effects
fact, by 2 years of age, 80% of dogs and 70% of cats have
White blood cells and other inflammatory mediators
some form of periodontal disease.? Small and toy breed
migrate out of the periodontal soft tissues and into the
dogs are particularly susceptible.? Furthermore, it has 
 periodontal space due to increased vascular permeability
been shown that even the most complete periodontal
and increased space between the crevicular epithelial
 treatment (ranging from a thorough dental prophylaxis 
cells.17 The bacteria within the gingival sulcus therefore
to periodontal surgery) cannot reliably eradicate infec-
 gain ready access to the bloodstream via the inflamed
tion." Finally, this high level of dental expertise is
sulcular epithelium. The inflammatory response of the
currently rare within general practices.
gingival and periodontal tissues allows the body's
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
81
82   The Progression of Disease
defenses to attack the invaders but also allows these
bacteria to gain access to the body 5&.18s.9 In fact, the sub-
Box 7.1 Key dlinical point
gingival microbiotia in animals with active periodontitis
 Avoiding professional cleanings in patients who are
provides a significant and consistent gram-negative
 particularly susceptible to the negative effects of bacteremias
i e a ae a p is  oi a
(such as pets with diabetes mellitus, renal or hepatic disease,
selves allowed access but also their inflammatory
or heart murmurs/low-grade heart disease) is not good
mediators such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS). These
medicine. As a matter of fact, there is significant evidence
bacteria and their byproducts can have severe delete-
 supporting the fact that these patients should be even more
rious effects throughout the body.2021 In addition to the
deiai euap jeuoissaod ohiapun ot pabenoua Aruos
bacteria themselves and their toxic byproducts, distant
because of the health benefitsit will provide.3-42
effects can also occur secondary to the activation of the
 patient's own inflammatory mediators such as cytokines
(e.g., IL-1 and 6, PGE2, and TNF).522-25 These mediators
 disease has been called "The Silent Killer?' Ignoring the
have been linked to numerous systemic problems such
 periodontal health of our pets and patients can be
as cardiovascular, hepatic, and renal insults.2627 It is
likened to ostriches putting their head in the sand to
reported that human patients with periodontal disease
avoid a lion. The lion (just like periodontal disease) is
are 4 times more likely to have multiple (three or more)
still lurking regardless of it being recognized.
systemic maladies than those in good periodontal
Furthermore, we know that periodontal therapy (from
health.2 It is also critical to note that even low grade
homecare to professional scaling) results in transient
 gingivitis (i.e., no periodontal loss) is sufficient to create
bacteremia. However, daily activities such as chewing
systemic consequences.
can also create these inflammatory states.34 As a matter
The subgingival area provides a large surface area for
of fact, daily activities such as mastication and tooth
bacterial exposure. In humans, it has been estimated that
brushing in humans result in more bacteremia than does
the surface area of the sulcal epithelium in patients with
a professional cleaning 3537
active disease is equal to the size of the palm of the hand
Affected organs/systems
 proportional size of the oral cavity and tooth roots of
Liver and kidneys
and toy breeds) creates a significant increase in the sur-
The hepatic and renal systems are responsible for fil-
face area for bacterial ingress. This fact, combined with
tering the blood. When oral bacteremias occur, the
the increased incidence of periodontal disease in these
bacteria may settle in these organs. Once within the
species,3 means periodontal infections likely represent a
 parenchyma, bacteria may go on to create microab-
 more severe issue in our patients than in the vast majority
scesses or cause other inflammatory changes in these
of humans. Furthermore, it appears that these changes
 organs. The bacterial invasion of the liver has been
 intensify with increasing periodontal disease burden.2z
shown to increase parenchymal inflammation and portal
These oral inflammatory repercussions are even more of
fibrosis.? Furthermore, bacteremias have been shown to
a problem in toy and small breed dogs.32.3
cause cholestasis in dogs,434 and one study showed a
A purulent infection equal to the size of the palm of
 significant relationship between the periodontal disease
-01d e 1o Apoq inoA jo uood alqisiA e uo puey 1noA
burden and increased inflammation in the hepatic
 portionally sized infection on the flank of a dog or cat 
parenchyma.22
would cause significant concern for the average person,
 Periodontopathogenic bacteria appear to have an
resulting in an immediate visit to the clinic and prompt
 affinity for endothelium. Renal filtration places them in
definitive therapy. Periodontal disease should be viewed
 direct contact with endothelium and therefore signifi-
with the same degree of respect since it is a significant
cantly increases the likelihood of the glomerular capil-
 gram-negative and anaerobic infection capable of severe
lary walls being affected45-4s Chronic infectious and
inflammation and potential systemic spread of these
inflammatory diseases have been shown to contribute to
dangerous microorganisms. However, since f
the oral
the formation of immune complexes in the kidney
cavity is rarely scrutinized by owners or veterinarians,
resulting in glomerulonephritis.3i Once these immune
 and no more than a cursory evaluation can be performed
complexes are formed, they appear to self-propagate the
without general anesthesia, periodontal disease is drasti-
inflammation by stimulating the production of other
cally underdiagnosed. Furthermore, the lack of any out-
bioactive mediators such as cytokines, growth factors,
ward clinical signs (in animals and humans) often results
and nitric acid. They may also stimulate increased
 in significantly delayed therapy. Therefore, periodontal
intra- and extracellular matrix filaments and proteins,
Systemic Manifestations of Periodontal Disease
83
causing further parenchymal changes.5051 These changes
While ischemic heart disease is not a common
can lead to chronic inflammation and secondary
problem in veterinary patients, numerous studies have
scarring of the organ, resulting in decreased function
linked periodontal disease and oral bacteremias to
Over time.2.25.26.52,53
myocardial infarctions and other histological changes
Finally, and perhaps most importantly,
thereis
evidence to suggest that periodontal therapy improves
increases with the severity and scope of the periodontal
renal function. Studies have shown that periodontal
infection,*5 and the endothelial function of the heart
therapy improves glomerular filtration rate in healthy as
muscle is negatively affected by periodontal disease.°
well as predialysis renal patients.3954 It is possible that
Finally, periodontal disease is reported to be associated
periodontal therapy may provide benefits to other organs
with hypertension in humans.73
as well, but more research is needed in this area. In
Ischemic heart disease in humans is precipitated by
any case, this is significant evidence to support the
the process of atherogenesis and thrombogenesis. These
importance of providing proper dental care to patients
conditions are enhanced by increased blood viscosity,74
with mild to moderate organ dysfunction.
which in turn is promoted by systemic infections such as
periodontal disease.75 Fibrinogen is likely to be the most
Heart
important factor in inciting this hypercoagulable state,
Periodontal disease has been linked to significant
and elevations of fibrinogen along with other coagula-
changes in the cardio-pulmonary system. Several studies 
tion factors are seen secondary to periodontal disease.75
have suggested that oral bacteria can adhere to previously
A correlation between periodontal disease and throm-
 damaged heart valves (i.e., valvular dysplasia), leading
bogenesis was found in a study that linked periodontal
to endocarditis.sss There are also veterinary studies
disease with increased aggregation of platelets via platelet
that have noted a significant increase in the incidence
aggregation-associated protein (PAAP) expressed by
of atrio-ventricular  valve changes  with
1periodontal
some periodontal pathogens.7 In fact, the simple infu-
disease.2z57 In fact, one report showed the risk of endo-
sion of these bacteria resulted in alterations of physical
 sp   ri ee ie s
 parameters (such as heart rate, blood pressure, and
stage 3 periodontal disease, compared with the risk for
 ECG) consistent with a myocardial infarction.7” An
 dogs without periodontal disease.57 Vegetative endocar-
additional link between periodontal and cardiac disease
ditis can result in intermittent infections and potentially
was provided by studies evaluating the increased level
of C-reactive protein' as well as other inflammatory
These types of vegetative lesions have been cultured, and
markers in association with periodontal disease and its
the results found many of the same bacteria that inhabit
 increased incidence in patients with myocardial infarc-
the oral cavity.5zs9c One study that evaluated the bacte-
tions.79-s3 These studies provide evidence for the level of
rial component of atheromatous plaques found that 44%
systemic inflammation caused by periodontal disease.
of the plaques were positive for a periodontal pathogen.6!
These findings were further supported by a study that
This condition was classically blamed on dental proce-
found a direct correlation between decreased tooth
dures, but recent studies report that even normal
brushing frequency and increased incidence of cardio-
activities such as eating are sufficient to create a
vascular events.4 Moreover, they found that human
bacteremia.34-3 Furthermore, it was found that the
patients who brushed their teeth less than twice daily
 majority of endocarditis cases in humans and dogs were
had a 70% increase in the risk rate of heart disease.4
Finally, there are studies that found periodontal infec-
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a fairly common
tions to directly cause atherosclerosis in pigs and
occurrence in older feline patients. Periodontal disease
mice.85.86
 may affect this disease process, as it has been shown to be
associated with left ventricular hypertrophy.?7 These
Lungs
negative changes are even more common in patients
We often do not think about periodontal disease affecting
with hypertension.465s One veterinary study has also
the lungs, but several studies have linked this disease to
revealed a possible link between periodontal disease and
an increased incidence of chronic respiratory disease
cardiomyopathies in dogs.57 Furthermore, it has been
(COPD) as well as pneumonia.2.87-91 Chronic infection
demonstrated in humans that the endothelial function of
of the lungs is thought to occur from the constant inha-
the heart muscle is negatively affected by periodontal
lation of high numbers of oral bacteria. This type of
disease. Finally, this same study reported an improve-
 infection ultimately results in areas of scarring within the
ment in endothelial function following periodontal
os u  ps i on rs) s
therapy.
 leading to bronchitis and emphysema.19
84   The Progression of Disease
While there is no current evidence that periodontal
Other deleterious effects
disease affects the incidence of acute respiratory diseases
Diabetes mellitus
in healthy patients, oral infections are known to exacer-
bate chronic respiratory diseases.9 Furthermore, proper
Numerous studies have established a strong link between
oral care has been shown to decrease the incidence
diabetes and increased periodontal disease, as well as
 of acute exacerbations of chronic respiratory disease,2
between periodontal disease and an increase in insulin
and controlling oral bacteria decreases opportunistic
respiratory infections.93-95
tion (bacterial or viral) will increase insulin resistance
Hospital-acquired (nosocomial) respiratory infections
and worsen glycemic control, even in non-diabetic
are also a significant problem (especially in severely ill
and ventilator patients),9 resultingin 20-50% mortality
to not only poor diabetic control but, maybe more
in human patients.97 The oral cavity is the typical reser-
importantly, to the increased severity of diabetic compli-
voir for pulmonary pathogens, and decontamination of
cations (wound healing, microvascular disease) as well
the oropharynx has been shown to decrease these types
of infections.9s-1∞ Moreover, the utilization of oral anti-
therapy of periodontal disease (professional peri-
septics such as chlorhexidine gluconate, as well as the
 odontal therapy, selected extractions, and homecare)
mechanical action of tooth brushing, has the ability to
 may actually improve glycemic control and decrease
 decrease nosocomial infections.0 Therefore, ECC and
ICU staff should take oral health status into consideration
 enhanced by the addition of systemic antibiotic therapy
when  formulating  treatment  plans  for  severely
il1
with doxycycline for 2 weeks following the dental scaling
 patients, especially those who are immune suppressed or
and root planing.134 This may be due to the fact that
on ventilators.
systemic antibiotics help clear residual bacteria from the
 periodontium. Finally, periodontal health is improved in
long-term ventilator patients, even relatively
7healthy
patients are at risk for intubation-induced pneumonia.
no published veterinary studies to this effect, there is
This is due to several factors, including introduction of
significant anecdotal evidence that supports periodontal
oropharyngeal bacteria into the trachea, bypassing the
 o o sd a s s e s
natural protection of the trachea, loss of macrophages,
and possible mucosal damage/inflammation.oz-1o5 While
needed insulin therapy after dental treatment.
the incidence of pneumonia is positively related to the
It is also reported that diabetes is actually a risk factor
duration of intubation, it can occur with even short sur-
for periodontal disease.36-142 This is explained by the fact
 gical procedures.104.1o Therefore, it is recommended to
that diabetes weakens the immune system, thereby
decrease the level of oral pathogens via oral antiseptic
rinsing (e.g-, chlorhexidine) whenever intubation is
Periodontal disease and diabetes are therefore viewed as
planned.107.108
having a bidirectional interrelationship, wherein each
 one worsens the other.147-150
Brain
Malignancies
Ischemic cerebral infarctions (or strokes) are often
As stated in the last chapter, periodontal disease has been
 proceeded by a systemic infection." In addition, those
implicated as a risk factor for oral neoplasia. Additionally,
with a prestroke infection suffer more significant neuro-
recent studies are proposing a link between periodontal
logic deficits than those without." Poor dental health
 disease and distant neoplasia such as gastrointes-
will contribute to strokes in the same fashion it does with
myocardial disease (i.e., increased thrombotic events,
cancers.'56 while these reports are far from definitive due
C-reactive protein, and blood viscosity).1 In fact, poor
 to the large number of confounding factors,'57 it makes
 dental health was shown to have a very strong influence
sense to address and control periodontal inflammation
on cerebral ischemic events, even more so t
than
 smoking 4.12.113 Therefore, proper periodontal
when possible.
care
should decrease the incidence and severity of this disease
 process. While the incidence of cerebral infarction in
Adverse pregnancy effects
animal patients is unknown, it does occur and therefore
 Oral bacteremias can cross the placental membrane,58-160
it is helpful to know that good dental health may aid in
allowing the bacteria to directly affect the fetus.
its prevention.
Several studies have found periodontal infections to be
Systemic Manifestations of Periodontal Disease
85
 pets. Effectively sharing this information will signifi-
 Box 7.2 Early mortality
cantly increase client compliance with homecare and
dental prophylaxis, as well as approval of advanced
A strikingly significant indicator of the degree to which
dental procedures for their pets. Consequently, the most
periodontal disease affects overall health is demonstrated in
mortality studies. When all other risk factors are ruled out,
important weapon in the fight against periodontal dis-
periodontal disease has been shown to be a significant 
 ease in the veterinary field is simple client education.
predictor of early mortality inhumanbeings.5-177 n fact,
one study reported that severe periodontal disease is a
higher risk factor than smoking!178
Box 7.3 Key points
·  Periodontal disease has been associated with numerous
associated with an increased incidence of adverse
systemic maladies including cardiopulmonary disease,
 pregnancy effects, such as pre-ecclampsia and low birth
renal and hepatic malfunction, neoplasia, and diabetes
weight.161-163 In contrast, proper dental care can help
mellitus
to reduce the rate of preterm births.164-16 while not a
●Systemic changes may be at least somewhat reversible
with periodontal therapy.
concern for the majority of veterinary patients, this
· Humans with poor periodontal health have a decreased
information may be critical for veterinary theriogenolo-
life span.
gists and their clients, especially breeders of small and toy
· While typically thought to be associated with severe
breed dogs. In any event, it provides further evidence of
periodontal disease, gingivitis is sufficient to cause
the significance of periodontal disease as it relates to
harmful systemic effects.
overall health.
● There is significant evidence supporting the fact that 
patients with any systemic disease benefit from proper
Chronic inflammation
 dental therapy.
 It has been proven that periodontal disease can elicit
 an increase in inflammatory lipids as well as an overall
lipidemic state.5.23.25.6.167 This is described as a state of
References
overall body inflammation leading to chronic disease
processes and an abnormal immune response.169-172
1. Francke OC. William Hunter's oral sepsis and American
Furthermore, periodontal therapy can decrease the level
odontology. Bull Hist Dent. 21(2):73-79, 1973.
2. Neuman HN. Focal infection. J Dent Res. 75:1912, 1996.
 of circulating inflammatory products and improve
3. Billings E Chronic focal infections and their etiologic relations to
endothelial function.67,13.174
arthritis and nephritis. Arch Int Med. 9:484-498, 1912.
4. Scannapieco FA. Systermic effects of periodontal disease. Dent
Clin North Am.49:533-550, 2005.
Conclusion
5. Scannapieco FA. Periodontal inflammation: From gingivitis to
While some of the aforementioned studies are not defin-
systemic disease? Comp Cont Educ Dent. 25:16S-25S, 2004.
6. National Companion Animal Study. University of Minnesota
itive,9.1o we surely know that periodontal disease is an
Center for Companion Animal Health. Uplinks, p. 3, 1996.
infectious process that requires affected patients to deal
7. Lund EM, Armstrong PJ, et al. Health status and population
with dangerous bacteria on a daily basis, leading to a
characteristics of dogs and cats examined at private veterinary
state of chronic disease.179.1so Therefore, we must learn to
practices in the United States. JAVMA 214:1336-1341, 1999.
view periodontal disease as not merely a dental problem
8. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
that causes bad breath and tooth loss, but as an initiator
pp. 186-231.
of more severe systemic consequences. As one human
9. Hoffmann TH, Gaengler P. Clinical and pathomorphological
text states, "Periodontitis is a gram-negative infection
investigation of spontaneously occurring periodontal disease in
resulting in severe inflammation, with potential intra-
dogs. J Small Anim Pract. 37:471-479, 1996.
vascular dissemination of microorganisms throughout
10. Mealey BL, Klokkevold PR. Periodontal Medicine: Impact of
the body?'9 This is echoed by an additional author who
periodontal infection on systemic health. In: Carranza’s Clinical
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 170-192.
states: “Periodontal disease is clearly an important and
11. Ronstrom A, Edwardsson S, Atistrom R. Streptococcus sanguis
potentially life threatening condition, often underesti-
and Streptococcus salvarius in early plaque formation on plastic
films. J Periodontal Res. 12:331, 1977.
e a aa  sn sn ui  a a
12. Quirynen M, Teughels W, Kinder Hake S, Newman MG.
Microbiology of periodontal diseases. In: Carranzas Clinical
the scope of this disease process and discuss the problem
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 134-169.
with clients, so they may understand and appreciate the
13. Loe H, Theilade E, Jensen SB. Experimental gingivitis in man.
depth of the problems this disease can cause for their
J Periodontol. 36:177-187, 1965.
86   The Progression of Disease
14. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
 35. Guntheroth WG. How important are dental procedures as a cause
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
of infective endocarditis? Am J Cardiol. 54:797, 1984.
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
 36. Hartzell JD, Torres D, Kim P, Wortmann G. Incidence of bacter-
15. Payne WA, Page RC, Olgolvie AL, et al. Histopathologic features
emia after routine tooth brushing. Am J Med Sci. 329:178-180,
of the initial and early stages of experimental gingivitis in man.
2005.
J Periodontal Res. 10:51, 1975.
 37. Glass RT, Martin ME, Peter LJ. Transmission of disease in dogs by
16. Rober M. Effect of scaling and root planing without dental
toothbrushing. Quintessence Int. 20(11):819-824, 1989.
homecare on the subgingival microbiotia. Proceedings of the 16th
 38. Dajani AS, Taubert KA, Wilson W, et al. Prevention of bacterial
European Congress of Veterinary Dentistry, 2007, pp. 28-30.
endocarditis: Recommendations by the American Heart
17. Nisengard RJ, Kinder Haake S, Newman MG, Miyasaki KT.
Association. JAMA 27:1794, 1997.
Microbial interactions with the host in periodontal diseases.
39. Artese HP, Sousa CO, Luiz RR, Sansone C, Torres MC. Effect of
In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
non-surgical periodontal treatment on chronic kidney disease
pp. 228-250.
 patients. Braz Oral Res. 24(4):449-454, 2010.
18. Niemiec BA. Periodontal disease. Top Companion Anim Med.
40. Miller LS, Manwell MA, Newbold D, et al. The relationship
23(2):72-80, 2008.
between reduction in periodontal inflammation and diabetes
19. Mealey BL, Klokkevold PR. Periodontal medicine: Impact of
control: A control of 9 cases. J Periodontol. 63:843, 1992.
periodontal infection on systermic health. In: Carranza's Clinical
41. Promsudthi A, Pimapansri S, Deerochanawong C, Kanchanavasi-
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 312-329.
ta W. The effect of periodontal therapy on uncontrolled type 2
20. Takai T. Fc receptors and their role in immune regulation and
diabetes mellitus in older subjects. Oral Disease 11:293-298,
autoimmunity. J Clin Immunol. 25:1-18, 2005.
2005.
21. American Academy of Periodontology. Mouth body connection.
42. Taylor B, Tofler G, Morel-Kopp MC. The effect of initial treatment
Availableat:
http://www.perio.org/consumer/mbc.top2.htm.
of periodontitis on systemic markers of inflammation and
Accessed June 17, 2006.
cardiovascular risk: A randomized controlled trial. Eur J Oral Sci.
22. Pavlica Z, Petelin M, Juntes P, et al. Periodontal disease burden
118(4):350-356, 2010.
and pathological changes in the organs of dogs. J Vet Dent.
43. Taboada J, Meyer DJ. Cholestasis associated with extrahepatic
25(2):97-108, 2008.
bacterial infection in five dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 3:216-220, 1989.
   sd  e na f a   
44. Center SA. Hepatobilliary infections. In: Infectious Diseases of
inflammation: Their role in periodontal disease. J Periodontol.
the Dog and Cat (Green CE ed.). Philadelphia: Saunders, 1990,
64:485-491, 1993.
Pp. 146-156.
24. Renvert S, Wirkstrom M, et al. Histological and microbiological
45. Arbes SJ Jr, Slade GD, Beck JD. Association between extent of
aspects of ligature induced periodontitis in beagle dogs. J Clin
 periodontal disease and self-reported history of heart attack: An
Periodontol. 23:310-319, 1996.
analysis of NHANES III data. J Dent Res. 78:1777, 1999.
25. Rawlinson JE, Reiter AM, Harvey CE. Tracking systemic parame-
 46. Khlgatain M, Nassar H, et al. Fimbria-dependant activation of cell
ters in dogs with periodontal disease. Proceedings of the 19th
adhesion molecule expression in Porphyromonas gingivalis
Annual Veterinary Dental Forum, Orlando, 2005, p. 429.
infected endothelial cells. Infect Immun. 70:257-267, 2002.
26. Debowes LJ, Mosier D, Logan E, Harvey CE, Lowry S,
 47. Nassar H, Chou HH, et al. Role for fimbrie and lysine-specific
Richardson DC. Association of periodontal disease and histo-
cysteine proteinase gingipain K in expression of interleukin-8 and
logic lesions in multiple organs from 45 dogs. J Vet Dent.
monocyte chemoattractant protein in Porphyromonas gingivalis
13(2)57-60, 1996.
infected endothelial cells. Infect Immune. 70:268-276, 2002.
27. Franek E, Blach A, et al. Association between chronic periodontal
 48. Ortiz A, Gomez-Chiarri M, et al. The role of platelet-activating
disease and left ventricular hypertrophy in kidney transplant
factor (PAF) in experimental glomerular injury. Lipids. 26:1310-
recipients. Transplantation 80:3-5, 2005.
1315, 1991.
28. Al-Emadi A, Bissada N, Farah C, Siegel B, Al-Zaharani M.
49. Baylis C. Effects of adrministered thrormboxane on the intact,
Systemic diseases among patients with and without alveolar bone
normal rat kidney. Ren Physiol. 10:110-121, 1987.
loss. Quintessence Int. 37(10):761-765, 2006.
 50. MacDougal DF, Cook T, et al. Canine chronic renal disease:
29. Page RC. The pathobiology of periodontal diseases may affect
 Prevalence and types of glomerulonephritis in the dog. Kidney
 systemic diseases: Inversion of a paradigm. Ann Periodontol.
Int. 29:1144-1151, 1986.
3:108, 1998.
 51. Sedor JR, Konieczkowski M, et al. Cytokines, mesangial cell
30. Gioso MA, Shofer F, Barros PS, Harvey CE. Mandible and man-
activation and glomerular injury. Kidney Int. 39(Suppl):65S-70S,
dibular first molar tooth measurements in dogs: Relationship of
1993.
radiographic height to body weight. I Vet Dent. 18(2):65-68,
 52. Fournier D, Mouton C, et al. Porphyromonas gulae sp. Nov., an
2001.
anaerobic, gram-coccobacillus gingival sulcus of various animal
31. Hoffmann TH, Gaengler P. Clinical and pathomorphological
hosts. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 51:1179-1189, 2001.
investigation of spontaneously occurring periodontal disease in
53. Cullinan MP, Ford PJ, Seymore GJ. Periodontal diease and
dogs. J Small Anim Pract. 37:471-479, 1996.
systemic health: Current status. Aust Dent J.54(Supp 1):SS62-S69,
32. Harvey CE, Shofer FS, Laster L. Association of age and body
2009.
weight with periodontal disease in North American Dogs. I Vet
54. Graziani F Cei S, La Ferla F, Vano M, Gabriele M, Tonetti M.
Dent. 11:94-105, 1994.
Effects of non-surgical periodontal therapy on the glomerular fil
33. Hoffman TH, Gaengler P. Epidemiology of periodontal disease in
tration rate of the kidney: An exploratory trial. J Clin Periodontol.
poodles. J Small Animal Pract. 37:309-316, 1996.
37(7):638-643, 2010.
34. Geerts SO, Nys M, De MP, et al. Systemic release of endotoxins
55. O'Grady MR. Acquired valvular heart disease. In: Textbook of
induced by gentle mastication: Association with periodontitis
Veterinary Internal Medicine (Etinger SJ, Feldman EC eds.). 4th
severity. I Periodontol. 73:73, 2002.
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1995, pp. 944-958.
Systemic Manifestations of Periodontal Disease 87
56. Abbott JA. Aquired valvular disease. In: Manual of Canine and
74. Lowe GD, Lee AJ, Rumley A, et al. Blood viscosity and of
Feline Cardiology (Tilley LP ed.). 4th ed. St. Louis: Elsevier, 2008,
cardiovascular events: The Edinburgh artery study. Heamotol.
pp. 110-138.
96:168, 1997.
 57. Glickman LT, Glickman NW, Moore GE, Goldstein GS, Lewis HB.
75. Kweider M, Lowe GD, Murray GD, et al. Dental disease, fibrino-
 Evaluation of the risk of endocarditis and other cardiovascular
 gen and white cell counts: Links with myocardialinfarction? Scott
 events on the basis of the severity of periodontal disease in dogs.
Med J. 38:73-74, 1993.
JAVMA 234(4):486-494, 2009.
76. Herzberg MC, Meyer MW. Dental plaque, platelets, and cardio-
58. MacDonald KA, Chomel BB, Kittleson MD, et al. A prospective
vascular diseases. Ann Periodontol. 3:151, 1998.
study of canine infective endocarditis in northern California
77. Meyer MW, Gong K, Herzberg MC. Streptococcus sanguis-
(1999-2001): Emergence of Bartonella as a prevalent etiologic
pue suapou pue slqe u Su iaed panu
agent. J Vet Intern Med. 18(1):56-64, 2004.
cardiopulmonary consequences. Infect Immun. 66(12):5906-5914,
 59. Calvert CA, Greene CE, Hardie EM. Cardiovascular infections in
1998.
dogs: Epizootiology, clinical manifestations, and prognosis.
78. Noack B, Genco RJ, et al. Periodontal infections contribute to
JAVMA 187:612-616, 1985.
elevated systemic C-reactive protein level. J Periodontol. 72:
60. Takahasi T, Fujisawa T, Yamamoto K, Kijima M, Takahashi T.
1221-1227,2001.
Taxonomic evidence that serovar 7 of Erysipelothrix strains
79. Ridker PM, Rifai N, Rose L, et al. Comparison of C-reactive
isolated from dogs with endocarditis are Erysipelothrix tonsilla-
protein and low density lipoprotein cholesterollevels in the pre
rum. J Vet Med B Infect Dis Vet Public Health. 47(4):311-313,
diction of first cardiac events. New England J Med. 347:1557,
2000.
2002.
61. Haraszthy VI, Zambon JJ, Trevisan M, Zeid M, Genco RJ.
 80. Wu T, Trevisan M, Genco RJ, et al. Examination of the relation
Identification of periodontal pathogens in atheromatous plaques.
between periodontal health status and cardiovascular risk factors:
J Periodontol. 71:1554-1560, 2000.
Serum total and high density lipoprotein cholesterol, C-reactive
 62. Drangsholt MT. A new causal model of dental diseases associated
protein, and plasma fibrinogen. Am J Epidemiol. 151:273, 2000.
with endocarditis. Ann Periodontol. 3:184-196, 1998.
 81. D'Aiuto F, Parkar M, et al. Periodontitis and systemic inflamma-
63. Peddle GD, Drobatz KJ, Harvey CE, Adams A, Sleeper MM.
tion: Control of the local infection in association with a reduction
Association of periodontal disease, oral procedures, and other
in serum inflammatory markers. J Dent Res. 83:156-160, 2004.
clinical findings with bacterial endocarditis in dogs. JAVMA
82. Debowes LJ. C-reactive protien and periodontal disease. Proceed-
234:1, 100-107, 2009.
ings of the 22nd Annual Dental Forum, 2008.
64. Angeli F Verdecchia P, Pellegrino C, et al. Association between
83. Joshipura KJ, Wand HC, Merchant AT, Rimm EB. Periodontal
 periodontal disease and left ventricle mass in essential hyperten-
disease and biomarkers related to cardiovascular disease. J Dent
sion. Hypertension 41(3):488-492, 2003.
Res. 83:151-155, 2004.
65. Franek E, Klamczynska E, Ganowicz E, et al. Association of
84. de Oliveira C, Watt R, and Hamer M. Toothbrushing, inflamma-
chronic periodontitis with left ventricular mass and central blood
tion, and risk of cardiovascular disease: Results from Scottish
pressure in treated patients with essential hypertension. Am J
Health Survey. BMJ DOI:10.1136/bmj.c2451, 2010.
Hypertens. 22(2):203-207, 2008.
85. Brodala N, Merricks EP, et al. Porphyromonas gingivalis bacter-
66. Mercanoglu F, Oflaz H, Oz O, et al. Endothelial dysfunction in 
emia induces coronary and aortic atherosclerosis in normocho-
lesterolermic and hypercholesterolemic pigs. Arteroscler Thromb
initial periodontal therapy. J Periodontol. 75(12):1694-1700,
Vasc Biol. 25:1446-1451, 2005.
2004.
86. Lalla E, Lamster IB.et al. Oral infection with a periodontal patho-
67. Southerland JH, Taylor GW, Moss K, Beck JD, Offenbacher S.
gen accelerates early atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-null
Commonality in chronic inflammatory diseases: Periodontitis,
mice. Arteroscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 23:1405-1411, 2003.
diabetes, and coronary artery disease. Periodontol. 40:130-143,
87. Garcia R. Epidemiologic associations between periodontal
2006.
diseases and respiratory diseases. In: The Periodontal-Systemic
 68. Mattila KJ, Nieminen MS, Valtonen VV, et al. Association bet-
Connection: A State-of-the-Science Symposium, Bethesda MD,
ween dental health and acute myocardial infarction. Br Med J.
April 18-20, 2001.
298:779, 1989.
88. Limeback H. Implications of oral infections on systemic diseases
 69. Loos BG, Craandijk J, Hoek FJ, Wertheim-Van Dillen PM, van der
 in the institutionalized elderly with a special focus on pneumonia.
Velden U. Elevation of systemic markers related to cardiovascular
Ann Periodontol. 3(1):262-275, 1998.
diseases in the peripheral blood of periodontitis patients. J Peri-
89. Hayes C, Sparrow D, Cohen M, et al. The association between
odontol. 71(10):1528-34, 2000.
alveolar bone loss and pulmonary function: The VA Dental
70. Janket S, Baird AE, Chuang S, Jones JA. Meta-analysis of
Longitudinal Study. Ann Periodontol. 3:257, 1998.
periodontal disease and risk of coronary heart disease and stroke.
90. Deo V, Bhongade ML, Ansari S, Chavan RS. Periodontitis as a
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 95:559,
potential risk factor for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
2003.
A retrospective study. Indian J Dent Res. 20(4):466-470, 2009.
 71. Joshipura KJ, Rirum EB, et al. Association of periodontal disease
 91. Scannapieco FA, Papandonatos GD, Dunford RG. Associations
and coronary heart disease. J Dent Res. 75:1631-1636, 1996.
between oral conditions and respiratory disease in a national
72. Geerts SO, Legrand V, Charpentier J, Albert A, Rompen EH.
sample survey population. Ann Periodontol. 3(1):251-256, 1998.
Further evidence of the association between periodontal condi-
 92. Nagatake T, Ahmed K, Oishi K. Prevention of respiratory infec-
tions and coronary artery disease. J Periodontol. 75(9):1274-1280,
tions by povidone-iodine gargle. Dermatology 204 Suppl 1:32-36,
2004.
2002.
 73. Tsakos G, Sabbah W, Hingorani AD. Is periodontal inflammation
 93. Kawana R, Nagasawa S, Endo T, Fukuroi Y, Takahashi Y. Strategy
associated with raised blood pressure? Evidence from a National
of control of nosocomial infections: Application of disinfectants
US survey. J Hypertens. 2010 Aug. 17. [Epub ahead of print.]
such as povidone-iodine. Derrmatology 204 Suppl 1:28-31, 2002.
88   The Progression of Disease
94. Adachi M, Ishihara K, Abe S, Okuda K. Professional oral health
113. Grau AJ, Bruggle F, Ziegler C, et al. Association between acute
care by dental hygienists reduced respiratory infections in
cerebrovasular ischermia and chronic and recurrent infection.
elderly persons requiring nursing care. Int J Dent Hyg. 5(2):
Stroke 28:1724, 1997.
69-74, 2007.
114. Nesbitt MJ, Reynolds MA, Shiau H. Association of periodontitis
95. Adachi M, Ishihara K, Abe S, Okuda K, Ishikawa T. Effect of
and metabolic syndrome in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of
professional oral health care on the elderly living in nursing
Aging. Aging Clin Exp Res. 22(3):238-242, 2010.
homes. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod.
115.Benguigui C, Bongard V, Ruidavets JB, Chamontin B,
94(2):191-195, 2002.
Sixou M, Ferrieres J, Amar J. Metabolic syndrome, insulin
96. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. National
resistance, and periodontitis: A cross-sectional study in a
Nosocormial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System Report, data
middle-aged French population. J Clin Periodontol. 37(7):
summary frorm January 1990-May 1999, issued June 1999. Am J
601-608,2010.
Infect Control 27:520-532, 1999.
116. Nagata T. Relationship between diabetes and periodontal disease.
97. Craven DE, Steger KE, Barber TW. Preventing nosocormial pneu-
Clin Calcium 19(9):1291-1298, 2009.
monia: State of the art and perspectives for the 1990s. Am J Med.
       1   
91:44, 1991.
Periodontal disease as part of the insulin resistance syndrome in
98. Stoutenbeek CP, van Saene HK, Miranda D, et al. The effect of
diabetic patients. J Int Acad Periodontol. 7(1):16-20, 2005.
 oropharangeal decontamination using topical non-absorbable
118. Ekuni D, Tomofuji T, Irie K, et al. Effects of periodontitis on
antibiotics on the incidence of nosocomial respiratory tract in
aortic insulin resistance in an obese rat model. Lab Invest.
multiple trauma patients. J Trauma 27:357, 1987.
90(3):348-359, 2010.
99. Okuda K, Kimizuka R, Abe S, Kato T, Ishihara K. Involverment 
119. Yri-Jarvinen H, Sammalkorphi K, Koivisto VA, et al. Severity,
of periodontopathic anaerobes in aspiration
 pneumonia.
duration, and mechanism of insulin resistance during acute
J Periodontol. 76(11 Suppl): 21542160, 2005.
infections. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.69:317, 1989.
100. Pugin J, Auckenthaler R, Lew DP, Suter PM. Oropharyngeal
120. Grossi SG, Mealey BL, Rose LF Effect of periodontal infection on
decontamination decreases incidence of ventilator-associated
systemic health and well being. In: Periodontics: Medicine,
pneumonia. A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind
Surgery, and Implants (Rose LF, Mealey BL, Genco RJ, Cohen
clinical trial. JAMA 265(20):2704-2710, 1991.
DW eds.). St Louis: Elsevier, 2004.
101. Scannapieco FA, Bush RB, Paju S. Associations between
121. Zadik Y, Bechor R, Galor S, Levin L. Periodontal disease might
 periodontaldisease andrisk for nosocomialbacterial pneumonia
be associated even with impaired fasting glucose. Br Dent J.
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A systematic review.
208(10):E20, 2010.
Ann Periodont. 8:54, 2003.
122. Iacopino AM. Periodontitis and diabetes interrelationships:
102. Craven DE, Steger KA. Nosocomial pneumonia in the intubated
Role of inflammation. Ann Periodontol. 6(1):125-137, 2001.
 patient. New concepts on pathogenesis and prevention. Infect
123. Grossi, S. Clinical considerations in the treatment of a diabetic
Dis Clin North Am. 3(4):843-866, 1989.
 patient with periodontal disease. In: The Periodontal-Systemic
103. Levine SA, Niederrman MS. The impact of tracheal intubation on
Connection: A State-of-the-Science Symposium, Bethesda MD,
host defenses and risks for nosocomial pneumonia. Clin Chest
April 18-20, 2001.
Med. 12(3):523-543, 1991.
124. Taylor GW, Burt BA, Becker MP, et al. Severe periodontitis and
104. Kotani N, Lin CY, Wang JIS. Loss of alveolar macrophages during
risk for poor glycemic control in patients with non-insulin
anesthesia and operation in humans. Anesth Analg. 81(6):
dependent diabetes mellitus. J Periodontol 67:1085, 1996.
1255-1262, 1995.
125. Thorstensson H, Kuylensteirna J, Hugoson A. Medical status
105. Kotani N, Hashimoto H, Sessler DI, et al. Intraoperative modula-
and complications in relation to periodontal disease experience
tion of alveolar macrophage function during isoflurane and
in insulin dependent diabetics. J Clin Periodontol. 23:194,
propofol anesthesia. Anesthesiology 89(5):1125-1132, 1998.
1996.
106. Hall JC, Tarala RA, Hall JL, Mander J. A multivariate analysis of
126. Tsai C, Hayes C, Taylor GW. Glycemic control of type 2 diabetes
the risk of pulmonary complications after laparotomy. Chest
and severe periodontal disease in US adult population.
99(4):923-927, 1991.
Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 30:182-192, 2002.
107. Okuda M, Kaneko Y, Ichinohe T, Ishihara K, Okuda K. Reduction
127. Southerland JH, Taylor GW, Moss K, Beck JD, Offenbacher S.
of potential respiratory pathogens by oral hygienic treatment in
Commonality in chronic inflammatory diseases: Periodontitis,
 patients undergoing endotracheal anesthesia. J Anesth. 17(2):
diabetes, and coronary artery disease. Periodontol. 40:130-143,
84-91, 2003.
2006.
108. Ogata J, Minami K, Miyamoto H, et al. Gargling with povidone-
128. Saremi A, Nelson RG, Tulloch-Reid M, Hanson RL, Sievers ML,
iodine reduces the transport of bacteria during oral intubation.
Taylor GW, et al. Periodontal disease and mortality in type 2
Can J Anaesth. 51(9):932-936, 2004.
diabetes. Diabetes Care 28:27-32, 2005.
109. Syrjanen J, Valtonen VV, Livanainen M, et al. Preceding infection
129. Mine K, Nejat A, Elif U, Faik Murat E. The effect of improved
as an important risk factor for ischemic brain infarction in young
periodontal health on metabolic control in type 2 diabetes
and middle age patients. Br Med J. 296:1156, 1988.
mellitus. J Clin Periodontol. 32:266-272, 2005.
110. Grau AJ, Buggle F, Heindl S, etal. Recent infection as a risk factor
130. Miller LS, Manwell MA, Newbold D, et al. The relationship
for cerebrovascular ischemia. Stroke 26:373, 1995.
between reduction in periodontal inflammation and diabetes
111. Mealey BL. Influence of periodontal infections on systemic
control: A control of 9 cases. J Periodontol. 63:843, 1992.
health. Periodontol 2000 21:197-209, 1999.
131. Skaleric U, Schara R, Medvescek M, Hanlon A, Doherty F, Lessem
112. Syrjanen J, Peltola J, Valtonen V, et al. Dental infections in
J. Periodontal treatment by Arestin and its effects on glycemic
association with cerebral infarction in young and middle-aged
control in type 1 diabetes patients. J Int Acad Periodontol.
men. J Intern Med. 225:197, 1989.
6(4 Suppl):160-165, 2004.
Systemic Manifestations of Periodontal Disease 89
132. Promsudthi A, PimapansriS, DeerochanawongC, Kanchanavasita
153. Stolzenberg-Solomon RZ, Dodd KW, Blaser MJ, Virtamo J,
W. The effect of periodontal therapy on uncontrolled type 2
Taylor PR, Albanes D. Tooth loss, pancreatic cancer, and
diabetes mellitus in older subjects. Oral Disease 1l:293-298,
Helicobacter pylori. Am J Clin Nutr. 78:176-181, 2003.
2005.
154. Michaud DS, Joshipura K, Giovannucci E, Fuchs
CS
133. Stewart JE, Wager KA, Friedlander AH, Zadeh HH. The effect of
 A prospective study of periodontal disease and pancreatic can-
periodontal treatment on glycemic control in patients with type 2
cer in US male health professionals. J Natl Cancer Inst. 99:
diabetes mellitus. J Clin Periodontol. 28:306-310, 2001.
171-175, 2007.
134. Grossi SG, Skrepcinski FB, DeCaro T, et al. Treatment of
155. Hujoel PP, Drangsholt M, Spiekerman C, Weiss NS. An explora
periodontal disease in diabetics reduces glycated hemoglobin.
tion of the periodontitis-cancer association. Ann Epidemiol.
J Periodontol. 68:713, 1997.
13:312-316, 2003.
135. Tervonen T, Knuuttila M. Relation of diabetes control to
156. Michaud DS, Liu Y, Meyer M, Giovannucci E, Joshipura K.
periodontal pocketing and alveolar bone level. Oral Surg Oral
Periodontal disease, tooth loss, and cancer risk in male health
Med Oral Pathol. 61:346-349, 1986.
professionals: A prospective cohort study. Lancet Oncol.
136. American Association of Periodontology. Position
paper:
9(6):550-558, 2008.
Epidemiology of periodontal diseases. J Periodontol. 70(8):
157. Meyer MS, Joshipura K, Giovannucci E, Michaud DS. A review
935-949, 1999.
of the relationship between tooth loss, periodontal disease, and
137. Canpus G, Salem A, Uzzau S, Baldoni E, Tonolo G. Diabetes and
cancer. Cancer Causes Control. 19(9):895-907, 2008.
periodontal disease: A case-control study. J Periodontol. 76(3):
       s   
418-425,2005.
 P. gingivalis in preterm delivery placenta. J Dent Res. 88(6):
138. King GL. The role of inflammatory cytokines in diabetes and its
575-578, 2009.
complications. J Periodontol. 79(8 Suppl):1527-1534, 2008.
159. Belanger M, Reyes L, von Deneen K, Reinhard MK, Progulske-
139. Papapanou PN. World workshop in clinical periodontics.
Fox A, Brown MB. Colonization of maternal and fetal tissues by
Periodontal diseases: Epidemiology. Ann Periodontol. 1:1-36,
 Porphyromonas gingivalis is strain-dependent in a rodent animal
1996.
model. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 199(1):86.e1-7, 2008.
140. Moore PA, Weyant RJ, Mongelluzzo MB, Myers DE, Rossie K,
160. Lin D, Smith MA, Elter J, Champagne C, Downey CL, Beck J,
Guggenheimer J, et al. Type 1 diabetes mellitus and oral health:
Offenbacher S. Porphyromonas gingivalis infection in pregnant
Assessrment of tooth loss and edentulism. J Public Health Dent.
mice is associated with placental dissermination, an increase in
58:135, 1998.
the placental Th1/Th2 cytokine ratio, and fetal growth restriction.
141. Tervonen T, Karjalainen K, Knuuttila M, Huumonen S. Alveolar
Infect Immun. 71(9):5163-5168, 2003.
 iod u I sialgns q i ada un sso aug
161. Jeffcoat MK, Guers NC, Reddy MS, et al. Periodontal infection
567-571, 2000.
and pre-term birth: Results of a prospective study. J Am Dent
142. Taylor GW, Burt BA, Becker MP, Genco RJ, Shlossman M,
Assoc. 132:875, 2002.
Knowler WC, et al. Non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus and
162. Lopez NJ, Srmith PC, Gutiererrez J. Higher risk of preterrm birth
alveolar bone loss progression over 2 years. J Periodontol. 69:
and low birth rate in women with periodontal disease. J Dent
76-83,1998.
Res. 81:58, 2002.
143. Hirsch T, Spielmann M, Zuhaili B, et al. Enhanced susceptibility
163. Offenbacher S, Katz V, Fertik G, et al. Periodontal infection as a
to infections in a diabetic wound healing model. BMC Surg. 8:5,
possible risk factor for preterm low birth weight. J Periodontol.
2008.
67:1103-1113, 1996.
144. Delamaire M, Maugendre D, Moreno M, Le Goff MC, Allannic
164. Lopez NJ, Da Silva I, Ipinza J, Gutierrez J. Periodontal therapy
H, Genetet B. Impaired leucocyte functions in diabetic patients.
reduces the rate of preterm low birth weight in women with
Diabet Med. 14(1):29-34, 1997.
pregnancy-associated gingivitis. I Periodontol. 76:2144-2153, 2005.
145. Schubert S, Heesermann J. [Infections in diabetes mellitus].
165. Lopez NJ, Smith PC, Gutierez J. Periodontal therapy may reduce
Immun Infekt. 23(6):200-204, 1995.
the risk of preterm low birth weight in women with periodontal
146. Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Canine diabetes mellitus. In: Canine
disease: A randomized controlled trial. J Periodontol. 73(8):
and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction. Philadelphia:
911-924, 2002.
Saunders, 2004, pp. 486-538.
166. Mitchell-Lewis D, Engebretson SP, Chen J, Lamster IB, Papapanou
147. Taylor GW. Bidirectional interrelationships between diabetes and
PN. Periodontal infections and pre-term birth: Early findings
periodontal diseases: An epidemiologic perspective.
Ann
[ f ng o man u uaum Aiouu uno jo louoo e uy
Periodontol. 6(1):99-12, 2001.
Sci. 109:34-39, 2001.
148. Grossi SG, Genco RJ. Periodontal disease and diabetes mellitus, a
167. Nibali L, DAiuto F Griffiths G, Patel K, Suvan J, Tonetti MS.
two-way relationship. Ann Periodontol. 3:51-61, 1998.
Severe periodontitis is associated with systemic inflammation
149. Mealey BL, Ocampo GL. Diabetes mellitus and periodontal dis-
and a dysmetabolic status: A case-control study. J Clin
ease. Periodontology 2000 44:127-153, 2007.
Periodontol. 34(11):931-937, 2007.
150. Loe H. Periodontal disease: The sixth complication of diabetes
168. Renvert S, Wirkstrom M, et al. Histological and microbiological
mellitus. Diabetes Care 16:329-334, 1993.
aspects of ligature induced periodontitis in beagle dogs. J Clin
151. Watabe K, Nishi M, Miyake H, Hirata K. Lifestyle and
Periodontol. 23:310-319, 1996.
gastric cancer: A case-control study. Oncol Rep. 5:1191-1194,
169. Moutsopoulos NM, Madianos PN. Low grade inflammation in
1998.
chronic infectious diseases: Paradigm of periodontal infections.
152. Abnet CC, Qiao YL, Mark SD, Dong ZW, Taylor PR, Dawsey SM.
Ann NY Acad Sci. 1088:251-264, 2006.
Prospective study of tooth loss and incident esophageal and
170. Iacopino AM, Cutler CW. Pathophysiological relationships
gastric cancers in China. Cancer Causes Control. 12:847-854,
between periodontitis and systemic disease: Recent concepts
2001.
involving serum lipids. J Periodontol. 71(8):1375-1384, 2000.
90  The Progression of Disease
171. Ebersole JL, Cappelli D, Mott G, Kesavalu L, Holt SC, Singer RE.
176. Avlund K, Schultz-Larsen K, Krustrup U. Effect of inflammation
Systemic manifestations of periodontitis in the non-human
in the periodontium in early old age on mortality at 21-year
primate. J Periodontal Res. 34(7):358-362, 1999.
follow-up. J Am Geriatr Soc. 57(7):1206-1212, 2009.
172. Salvi GE, Brown CE, Fujihashi K, et al. Inflammatory mediators
177. Holm-Pedersen P, Schultz-Larsen K, Christiansen N, Avlund K.
of the terminal dentition in adult and early onset periodontitis.
 Tooth loss and subsequent disability and mortality in old age.
J Periodontal Res. 33:212-225, 1998.
I Am Geriatr Soc. 56(3):429-435, 2008.
173. Correa FO, Goncalves D, Figueredo CM, Bastos AS,
178. Garcia RI, Krall EA, Vokonas PS. Periodontal disease and
Gustafsson A, Orrico SR. Effect of periodontal treatment on
mortality from all causes in the VA dental longitudinal Study.
metabolic control, systemic inflammation and cytokines in
Ann Periodontol. 3:339, 1998.
 patients with type 2 diabetes. J Clin Periodontol. 37(1):53-58,
179. Harvey CE, Emily PP. Periodontal disease. In: Small Animal
2010.
Dentistry. St. Louis: Mosby, 1993, pp. 89-144.
174. Duarte PM, da Rocha M, Sampaio E, et al. Serum levels of
180. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis. In:
cytokines in subjects with generalized chronic and aggressive
Veterinary Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders,
 periodontitis before and after non-surgical periodontal therapy:
1998, pp. 133-166.
A pilot study. J Periodontol. 81(7):1056-1063, 2010.
181. Sculley D, Langley-Evans S.Salivary antioxidants and periodontal
175. Jansson L, Lavstedt S, Frithiof L. Relationship between oral health
disease status. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 2002,
 and mortality rate.J Clin Periodontol. 29:1029, 2002.
137-143.
Unusual forms of periodontal disease
Periodontal abscesses
Periodontal abscesses are localized purulent inflamma-
tion of the periodontal tissues.' There are three distinct
 groups: gingival, periodontal, and pericoronal. These
lesions can be further classified as acute, chronic, or
acute on chronic.?
Etiology
There are numerous causes for gingival and periodontal
abscesses, including foreign body entrapment (e.g--
foxtail) (Figure 8.1), trauma, endodontic perforation,
tooth fracture, and bacterial plaque infection.3-5 However,
the most common cause of gingival and periodontal
-ou st (onooad un u isa ne sassse
Figure 8.1 Intraoral picture of the mandibular right in a dog. The
plete subgingival scaling.? In these cases, the marginal
foreign body (foxtail) (yellow arow) has created a periodontal
gingival area has been cleaned, which allows reattach-
abscess (white arrow).
 ment, while calculus remains apically (Figure 8.2). This
traps the bacteria and their produced gasses, creating
Clinical appearance
the abscess.? Another common cause for periodontal
abscesses is acute exacerbation of existing periodontal
The gingival type of periodontal abscess affects only the
pockets, which is generally seen in cases of untreated
gingiva and typically presents as a localized, acute
moderate to severe periodontal disease.37 Additional
inflammatory lesion. They usually appear as a red,
factors that may predispose patients to a periodontal
smooth, and possibly flocculent swelling (Figure 8.3).6
abscess include more significant infection, lack of
The periodontal type is an extension of a periodontal
spontaneous drainage, a weakened or suppressed immune
pocket and involves the periodontal ligament and alve-
system, systemic antimicrobial therapy,? periodontal
olar bone that may result in their destruction.6
surgery, and diabetes mellitus. In fact, uncontrolled
Acute periodontal abscesses of any type are typically
diabetes mellitus has been found to be a significant con-
painful, although this may not be demonstrated by
tributor to periodontal abscess formation in humans. 10
veterinary patients. They usually appear as red, edema-
Pericoronal abscesses result from inflammation of the
tous swellings of the gingival tissues, with possible pain
soft tissue operculum during eruption. This generally
occurs from trauma or food impaction but can be caused
 present, which is usually coronal to the mucogingival
by bacterial plaque.6
line (Figure 8.4). In addition, the tooth is often mobile
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
91
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.2 (a and b) Intraoral dental pictures of patients with subgingival calculus remaining after dental cleanings at general practices. Note
how clean the crowns are, but when the gingiva is reflected, there is significant subgingival calculus (blue arrows). This condition can lead to
thedevelopmentofperiodontal abscesses.
(b)
(a)
Figure 8.3 Gingival abscesses in two canine patients. Note the red, flocculent swelling on the right maxillary fourth premolar (108) (a)
and left maxillary canine (204) (b). These were confirmed as gingival abscesses.
(a)
(b)
(moe ang) (sot) jelowand isn Aexew sbu aui uo pe buuieip e ym ssasge (eiuoponad e jo anpid jeoeul (e) t'g anby
(b) Intraoral picture of a cat with a large fistula with significant purulent discharge over the right mandibular first molar (409).
Unusual Forms of Periodontal Disease   93
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.5 (a) Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary first premolar (205) in a dog with a periodontal abscess in which the tooth 
is slightly elevated from the alveolus (yellow arrow). The dental radiograph (b) confirms the alveolar bone loss (yellow arrow) and
au aui uo ssassge jeiuonoad e ym bon e yal neingiu aun jo ydeoipe euap jeoul () (moe pa) r jeuoo ao
mandibular first premolar. Note the significant alveolar bone loss (blue arrow) and the tooth is slightly higher than the second pre-
molar (yellow arrow).
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.6 (a) Intraoral dental picture of a patient with a periodontal abscess of the right mandibular first molar (409) that has fistulated
(blue arrow). (b) Coresponding dental radiograph revealing severe alveolar bone loss (yellow arrows). Note that the second molar (410)
also has a class ll perio-endo lesion (red arrow).
and may be elevated from the alveolus (Figure 8.5).6
Systemic signs of infection (fever, malaise, regional
Diagnosis
lymphadenopathy)  may  also occur.21.11  Chronic
 The main differential diagnosis for a periodontal abscess
periodontal abscesses form after the acute infection has
is an abscess of endodontic origin. There are several
      
clinical signs that help differentiate these two condi-
infection may be controlled in a number of ways,
 tions. First, periodontal abscesses are associated with a
including drainage, immune reaction of the host, or
periodontal pocket, whereas endodontic abscesses are
 professional therapy.* Chronic abscesses are generally
generally associated with a tooth that has signs of end-
asymptomatic'2 but may cause oral pain, which could
odontic compromise. This compromise can present as a
stimulate a bruxism-type behavior.? Chronic lesions may
also have a fistulous tract associated with a deep
staining. Furthermore, periodontal abscesses typically
periodontal pocket (Figure 8.6).6 Acute on chronic cases
fistulate coronal to the mucogingival junction (see
develop due to an acute exacerbation of a chronic state.
Figure 8.4), whereas endodontic abscesses are usually
 The clinical appearance of a pericoronal abscess is gin-
apical to this point (Figure 8.7).6 Radiographically,
gival swelling/inflammation associated with the crown
 periodontal abscesses are often associated with angular
of an erupting tooth.o
bone loss (Figure 8.8), whereas endodontic abscesses are
94  The Progression of Disease
Figure 8.7 Intraoral picture of a patient with a fistulation apical
Figure 8.9 Intraoral dental radiograph of the maxillary left fourth
to the mucogingival junction of the left maxillary fourth premolar
 premolar (208) in a dog revealing periapical rarefaction (blue
(208) (yellow arrow). This is the classic appearance of an abscess
arrow). This indicates that an abscess in this area is associated
of endodontic origin.
with endodontic as opposed to periodontal disease.
and the second step is managing the chronic condition.
The goals of the acute phase are to alleviate the pain,
establish drainage, and control the spread of infection.
Drainage can be established either through the
periodontal pocket or an external incision. If the abscess
is small and uncomplicated, drainage can be established
by gentle separation of the periodontal ligament and
gentle digital pressure. Standard scaling/root planing
(SRP) can then be performed closed. Larger lesions
require a surgical approach, often through an external
 incision, which in human dentistry is delayed until the
 acute symptoms subside. These cases should also be
treated with broad spectrum antibiotics and analgesics.
 If the abscess is accompanied by significant periodontal
Figure 8.8 Intraoral dental radiograph of the left mandibular first
disease, extraction of the tooth is likely the best form of
molar (309) in a dog with advanced periodontal (angular) alveolar
therapy. The chronic form is managed as any chronic
bone loss (blue arrows). This indicates that an abscess in this area
 periodontal pocket, with appropriate professional care
is of periodontal as opposed to endodontic origin.
diagnosed by the presence of periapical rarefaction
(Figure 8.9).25.13 Note that the periapical rarefaction is
Box 8.1 Key points
 the result of a chronic apical granuloma, not the acute
 abscess. (See chapter 9 for a discussion of radiography in
 Gingival or periodontal abscesses are typically initiated by
 periodontal disease.)
dhronic periodontal disease but can be caused by a foreign
body.
Treatment
● Gingival or periodontal abscesses most often present after
suboptimal scaling.
 Gingival abscesses are treated by removal of the inciting
●It is important to differentiate periodontal abscesses from
cause (foreign body or subgingival calculus). Subgingival
calculus and infection are removed by thorough scaling
endodontic disease
 Effective therapy must establish drainage and treat the
and root planing. If this does not resolve the infection,
periodontal disease.
gingival surgery may be indicated.
 Extraction of the diseased tooth is the most definitive form
The treatment of periodontal abscesses is a two-step
of therapy.
 process. The first step is controlling the acute infection
Unusual Forms of Periodontal Disease
95
(prophylaxis, SRP, periodontal surgery) combined with
stomatitis, but it has not been proven to cause chronic
meticulous homecare or extraction of the offending
caudal stomatitis.5?4 Based on these studies, it is felt that
tooth. For all types of oral abscesses, antibiotic therapy
calicivirus is a factor in the disease process in some cases,
alone is insufficient.
but not the true cause.
 Pericoronal abscesses are drained by gently lifting the
FeLV and FIV may also play a role in the development
soft tissue operculum and debriding/lavaging the area. In
of caudal stomatitis. This is thought to be associated with
cases where this is insufficient for therapy, the operculum
the lower levels of salivary IgA seen in oral inflammatory
can be excised (operculectomy) or the tooth extracted.
diseases, as FIV is known to decrease serum IgA levels.5.25
However, since the majority of cats with caudal stomatitis
Feline caudal stomatitis (previously called
test negative for these viruses and there is no difference in
gingivostomatitis)
the level of FIV infection between cats affected with this
condition and normal cats,2 these viruses are clearly not
This is a very misunderstood oral inflammatory disease
the cause.?7 However, it has been anecdotally noted by this
 process in felines. Recently, the nomenclature was
author, as well as others, that retrovirus-positive patients
sad om oi ssad aseas a app o pa
 tend to have more severe inflammation.14
(1 and 2). The two types are differentiated by the involve-
Bartonella henselae infection has been suggested as a
ment of the back of the oral cavity/oropharyngeal area.
possible eitiology partly due to the fact that stomatitis is
Type 1 is defined as inflammation present anywhere in
one of its clinical signs.'" However, this theory has been
the mouth other than the caudal area. If the caudal area
recently disproven,21.2 and this author has not found
of the oral cavity is involved (with or without inflamma-
testing or treatment for this disease process to be of
tion to the rest of the oral mucosa), it is considered type
benefit in cases of caudal stomatitis.
 2 or caudal stomatitis.14 This section will focus on type 2
Bacteria have long been associated with caudal
 as it is much more challenging to treat.
stomatitis and recently Pasteurella multocida has been
Caudal stomatitis is a severe inflammatory reaction of
found in greater numbers in cats with this condition
the oral tissues of cats. It is a clinical diagnosis of inflamma-
 s n 'sn s'sd ru qm n 
tion and proliferation of the gingiva and oral mucosa.15
theorized that Pasteurella may represent an etiologic
Specifically, it is inflammation associated with the caudal
agent. However, this bacteria is also quite common in the
mouth (mucocitis),'6 which is the delineating factor
feline oral cavity and is increased in most oral diseases.
between caudal stomatitis and periodontal disease.515
Therefore, a link cannot be established at this time. Finally,
 Caudal mucocitis is defined as inflammation of mucosa of 
it has been suggested that cats with caudal stomatitis have
the caudal oral cavity, bordered medially by the palatoglos-
an exaggerated inflammatory response to generalized
sal folds and fauces, dorsally by the hard and soft palate,
bacterial plaque.5.2729 This theory has been suggested
and rostrally by alveolar and buccal mucosa. The fauces are
 mainly because in many cases ofchronicoralinflammatory
the archway between pharyngeal and oral cavities, formed
disease, no other etiology has been identified. Therefore,
by the tongue, anterior tonsillar pillars, and the soft palate.17
bacteria should be viewed as a contributor rather than a
causative agent of disease. In short, this caudal stomatitis
Etiology
does not seem to be a distinct disease entity. Rather, it
The etiology of this disease process is currently
appears to be an excessive, inflammatory immune
unknown.14 Multiple etiologies may exist that, either sin-
response to a heretofore unknown agent.14.27
gularly or combined, create the inflammation.4 Possible
Clinical signs
causative agents include an inflammatory response to
plaque bacteria, viruses, Bartonella henselae infection, or
In cases of caudal stomatitis, the history typically
altered immune status (FeLV or FIV).5.1.19
includes halitosis, dysphagia, pawing at the mouth,
Upper respiratory viruses such as feline calicivirus
reluctance to eat, anorexia (complete or partial), cry-
(FCV) and herpes virus-1 have commonly been linked
ing out in pain when eating or yawning, weight loss,
to caudal stomatitis. This is due to several factors,
decreased grooming (which results in an unkempt
including the fact that cats with chronic caudal stomatitis
appearance) (Figure 8.10), and drooling (pseudoptyalism)
are more likely to be currently shedding virus than cats
(Figure 8.11),.2730.3
without this oral inflammation.' However, herpes virus
 The affected gingiva and oral mucosa have varying
has been shown in several studies to be an unlikely player
amounts of inflammation, proliferation, and ulceration
in this disease process,21z2 whereas calicivirus (all bio-
ooa pe en o ai aq o pn sm (esad
blestone architecture.? The inflammation is often bilater-
agent.?1 Finally, FCV is reported to cause acute caudal
ally symmetrical (Figure 8.13) with friable oral tissues that
96  The Progression of Disease
(a)
Figure 8.10 Unkempt appearance of a feline patient due to lack
of self-grooming. Patients with caudal stomatitis often stop
(b)
 grooming due to oral pain.
Figure 8.12 (a and b) Intraoral pictures of two feline patients with
severe stomatitis. Note the severe inflammation of the attached
Figure 8.11 Picture of the mandible of a cat with severe caudal
gingiva as well as the associated buccal mucosa (blue arrows).
stomatitis. The purulent psuedoptalism is a classic outward clinical
Note that in Figure 8.12a) there is minimal dental calculus.
sign of caudal stomatitis.
bleed easily (Figure 8.14).3 Gingivostomatitis and
     n  s
inflammation. The clinical sign that differentiates these two
conditions is the presence of caudal inflammation (distal to
the teeth) in cases of caudal stomatitis (Figure 8.15),5.15.30
This presentation was previously called “faucitis" but is
now known as caudal mucositis. In contrast, in cases of
typical periodontal disease the inflammation is associated
with the gingiva surounding the teeth and does not
extend distally to any significant effect (Figure 8.16).
Diagnostics
Caudal stomatitis is a clinical syndrome and does not
Figure 8.13 Intraoral picture of a feline patient with significant 
made by visual inspection of the oral cavity.'5 Diagnostic
bilateral caudal mucositis.
Unusual Forms of Periodontal Disease
I6
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.14 (a and b) Intraoral pictures of the maxillary left in two cats with severe caudal stomatitis. These patients have severe oral
inflammation and spontaneoushemorrhage.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 8.15 (a-c) Caudal mucositis in three feline patients. This is suggestive of caudal stomatitis as opposed to periodontal disease.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.16 (a and b) Intraoral pictures of two patients with significant gingival/periodontal inflammation but no caudal inflammation.
This is indicative of periodontal disease as opposed to caudal stomatitis.
98  The Progression of Disease
tests to further define the disease should minimally
homecare and routine professional cleanings to keep
include dental radiographs (to evaluate for the presence 
inflammation at bay. However, since the majority of
of retained root tips, periodontal or endodontic disease,
patients have widespread inflammation that makes
or bony changes suggestive of neoplasia), a minimum
homecare challenging, the most successful long-term
data base (CBC, chemistry panel, t4, U/A) to evaluate
 treatment for cats with chronic gingivostomatitis is the
for underlying and/or concurrent systemic health prob-
COMPLETE extraction of all premolars and molars as
lems, and evaluation of FeLV/FIV status.143o The only
well as careful smoothing of the alveolar bone.15.3 An
common biochemical abnormality is a polyclonal
additional step taken by many veterinary dentists is to
gammopathy.27
 perform careful removal of all periodontal ligament
-edos no pns pue ui aq pinous ado v
remnants (with a curette or coarse diamond bur),
 thology, especialy if the inflammation is asymmetrical
which has anecdotally improved success rates. The
reasoning behind extraction therapy is to remove
 plaque retentive surfaces and therefore virtually elimi-
dominance of plasma cells with some lymphocytes.32
 nate the periodontopathogens from the area, thus
Serum testing for B. henselae may also be considered.
decreasing inflammation. Extraction of the canine and
incisor teeth is indicated when the inflammation
Management
extends to include the gingiva surrounding them
The goal of therapy for this disease proces is to com-
(which is the majority of cases),529 Therefore, this
pletely eradicate the oral inflammation.27 However,
author will typically perform FULL mouth extractions
maintaining a state of decreased inflammation is some-
in cases of significant oral inflammation, while some
times the best that can be achieved. Several treatments
veterinary dentists prefer to leave the canines and inci-
have been suggested, including extraction of all premo-
sors if at all possible. Postoperative dental radiographs
lars and molars, full mouth extraction, laser treatment to
must be exposed to document complete extraction of
remove inflammatory tissue, chronic immune-suppressive
all tooth roots.529.30
treatment (ie., cyclosporine, corticosteroids, Imuran),
The vast majority of cats have an excellent response to
anti-inflammatory treatment (corticosteroids or NSAIDs),
 this treatment, requiring no chronic medical treatment
interferon, and antibiotics.
(Figure 8.17)5.30.33 If the canines and incisors are not
extracted, owners must provide meticulous homecare
Surgical therapy
for these teeth. Antibiotic administration (14days)
Controlling inflammation is the key to management of
following extractions is recommended to help resolve
this disease process. Therefore, any tooth affected with
the oral infection, and topical rinses such as 0.12%
inflammation from any cause (periodontal, end-
chlorhexidine may also be beneficial during healing."
odontic, tooth resorption, or alveolar mucocitis) should
Finally, it has been shown that feeding a recovery food
be extracted.'4 Any remaining teeth must receive strict
 postoperative may be beneficial.34
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.17 Pictures of two feline patients who have received full (a) and caudal (b) mouth extractions. Note the complete resolution of
inflammation in both cases.
Unusual Forms of Periodontal Disease
99
Regardless of the quality of the extractions, some cats
Laser therapy
have only partial improvement and require long-term
The use of surgical lasers to control inflammation associ-
medical management, albeit at much lower doses than
ated with caudal stomatitis has been anecdotally reported
prior to surgery. If extraction therapy does not prove to
for years. However, there are no current published reports
be effective, it is usually due to incomplete extractions
showing laser ablation of the inflamed gingiva has
(i.e., leaving roots behind), as it is essential to remove all
significant beneficial results. One recent case report
tooth roots (Figures 8.18 and 8.19).53? In rare cases,
 revealed improvement affer surgical laser therapy.35
 properly performed extractions may have only a minimal
However, the improvement did not occur following sev-
therapeutic effect, and in these cases the patients will
eral laser treatments; resolution occurred only after full
require long-term medical management. Fortunately,
mouth extractions were eventually performed concurrent
this is the minority of patients.? The patients who
to laser ablation. Therefore, laser therapy alone did not
have the least response to extraction therapy are typi-
have an obvious benefit. Furthermore, the patient appeared
cally those that have had long-standing, chronic inflam-
 to have a significant (although transitory) negative
 mation that has been treated with repeated high doses of
response (pain) after the laser treatments. Finally, this
glucocorticoids.53 It is important to note that generally,.
 author has treated numerous patients where laser therapy
the earlier the teeth are extracted the better the outcome.
has been used elsewhere with no response. Consequently,
it is not currently a recommended form of therapy.
Medical therapy
In cases where owners are reluctant to have multiple
extractions performed early in the course of treatment,
rial load and inflammation. The majority of the products
utilized are oral medications, which require daily to
twice daily administration. This is difficult to achieve in
cats in general, and the oral pain and inflammation only
serves to complicate matters. Finally, many of the prod-
ucts have significant side effects (which will be discussed
in more detail below). Moreover, clients should be
 informed that medical therapy is almost invariably a life-
Figure 8.18 Recheck picture of the mandibular left of a cat who had
long process with numerous disadvanfages. In addition,
received "full mouth extractions" at a practice without dental radi-
there are no medical protocols that have been shown to
ology. Note the lack of teeth but continued severe oral inflammation.
be completely effective; rather they just temporarily
reduce the clinical signs.2" Therefore, clients should be
counseled that delaying extraction therapy often results
 in a decreased response, possibly yet again necessitating
long-term medical therapy.
 Prior to the initiation of medical therapy, a complete
 dental prophylaxis should be performed to decrease the
 amount of oral bacteria and inflammation. At this time,
any diseased teeth and/or retained roots should be
extracted (as above).30
Antibiotics
Systemic antibiotics may result in some improvement in
 the amount of oral inflammation. However, this is gener-
ally temporary at best, and most patients will relapse
Figure 8.19 Intraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular left of
even during the course of antibiotic therapy.5.29
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid,^ clindamycin, metronida-
the patient in 8.18 confirming the retained roots (red arrows)
Extraction of these retained roots (as well as many others) resulted
zole, and azithromycinF are the best antibiotic choices for
in complete resolution of inflammation with retained roots (red
the oral cavity.** Rinsing with a 0.12% chlorhexidine glu-
 arrows) from a previous full mouth extraction surgery.
conate solution? may also be beneficial in some cases.5
100
  The Progression of Disease
Anti-inflammatories
reports of fatal opportunistic infections associated the
 Corticosteroids are by far the most commonly used and
use of cyclosporine.39-41
The bioavailability of the three available forms of
effective drugs for immune modulation.  Steroid
cyclosporine is quite variable, and therefore dosing
administration results in clinical improvement far more
 depends on which form is used.? Recently, a veterinary
often than antibiotic therapy. In addition, glucocorti-
coids are often used concurrently with antibiotics. Long-
product has been released for atopy and may be of use
term use of corticosteroids may have detrimental effects
in cats. Serum cyclosporine levels should be evaluated
such as the induction of diabetes mellitus and opportu-
within 24-48 hours of beginning therapy and then mon-
nistic infections.2936 Use the lowest effective dose and
itored weekly for a month, and monthly thereafter, to
 maintain concentrations within the therapeutic range
monitor biochemical values on a regular basis. Injectable
and avoid toxic levels. The recommended range varies
treatment (methylprednisone 10-20 mg SC) is usually
recommended initially, due to the degree of oral pain.5.27
between 250 and 1,000 ng/ml.42 In addition to moni-
toring cyclosporine levels, standard biochemical tests
This typically results in clinical improvement within
24-48 hours and lasts for 3-6weeks. However, these
should be routinely performed as surveillance for delete-
intervals tend to progressively shorten the longer the
rious side effects.29
injections are continued, until in some cases no response
occurs! For these many reasons, chronic corticosteroid
Feline interferon
therapy should only be performed as a last resort when an.
There is currently significant interest in the use of feline
owner will not allow extractions.14
 interferon43.G for caudal stomatitis. It is reported to not
Another possible option for  anti-inflammatory
only provide an antiviral effect but to also provide an
therapy is NSAIDs. These medications are best used on
immunomodulatory effect and bring about a return to
a short-term basis to reduce the inflammation and
normal local immune response. Several studies have
improve the patient's situation while preparing for
shown efficacy in resistant cases,44-46 but as of yet, no
extraction surgery. The long-term use of NSAIDs to
evidence exists to show that it works as a primary
control the inflammation is a high-risk choice for cats. If
 treatment. There are several options for therapy
this treatment plan is selected, the patient must have
including intralesional injection and/or oral versus
good renal function prior to initiating therapy, remain
injectable systemic treatment.14.z The preferred method
well hydrated, and have routine biochemical testing
at this point is to inject 5 MU intralesional (often at the
(including urinalysis) to ensure the kidneys are not being
time of extractions) and then follow this up with the
compromised. Meloxicam? is approved in cats for a one-
remainder of the vial (5 MU) diluted into 100 cc of
time postop injection.37 If used chronically, it is best to
sterile saline and administered per os by the owner at a
 prescribe the lowest possible dose on an every other to
dose of 1 ml once daily for 100 days." Note that this
every third day schedule.37 It is important to discuss the
 product in not currently available in the United States.
risks in detail with the clients and obtain consent for the
off-label use of these medications. This author does not
Other medications
recommend long-term NSAID use in cats, due to the
 degree of risk and the potentially fatal effects that can
Lactoferrin (topically @ 40 mg/kg),474 gold salts (1-2mg
occur.
weekly for 8weeks and then monthly), levamisole
(2-5 mg/kg PO 3 times weekly),27 doxycycline (2 mg/kg
BID, with decreasing doses if effective), and coenzyme
Cyclosporine
Q10 (30-60 mg daily) have also been used with occa-
Cyclosporine A has been purported as an immunosup-
sional success. However, none of these therapies are rec-
 pressive drug for cats with caudal stomatitis. Some have
 ommended at this time.
promoted it as an alternative to extractions in order to
avoid the use of glucocorticoids. However, this author
Conclusions
prefers to withhold its use to those cases where addi-
 fional medical management is necessary postextraction.
 It must be noted that even intense efforts at plaque con-
 There is scant information that supports its use other
 trol in addition to medical therapy (antibiotics and
than one unpublished veterinary study, which showed
anti-inflammatories)  rarely  result  in  an  acceptable
efficacy in cases refractory to extractions.3 However, it 
response.? Therefore, at the time of this writing, surgical
may provide an alternative to long-term steroid therapy.
extraction therapy is the preferred treatment and should
If must be used with caution in cats with hepatic or
be performed as soon as possible. Medical therapy
renal disease. In addition, it must be noted that there are
should be reserved for those cases where clients will not
Unusual Forms of Periodontal Disease   101
Box 8.2 Key points
Caudal stomatitis is defined as significant inflammation to
the oral mucosa typically centered on the caudal orophar-
ynx.
 Caudal stomatitis is a clinical diagnosis.
 Surgical therapy with partial to full mouth extractions is
the treatment of choice for this condition.
 Medical therapy requires lifelong management, with
numerous deleterious side effects, and is often frustrating.
allow (or cannot afford) extraction therapy. This author's
 approach with resistant cases (where retained roots are
ruled out) is as follows: (1) feline interferon, (2) cyclo-
sporine, (3) corticosteroids.
Figure 8.20 Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a 9-month-
old feline patient with severe hyperplastic gingivitis. Note the lack
Feline juvenile (puberty) gingivitis/periodontitis
of dental calculus and caudal mucositis. This is the classic appear-
ance of juvenile gingivitis.
Definition
 Juvenile periodontal disease is inflammation that occurs
soon after permanent tooth eruption.?7 This syndrome
can be described in two categories, feline hyperplastic
gingivitis (where the inflammation is confined to the
gingiva), and juvenile onset periodontitis.4
Etiology
As of this writing, the etiology of this condition is
unknown. However, in humans there is a period of
increased susceptibility to gingivitis during the pubertal
toward feline juvenile onset periodontitis has been
 reported in Siamese, Somali, and Maine Coon cats.27
Clinical features
Hyperplastic gingivitis appears as gingival enlargement
and significant inflammation (Figure 8.20), which is con-
fined to the gingiva and begins during the eruptive period
of the permanent dentition. Bleeding during mastication
and on oral exam is a common finding.* while occasion-
Figure 8.21 Intraoral picture of the left of the patient in
ally seen in dogs, this condition has a much higher inci-
Figure 8.20. Note the lack of dental calculus and caudal mucositis.
  u e  si n s  
This is the classic appearance of juvenile gingivitis, not
the patient, and halitosis is a common complaint. If lefft
"stomatitis."
 untreated, it typically proceeds quickly to periodontal dis-
ease, which may result in early exfoliation of the teeth.49
In contrast, juvenile periodontitis does not involve
This disease is commonly mistaken for caudal stomatitis.
enlargement of the gingiva and usually leads to the rapid
The distinguishing clinical sign is the lack of caudal inflam-
proliferation of plaque and calculus and subsequent
mation in this disease process (Figure 8.21).
inflammation (Figure 8.22). This in turn results in
As the patient matures, susceptibility appears to sub-
significant early bone loss, periodontal pocket formation,
side at approximately 2 years of age," which is the same
and furcation exposure (Figure 8.23).?” This is generally
type of pattern followed in the human disease.5" Ergo, if
the worst in and around the mandibular first molars
this process is treated aggressively early on, the patient
(Figure 8.24). Treatment and effective management of
 may enjoy normal periodontal health in the future.
these cases is often exceedingly difficult.49
102
2 The Progression of Disease
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.22 Intraoral dental pictures of the maxillary incisors (a) and mandibular right (b) of two different juvenile feline patients with
a]
Figure 8.23 ntraoral dental radiograph of the mandibular right
of a young feline patient with severe periodontal loss resulting in 
(b)
class Ill furcation exposure of the third premolar (407) and first 
molar (409) (yellow arrows).
Diagnostics
Histopathology (via incisional biopsy) should be consid-
 ered to rule out other causes of gingival inflammation.49
n s s  as e a
but may be of value in non-responsive cases. Dental
radiographs should be performed to evaluate the quality
 of the alveolar bone and also for early tooth resorption.
 Finally, Bartonella testing may be beneficial in some
cases, especially in patients who do not respond to tradi-
tional management practices.
Figure 8.24 (a) Intraoral dental picture of the mandibular left of
Management
a feline patient with severe juvenile periodontitis. The entire
caudal arcade is involved, but inflammation is worst over the
In the management of both of these conditions, early
mandibular first molar. (b) Corresponding intraoral dental radio-
(9months of age) and frequent (q 6-9months) dental
graph confirming the severe alveolar loss, which is worst around 
 prophylaxis (even if only minimal plaque is present)
the first molar (309) (yellow arrow).
Unusual Forms of Periodontal Disease   103
along with strict homecare is critical to decrease inflam-
7. Becker W, Berg L, Becker BE. The long terrm evaluation of
periodontal treatment and maintenance in 95 patients. Int J Peri-
as it is the gold standard of plaque control. Other
odontics Restorative Dent. 4(2):54-71, 1984.
8. Epstein S, Scopp IW. Antibiotics and the intraoral abscess. J Peri-
homecare alternatives include chlorhexadine rinses as
odontol. 48(4):236-238, 1977.
well as plaque control diets' and treats. Finally, this
9. Topoll H, Lange D, Muller R. Multiple periodontal abscesses after
author has had success with a tasteless, commercially
systemic antibiotic therapy. J Clin Periodontol. 17(4):268-272,
 available zinc ascorbate gel. In cases where gingival
1990.
hyperplasia is present, early gingivectomy is recom-
10. Meng HX. Periodontal abscess. Ann Periodontol. 4:79-83, 1999.
11. Herrera D, Roldan S, Gonzalez I, Sanz M. The periodontalabscess
mended to remove psedopockets, decrease inflamma-
(I). Clinical and microbiological findings. J Clin Periodontol.
tion, and facilitate plaque control (both professional and
27(6):387-394, 2000.
homecare).27 Finally, extraction of any significantly
12. Dahlén G. Microbiology and treatment of dental abscesses and
diseased teeth is warranted to decrease the degree of
inflammation.49
2002.
13. Mulligan TM, Aller MS, Williams CE. Interpretation of periodontal
disease In: Atlas ofCanine and Feline Dental Radiography. Tren-
ton, NJ: Veterinary Learning Systems, 1998, pp. 104-123.
Box 8.3 Key points
14. Camy G, Fahrenkrug P, Gracis M, et al. Proposed guidelines
on the management of feline chronic gingivostomatitis (FCGS)
 Juvenile periodontal disease involves severe periodontal
syndrome: A consensus statement, September 2010.
inflammation that occurs during and immediately after
15. Lyon KE Gingivostomatitis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract. 35(4):891-911, 2005.
eruption of the permanent dentition.
16. AVDC Accepted Nomenclature. WWW AVDC.org, accessed Jan.
 Treatment and management of this condition includes early
1, 2011.
(and regular) professional plaque control (dental prophy-
17. Zwemer TJ. In: Boucher's Clinical Dental Terminology: A Glos-
laxis), gingivectomy (if indicated), and strict homecare.
sary of Accepted Terms in Disciplines of Dentistry. Philadelphia:
 With proper therapy, susceptibility may subside at about
Mosby, 1993, p. 116.
2 years of age.
18. Lommer MJ, Verstraete FJM. Concurrent oral shedding of feline
calicivirus and feline herpesvirus 1 in cats with chronic gingivo-
stomatitis. OralMicrobiologyand Immunology 18:131-134, 2003.
19. Hardy WD, Zuckerman E, Corbishley J. Serological evidence that
Notes
Bartonella cause gingivitis and stomatitis in cats. In Proceedings,
16th Annual Veterinary Dental Forurm, October 3-6, 2002,
A. Clavamox, Pfizer Animal Health.
 Antirobe, Pfizer Animal Health.
pp. 79-82.
B.
C. Zithromax, Pfizer Animal Health.
20. Thompson RR, Wilcox GE, Clark WT, Jansen KL. Association of
calicivirus infection with chronic gingivitis and pharyngitis in
 D. CET Oral Hygiene Rinse, Virbac Animal Health.
cats. J Small Anim Pract. 25(4):207-210, 1984.
E.
 Metacam, Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica, Inc.
E. Atopica, Novartis Animal Health, Inc.
21. Dowers KL, Hawley JR, Brewer MM, Morris AK, Radecki SV,
Vibragen, Virbac Animal Health.
Lappin MR. Association of Bartonella species, feline calicivirus,
G.
H. CET Oral Hygiene Rinse, Virbac Animal Health.
and feline herpesvirus 1 infection with gingivostomatitis in cats.
J Feline Med Surg. 12(4):314-321, 2010.
1.
t/d canine and feline, Hill's Pet Nutrition.
 J. Maxiguard oral cleansing gel, Addisons biologics.
22. Lee M, Bosward KL, Norris IM. Immunohistological evaluation of
feline herpesvirus-1 infection in feline eosinophilic dermatoses or
stomatitis. J Feline Med Surg. 12(2):72-79, 2010.
References
23. Poulet H, Brunet S, Soulier M, Leroy V, Goutebroze S, Chappuis G.
Comparison between acute oral/respiratory and chronic stomatitis/
1. Melnick PR, Takei HH. Treatrment of periodontal abscess. In:
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
and cross-neutralisation studies. Arch Virol. 145(2):243-261, 2000.
Pp. 714-721.
24. Reubel GH, Hoffmann DE, Pederson NC. Acute and chronic fau-
 2. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
citis of domestic cats: A feline calicivirus-induced disease. Vet
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 22(6):1347-1360, 1992.
Pp.186-231.
25. Harley R, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Day MJ. Determination of salivary
3. Carranza FA, Carmago PM. The periodontal pocket. In:
and serum immunoglobulin concentrations in the cat. Vet Immu-
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
nol Immunopath. 65:99-112, 1998.
Pp. 434-451.
26. Quimby JM, Elston T, Hawley J, Brewer M, Miller A, Lappin MR.
4. Meng HX. Periodontal abscess. Ann Periodontol. 4:79-83, 1999.
Evaluation of the association of Bartonella species, feline herpes-
 5. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
virus 1, feline calicivirus, feline leukemia virus and feline immu-
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niermiec BA
nodeficiency virus with chronic feline gingivostomatitis. J Feline
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
Med Surg. 10(1):66-72, 2008.
6. Melnick PR, Takei HH. Treatment of periodontal abscess. In:
27. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Domestic feline oral and dental disease.
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
In: Veterinary Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia:
Pp. 714-721.
Lippincott-Raven, 1997, pp. 482-517.
104  The Progression of Disease
28. Dolieslager SM, Riggio MP, Lennon A, Lappin DF, Johnston N,
40. Beatty J, Barra V. Acute toxoplasmosis in two cats on cyclosporine
Taylor D, Bennett D. Identification of bacteria associated with
therapy. Aust Vet J. 81(6):339, 2003.
feline chronic gingivostomatitis using culture-dependent and
41. Davis E. Systemic cyclosporine administration and life threaten-
culture-independent methods. Vet Microbiol. Aug 17, 2010.
ing infections. An emerging problem in veterinary medicine.
29. Bellows J. Treatment of oropharyngeal inflammation. In: Feline
Proceedings of the American Veterinary Dental Forum, 2007.
Dentistry: Oral Assessment, Treatment, and Preventative Care.
42.1
 Plumb DC. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook. 5th ed. Ames,
Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 242-268, 2010.
IA: Blackwell, 2005.
30. Niemiec BA. Oral pathology. Top Companion Anim Med.
43.
Southerden P, Gorrel C. Treatment of a case of refractory feline
23(2):59-71, 2008.
chronic gingivostomatitis with recombinant interferon omega.
31. Niemiec BA. Ptyalisrm. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medi-
J Small Anim Pract. 48(2):104-106, 2007.
cine (Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC eds.). 7th ed. New York: Elsevier,
 44. Hennet P, Camay G. Comparitive efficacy of a recombinant feline
2012.
interferonomega in refractory cases of calici-virus positive cats
32. Frost P, Williams CA. Feline dental disease. Vet Clin North Am
with caudal stomatitis: A randomized multicentric, controlled,
Small Anim Pract. 16:851-873, 1986.
double blind study in 39 cats. Proceedings European Congress of
33. Hennet P. Chronic gingiva-stomatitis in cats: Long term follow up
Veterinary Dentistry, 2010.
cn 30 cases treated by dental extractions. J Vet Dent. 14(1):15-21,
45. Southererden P, Gorrel C. Treatment of a case of refractory feline
1997.
chronic gingivostomatitis with feline recombinant interferon
34. Theyse LFH, et al. Partial extraction in cats with gingivitis
omega. J Small Anim Pract. 47:1-3, 2006.
stomatitis-pharengitis-complex—beneficial effects of a recovery
 46. Mihaljievic S. Felne gingivitis-somatitis FORl complex: First
food. Symposium Proceedings of Hills European Symposium on
clinical data on the use of interferon. Procedings of the BTP
Oral Care, 2003.
Congress, Nuremberg, 2002.
35. Lewis JR, Tsugawa AJ, Reiter AM. Use ofCO,laser as an adjunctive
47. Sato R, Inanami O, Tanaka Y, Takase M, Naito Y. Oral
treatment for caudal stomatitis in a cat. J Vet Dent. 24(4):240-249,
administration of bovine lactoferrin for treatment of intractable
2007.
stomatitis in feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)-positive and
36. Niemiec BA. Problerms of the oral mucosa In: Small Animal
FIV-negative cats. Am J Vet Res. 57(10):1443-1446, 1996.
Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook
48. Addie DD, Radford A, Yam PS, Taylor DJ. Cessation of feline
(Niemiec BA ed.). London: Manson, 2010, p. 183-198.
calicivirus shedding coincident with resolution of chronic gin-
37. Plumb DC. Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook. 6th ed. Ames,
givostomatitis in a cat. J Small Anim Pract. 44(4):172-176,
IA: Blackwell, 2008, pp. 574-575.
2003.
38. Lommer MJ. Use of cyclosporine for the treatment of refractory
49. Niemiec BA. Pathology in the pediatric patient. In: Small Animal
feline gingivostomatitis. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Dental
Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook
Forum, 2008.
(Niemiec BA ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 189-226.
39. Last RD, Suzuki Y, Manning T, Lindsay D, Galipeau L, Whitbred TJ.
 50. Neville BW, Damm DD, Alen CM, Bouquot JE. Periodontal
A case of fatal systemic toxoplasmosis in a cat being treated with
cyclosporine A for feline atopy. Vet Dermatol. 15(3):194-198, 2004.
Saunders, 2002, pp. 137-162.
SECTON3
Initial therapy of periodontal disease
Dental radiology for periodontal disease
Jerzy Gawor
 More is missed by not looking than by not knowing.
substances that represent different levels of x-ray beam
Thomas McCrae, 1870-1935
 penetration (Figure 9.1). A clinical evaluation of the peri-
 odontium is always performed first, followed by the radio-
graphic study. These two examinations are complementary,2
The value of periodontal radiography
and therefore the gold standard of veterinary oral health
 Periodontal disease is the number one health problem in
care includes thorough clinical assessment of all teeth
(periodontal probing) as well as full mouth radiography.?3
small animal patients, and therefore appropriate diagnosis
 Radiographic examination is an important part of
has become very important. The periodontium is the
clinical assessment; moreover, the examination is not
three-dimensional group of tissues, structures, and
complete without radiography. For periodontal disease,
endodontic problems, fractures, caries, resorptive lesions,
bone pathology and proliferative conditions radiography
is mandatory45 (Figures 9.2 and 9.3).
The value of radiographic evaluation in veterinary
 patients was proven in studies that found 27.8% of clinically
important lesions in dogs and 41.7% in cats would be missed
without full mouth radiography56 (Figures 9.4 and 9.5).
Figure 9.1 The periodontium is the three-dimensional group of
Figure 9.2 Apart from enamel and dentinal hypoplasia, period ontal
different tissues. structures, and substances that represent
examination of the left mandibular first molar (309) tooth does not
different levels of x-ray beam penetration.
reveal any pathology.
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
107
108
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
It has been shown that older patients benefit more
from radiography” and that periodontal disease is
more common in older animals.* Therefore, full mouth
radiography is an obligatory part of the diagnostic plan
 in older animals or in those more prone to periodontal
disease (small and toy breed dogs) as well as other
 predisposed breeds (e.g., Greyhounds)56 (Figures 9.6
and 9.7). Another study revealed that the clinical and
paonpal :z'6 ainb!y woy 4io0l a4l jo ydeiboipey E'6 anb!
periodontal structures present due to the undeveloped roots.
Figure 9.6 10-year-old Yorkshire Terrier. Clinical evaulation of
the maxillary incisors. PD2 (<25% attachment loss) in 103 and
203. PD3 (25-50% attachment loss) in 102 and 202, PD4 (more
than 50% of the attachment loss) in 101 and 201. Mobility grade
3 in 101
Figure 9.4 Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary fourth pre-
molar (208) which is covered by calculus and plaque; the gingiva
is slightly inflamed. Periodontal probing revealed a pathologic
pocket at the buccal aspect of 208. Adjacent teeth are normal.
Figure 9.5 Radiograph of the 208 from Figure 9.4. The radio-
Figure 9.7 Patient from Figure 9.6. Radiograph of the maxillary
graph reveals significant pathology affecting entire periodontal
incisors. Bone loss of the alveolar socket in 101 marked by the
tissue of 207 through 210.
whitearrows.
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease   109
radiographic examination may differ and this difference
if the bone loss occurs on the lingual or buccal/
is increased when utilizing histometric measurements.
palatal site ofthe alveolar bone only14(Figure 9.12).
The disparity reported in published studies was between
The early stage of periodontal disease (gingivitis) is
14% and 60%9:0 (Figures 9.8 and 9.9). In addition, the
not radiographically evident, and therefore clinical
clinical appearance of the evaluated area does not corre-
evidence of disease preceeds radiographic changes.
late completely with the radiographic one and vice versal
4.
 The first grade of furcation involvement is not
(Figures 9.10 and 9.11).
evident radiographically.
The major limitations of radiographic evaluation of
Appropriate evaluation of the radiographs depends
the alveolar bone are:
on the quality of exposure, which requires correct
1.
Dental radiographs will not show changes until more
positioning and conditions. Underexposed, burnout,
than 30-60% bone resorption has occurred.12.13
and malpositioned radiographs are non-diagnostic'4
2.
There are certain situations where clinical examina-
(Figures 9.13 and 9.14). In general, dental radiographs
tion is necessary for proper diagnosis; for example,
for periodontal assessment should be made slightly
underexposed. 5
Quality of the x-ray depends on the resolution as
well. Erikssen provided the results of microfocal radiog-
raphy in evaluation of the delicate feline periodontal
Figure 9.8 Periodontal probing revealed 9 mm perio-pocket from
the mesio-palatal aspect of the right maxillary canine 104.
Figure 9.10 A 10-month-old female, Maine Coon cat with juvenile
gingivitis.
Figure 9.9 Radiograph of 104 from Figure 9.8. Distance from CEJ
Figure 9.11 Radiograph of the area presented in Figure 9.10. No
to the pocket bottom is 11 mm (arrow).
radiographic evidence of the severe gum disease.
110
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
structures.'6 Though valuable findings were provided,
this method is not currently practical for general and
wide application in veterinary medicine.
Before any radiographs are taken it is useful to clean
 the teeth, as the dental calculus is radiodense and can 
 obscure pathological lesions on a radiograph.17
distortion is the direct lateral view (parallel technique). 'β
 This technique requires parallel positioning of the film
to the object (tooth/root). However, the anatomy of
dogs and cats does not allow this projection for all
teeth.s.19 In addition, placement of the tube head
perpendicular to the film is necessary to achieve diag-
 nostic images. The importance of correct positioning of
Figure 9.12 Radiograph of the right maxilla with horizontal bone
the x-ray beam is demonstrated in Figures 9.15, 9.16,
loss in all four premolars and canine. Clinical examination can
define which site of the alveolar bone is more affected. Root
remnant of 504 is visible (white arrow).
Figure 9.15 Radiograph of the left mandible (teeth 308-311).
Lateral projection with x-ray beam perpendicular to the object
and film.
Figure 9.13 Radiograph of the left mandible (teeth 307-310) is
overexposed and non-diagnostic.
Figure 9.16 The same area as in Figure 9.15, with the same
position of film. The x-ray beam is focused on the same object but
Figure 9.14 The same projection with reduced exposure. Visible:
the beam is shifted dorsally (x-ray beam is non-perpendicular to
bone loss, resorption, and ankylosis. White arrows indicate bone
the film and object). Foreshortened image, teeth crowns overlap
loss, black arrows resorption, and red arrows show ankylosis.
roots (black arrows).
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease   111
Figure 9.17 The same area as in Figure 9.15, with the same
Figure 9.18 Radiograph of the right mandible (teeth 408-411).
position of film. The x-ray beam is focused on the same object but
The interradicular space (star) and interalveolar space (arrows) of
shifted mesially (x-ray beam is not pependicular to the film and
the alveolar bone may be affected by periodontitis.
object). Interproximal crown surfaces (black arrows) and radicular
 grooves (black stars) overlap one another.
and 9.17. In human radiology, four criteria to determine
adequate angulation of periapical radiographs are (1)
the radiograph should show the tips of molar cusps with
little or none of the occlusal surface showing, (2) enamel
caps and pulp chambers should be distinct, (3) inter-
 proximal spaces should be open, and (4) proximal con-
tacts should not overlap unless teeth are out of line
anatomically.20
Some efforts had been made to evaluate different
radiographic views for periodontal attachment evalua-
tion of the canine teeth in dogs.?' It is also mentioned
that radiographs produced with the bisecting angle tech-
nique may appear to indicate greater destruction of the
alveolar bone than is actually present.17
Figure 9.19 Radiograph of the left mandible of a 42-year-old
The periodontal hard tissues consist of cementum and
male human patient. Human healthy periodontium radiography
alveolar bone. The periodontal aspect of radiography is
requires continuous visible and linear lamina dura (white
focused on
arrows). The angle between lamina dura of the alveolar sockets
The continuity of lamina dura.
is sharp (black arrow). Another standard is the minimum 2 mm
1.
 The width of periodontal ligament space.
distance between the edge of the alveolus and the CEJ (white
2.
stars). The spongious bone appearance in the periapical area
 The shape, height, and density of alveolar bone process.
should be the same as in the interalveolar region (black stars).
The alveolar process of the maxilla and mandible fills
Also note the impacted molar.
 the furcation (the interradicular space) and interalveolar
space.?2 Both parts may be affected by periodontitis?3
(Figure 9.18).
4.
 The spongious bone appearance in the periapical
area should be the same as in the interalveolar
 periodontal tissues is as follows:
region?4 (Figure 9.19).
There is a continuous visible and linear lamina dura.
 The furcation is an important and delicate area to
2
The angle between lamina dura of the alveolar
evaluate. When furcational bone loss is evident, it is
sockets is sharp.
reasonable to make an additional image with a decreased
3.
There is a minimum 2 mm distance between the
exposure to confirm the bone loss, as opposed to an
edge of the alveolus and the CEJ.24
(17'6 pue 07'6 sa1n) s w pasodxaiaao
112
2 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Figure 9.20 Radiograph of the right maxilla (teeth 107-110). Due
to overexposure the furcation area of the 108 shows radiolucency
(red arrow).
Figure 9.22 Radiograph of the left mandibular first molar
(309). The following periodontal structures are evident: radi-
opaque alveolar bone with increased density of the lamina
dura and an alveolar edge. The alveolar process is comprised
of cancellous bone, which shapes the interalveolar septa and
interradicular area. The alveolar wall margin as well as buccal
and lingual (palatal) surfaces consists of compact bone. The
radiolucent zone between cementum and lamina dura is the
PDL space. In all feline teeth and most canine the PDL space is
radiographically linear. In dogs, some of the roots (particularly
Figure 9.21 The same area as in Figure 9.20. Reduced exposure
allow for appropriate evaluation of the furcation area in 108.
mandibular molars) appear as a double radiolucent line. This is
created by the presence of the developmental radicular
grooves, which strenghten the resistance for twisting move-
Radiographic appearance of normal
ments. White arrow-alveolar ridge, red arrow-radicular groove,
blue arrow-lamina dura, white star-interradicular space, black
periodontal anatomy
star-interalveolar space, and red star-furcation area.
The radiographic appearance of periodontal structures
and normal anatomic features refers to both the decid-
uous and permanent dentition. The radiopaque peri-
mandibular molars), this space appears as a double
odontal tissues are
radiolucent line. This is created by the presence of devel-
opmental radicular grooves, which strengthen the resis-
 The alveolar bone with increased density of the
tance for twisting movements (Figure 9.22).25
lamina dura.
The process of creation of the periodontal struc-
2.
 The alveolar process, which is comprised of cancel-
tures occurs during root development and subsequent
lous bone that shapes the interalveolar septa and
eruption. This process is visible in the radiographs taken
interradicular area.
at the age of 10 and 16weeks (Figures 9.23 and 9.24).
3.
 The alveolar wall and margin and buccal and lingual
After eruption is complete, the healthy periodontium
(palatal) surfaces consisting of compact bone.
keeps the same radiographic appearance (Figures 9.25
The radiolucent zone between cementum and lamina
and 9.26). Age in and of itself does not seem to play a role
dura is the periodontal ligament (PDL) space. In all feline
in it, although in older patients the alveolar bone is less
and most canine teeth, the PDL space is radiographically
 elastic and more prone to fracture. This is also true in cats
linear. In some tooth roots of dogs (particularly the
(Figures 9.27 and 9.28).1.12.15.27
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease 113
Figure 9.26 After eruption is completed, the healthy periodon-
yal jo ydeiboipey aueleadde yiydeiboipei awes ayi sdaay wn!
Figure 9.23 Radiograph of the left mandible in a 10-week-old
mandible of 6-year-old German Shepherd
puppy. Periodontal structures of deciduous dentition are perfectly
developed. The roots in secondary dentition are at the beginning
of development.
Figure 9.27 Radiograph of a 5-month-old kitten's right mandible
Root and periodontal structures of the secondary dentition (307.
Figure 9.24 Radiograph of the left mandible in a puppy at the
308) are under process of development. Roots and periodontal
age of 16 weeks. The development of the roots is accompanied by
structures of deciduous teeth (707, 708) (red arrows) undergo
development of the periodontal structures.
resorption
Figure 9.25 when the periodontal structures of the secondary
dentition are created, the deciduous periodontium undergoes
Figure 9.28 2-year-old feline's left mandible. Visible normal
resorption. This puppy is 6months old. A persistent deciduous 
periodontal structures: lamina dura, periodontal space, alveolar
708 (red arow) is present over the retained 308.
ridge, interalveolar septum, interradicular septum, furcation area.
114  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Figure 9.31 Periodontal ligament space in periodontal disease is
Figure 9.29 Radiograph of the left mandible (teeth 309 and 310).
widened and irregular (white arrows).
Loss of lamina dura (white arrows) is an indicator of periodontal
disease.
Figure 9.32 Periodontal pocket (7 mm) revealed in one location
Figure 9.30 The loss of sharp edges of the interalveolar septa
between 308 and 309.
(white arrows) is a very important symptom in human
periodontology.
disease, the lamina dura loses its anatomic
Radiography in periodontal disease and other
character (Figure 9.29).
 pathologic conditions
 The interalveolar septa edges lose their sharpness;
this is a very important symptom of periodontal
Numerous mechanical, metabolic, inflammatory, and
 disease in humans (Figure 9.30).
microbiological factors influence the quality, density,
3
 The periodontal ligament space becomes widened
 and structure of periodontal tissues, resulting in radio-
 and irregular in periodontal disease (Figure 9.31).
 graphic changes. Listed below are various lesions and
Vertical bone loss occurs when there is one area of
their respective images that characterize the process of
recession with the surrounding tissue being
 the attachment destruction, bone loss, and other changes
higher and closer to the CEj2 (Figures 9.32
 accompanying periodontal disease.
and 9.33).
Note that most of the vertical bone loss images were
 Early stage of bone loss: three-wall bony
taken of artificially created pathology in order to achieve
pocket; the defect is defined by the root as
educational-quality images (see Figures 9.34-9.39).
one wall and three surfaces of the alveolar
Clinically, all possible types oflesions can be (and often
bone (Figures 9.34 and 9.35).
are) combined on one tooth, making it much less obvious.
b.
Further development of previous defect
1. Lamina dura normal appearance should be visible,
extends the lesion interdentally to communi-
continuous, linear, and even. In periodontal
cate with a root of the adjacent tooth, creating
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease   1 15
a two-wall crater defect. Another type of
two-wall defect refers to the situation where
instead of a communication with the adja-
cent tooth, the lingual or facial wall of the
three-wall pocket is destroyed, and the
remaining two bony walls create a two-wall
defect (Figures 9.36 and 9.37).
A one-wall defect is an extension of the
two-wall defect that involves only one
tooth. Destruction of both lingual and
facial bony walls creates a one-wall defect
(Figure 9.38).
A four-wall or circumferential defect occurs
when the bone loss surrounds the entire
Figure 9.33 Radiograph of the same area as in Figure 9.32. Vertical
tooth2 (Figure 9.39).
bone loss (white arrows) occurs when there is one area of recession
with the surrounding tissue being higher and closer to the CEJ.
(a)
(b)
1le jo ydeihoipey (g) wnuopoad penui ym (tle) seow pln nenquew yan (e) te'h aney
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.35 (a) Three-wall bony pocket defect created in the periodontal tisue of 311. (b) The corresponding dental radiograph from
Figure 9.35a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.36 Further development of the three-wall defect extends the lesion interdentally: communication with the root of the adjacent
tooth is what makes a two-wall crater defect. (a) Defect created between 407 and 408. (b) Corresponding radiograph from Figure 9.36a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.37 When the lingual or facial wall of the three-wall pocket is destroyed, the remaining two bony walls create a two-wall defect.
(a) Defect created between 406 and 407. (b) Corresponding radiograph from Figure 9:37a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.38 The one-wall defect is an extension of the two-wall defect that involves only one tooth. Destruction of both lingual and
facial bony walls makes the defect one wall. (a) Defect created in mesial part of 306. (b) Corresponding radiograph from Figure 9.38a.
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease1 17
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.39 Four-wall defect or a circumferential one occurs when the bone loss surrounds the entire tooth. (a) Destruction created in
311. (b) Corresponding radiograph from Figure 9.39a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.40 Furcation involvement appeares as a loss of density and lack of substance at the coronal aspect of the interradicular bone.
Stage 3 of furcation involvement allows the periodontal probe to go through the furcation area from the buccal to lingual/palatal site of
the examined tooth. (a) Stage 3 involvement of 206. (b) Radiographed 206 from Figure 9.40a.
5.
Furcation involvement appears as a loss of
b.
Grade 2—the probe explores the furcation
 density and lack of substance at the coronal
but does not pass through it.
aspect of the  interradicular bone. Clinically,
C.
Grade 3—total involvement; the probe passes 
it has 3 grades (grade 0 has no furcation
through the furcation from one side to
involvement) (see chapter 19):
another ofthe multirooted teeth (Figure 9.40).
a.
 Grade 1—the periodontal probe may be
Radiographic appearance of calculus: visible subgin-
inserted  into  the  furcation  area but  the
 gival deposits and tartar bridges joining adjacent
destruction is less than one-third of the
teeth (Figure 9.41). Because calculus is radiodense,
horizontal width.
 in order to avoid interference of dental deposits
118
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Figure 9.41 Radiographic appearance of tartar: visible subgingi-
Figure 9.43 Ankylosis of the periodontal attachment appearing
val deposits in 408 and 409 (white arrows) and tartar bridges
as the lack of PDL space (red arrows). Illustrated ankylosis in 105
joining adjacent teeth 407, 408, and 409.
and 106.
(a)
Figure 9.44 Cancellous bone had replaced pre-existing interal-
veolar septa in incisive part of maxilla 6 months after the extrac-
tion of the maxillary incisors.
(b)
 on the final image, it is reasonable to radiograph
cleaned and scaled dentition.
7.
Horizontal bone loss (Figure 9.42) is defined as an
osteolytic process leading to a decreased height
 of the alveolar ridge and root exposure.27.29
8.
 Ankylosis of the periodontal attachment appears as
the lack of a PDL space. The alveolar bone and
root substance have no significant border line.
 Resorption of cementum is often followed by bone
replacement of resorbed tissue (Figure 9.43).30
9.
Toothless periodontium 6 months after extraction.
 Cancellous bone has replaced pre-existing inter-
alveolar septa in incisive part of maxilla
(Figure 9.44). In humans, edentulous areas
Figure 9.42 (a) Right maxillary premolars covered by tartar.
(b) Radiographed right maxillary premolars of the dog from
undergo atrophy.
Figure 9.42a. Horizontal bone loss is defined as an osteolytic pro-
10.
Chronic periodontitis may cause osteomyelitis of
cess leading to decreasing height of the alveolar ridge and root
the entire maxilla or mandible (Figures 9.45 and
exposure.
9.46). This is a serious complication of periodontal
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease 1 19
Figure 9.45 Chronic periodontitis in a 4-year-old dog caused
complete loss of dentition, osteomyelitis, and bone sequestra in
the mandible (red arrow).
Figure 9.47 Tooth luxation due to periodontal disease. The left
mandibular canine (204) is pushed out from the alveolus
Quite often, class I lesions have fistulation.
To distinguish the origin of the fistula, it helps
to expose the radiograph after inserting a
gutta percha point into the intaroral opening
Figure 9.46 Chronic periodontitis and tooth resorption in a
(Figure 9.49).
16-year-old cat has resulted in osteomyelitis.
14.
 Radiograph of a “swimming tooth" with complete
loss of periodontal attachment and level II1
mobility (Figure 9.50). High mobility of the
disease that influences the quality of life of the
tooth can be caused by loss of attachment as
patient (with pain and malfunction of the jaws)
well as root fracture or neoplastic process.
and the potential for further complications such
Radiographic assesment is necessary for diag-
 as distant infection, immune response, or patho-
nosis. Histopathology should be considered if
 logic fracture. The complementary and necessary
there is any question as to the cause of the
diagnostic tool apart from radiography is histo-
bone loss.
pathologic evaluation of the affected bone.
11.
Tooth luxation due to periodontal disease. The tooth
The appearance of the periodontium
is pushed out from the alveolus (Figure 9.47).
in specific conditions
 This is a long-term and atypical process. Usually
 The appearance of the periodontium in specific condi-
the tooth becomes loose (mobile).
tions is as follows:
12.
Perio-endo lesions (class II) have primarily
 periodontal character with secondary endodontic
 Dentin hypoplasia—lack of roots, decreased miner-
involvement (Figure 9.48).
alization of the hard dental tissues (generally
13.
Endo-perio lesions (class I) have primarily end-
associated    with
enamel
hypocalcification)
 odontic with subsequent periodontal involvement.
(Figure 9.51).
120
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.48 (a) Clinical examination revealed 15 mm periodontal pocket between 408 and 409 and grade 3 mobility of 309. There was
no fracture of the examined tooth crown. (b) Radiographed 409 from Figure 9.48a. Perio-endo lesions (class Il) have primarily periodontal
dharacter (red arrows) with secondary endodontic involvement (blue arrow).
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.49 (a) Clinical examination of 108 in a dog revealed a complicated crown fracture and draining tract at the buccal aspect of oral
mucoca 6 mm over furcation area of the fractured tooth. (b) Radiograph of 108 from Figure 9.49a with the use of a GP point inserted into
the intaroral fistula. Endo-perio lesions (class I) have primarily endodontic with subsequent periodontal involvement.
2.
Craniomandibular osteopathy (Figure 9.52)—this
disease affects the alveolar bone, which has an
 abnormal radiologic appearance.
Hyperparathyroidism associated with renal insuffi-
ciency (Figure 9.53)—decalcification of the bone
 aa oi anp in aend si sef a 
calcium turnover in alveolar bone metabolism.
Clinically, teeth are mobile without causing pain
and/or bleeding. Radiographs show the lack of
bone structure: no lamina dura, interalveolar
bone, or PDL space. This condition is also called
"rubber jaw” syndrome.
Figure 9.50 Radiograph of "swimming tooth" 206 with complete
4。
 Tooth resorption in cats—related to periodontal
loss of periodontal attachment and level ll mobility.
 disease and type of resorption. A significantly
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease 121
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.51 (a) Clinical examination of maxillary incisors of 8-month-old Dog de Bordeaux. All examined teeth are affected by enamel
hypoplasia and hypocalcification. (b) Radiograph of maxilary incisors presented in Figure 9.51a. Dentinal hypoplasia—lack of roots and
 decreased mineralization of the hard dental tissues (generally associated with enamel hypocalcification).
Figure 9.52 Radiograph of the right mandible. Craniomandibular
Figure 9.53 Radiograph of the left maxilla of a 6-month-old
osteopathy in 8-month-old female Doberman Pinscher. Alveolar
euan y paeosse wsiouienediaday Aq paae asaua
bone is affected with remarkable loss of the trabecular structure.
insufficiency. Complete decalcification and loss of density of the
alveolar bone.
lower occurrence of root replacement in cats
with benign lesions such as gingival hyperplasia
teeth with resorptive lesions and periodontitis
(Figure 9.57), but is seen in more aggressive
(type 1) has been described in the literature31.32
lesions such as squamous cell carcinoma (Figure
(Figure 9.54).
 9.58). This can be crucial knowledge in treating
5.
Tooth resorption in a dog (Figure 9.55).
oral growths (Figures 9.57 and 9.58).
6.
Hypercementosis, which is often associated with
tooth resorption (Figure 9.56).
Clinical applications of periodontal radiography
 Proliferative  conditions—gingival  hyperplasia  or
Clinical applications of periodontal radiography include
 neoplastic diseases. Some of these conditions are
the following:
radiodense, such as when calcification occurs or
the process has an osseous character. Others
Treatment  plan  before  performing  extractions
appear as radiolucent areas with infiltrative
(deciduous and/or permanent teeth).3
lesions or circumferenced character. Destruction
Postoperative radiographs  in  extraction cases  to
of periodontal space and ankylosis is not seen
ensure complete removal of the roots.
122
2 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(a)
Figure 9.56 12-year-old Dachshund with teeth affected by
(b)
resorption accompanied by hypercementosis.
(a)
Figure 9.54 (a) Right mandibular first molar (409) in 10-year-old
cat with periodontal pockets, grade 3 mobility, and furcation
(b)
involvement. (b) Radiographed tooth from Figure 9.54a. Bone loss
and tooth resorption affecting the same tooth.
Figure 9.57 (a) Gingival hyperplasia between 408 and 409
(confirmed by histopathologic evaluation). Local pseudopocket
Figure 9.55 Tooth resorption in a dog (red arrows). Mandibular
 paiesn! eane al jo ydeboipey (q) 'eane papaye u juasaid
dentition in 9-year-old Dachshund.
Figure 9.57a. No evicdence of periodontal pathology.
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease   123
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.58 (a) Squamous cell carcinoma in a 1.5-year-old dog. Third stage of growth. (b) Radiograph of the affected mandible. Bone
loss of the interalveolar space between 304 and 303.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.59 (a) Radiograph of the maxilla of a 5-year-old dog. 101 was lost due to injury. The root remnant causes inflammation in the
alveolar socket (red arrow). (b) After debridement the socket was augmented with the use of bioglass material (blue arrow). (c) 6-month
follow-up. The alveolar process is recovered and ready for the implant procedure (black arrow).
3.
 Treatment plan for periodontal surgery. Based on
 open root planing, pocket reduction, or guided
results of the clinical examination and radiographic
tissue regeneration , or extraction.34
appearance of periodontal lesions (i.e., the extent,
 4.  Results of treatment: alveolar socket augmentation,
size, and accompanying pathologies), a prognosis
healing, GTR requires follow-ups and reliable
can be assigned. If the tooth is to be saved, the best
evaluation of the healing process34.3 (Figure 9.59).
treatment decision can be made; that is, closed or
The material applied for the bone augmentation 
124  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.60 (a) Radiograph of 103 and 102 in dog. The 103, due to its mobility. was planned for extraction: the adjacent 102 was
planned to be saved. (b) After extraction of 103 and meticulous debridement, the alvelolar socket was augmented with the use of bone
graft material.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.61 (a) Radiograph of the right mandible in 11-year-old Dachshund. Distal root is affected by periodontal disease and has
an infrabony pocket (red arrows). Open root planing was performed as was local application of antibiotic. (b) 13 month follow-up
revealing bony regrowth.
influences the quality of regenerated bone and
required,3 primarily because it is the only way to
may also play a role in planing the implant after
evaluate the result of treatment, and secondly to
traumatic loss of the tooth. It is important to eval-
 evaluate for any periodontal reactions that may be
uate whether after extraction and alveolar socket
 caused by certain root canal filling materials39
 debridement the augmentation is packed properly
(Figure 9.63).
(Figure 9.60).3 Radiography is also proven to be
 6. Implantology requires proper radiographic evalua-
the most reliable method for evaluation of the
tion of the remaining alveolar bone to determine
bone remodelling process (Figure 9.61).37 The
ifthe healing process is sufficient (see Figure 9.59).
long-term radiographic follow-up after perio-
In addition, therapeutic decisions such as the
dontal treatment shows the results of surgical
appropriate size of the implant and/or the depth/
efforts and the efficacy of homecare provided
angle of placement can be directed via radiology
(Figure 9.62).
(Figure 9.64).* Further evaluation of the alveolar
5.1
 Endo-perio lesions (class I): A 6-month follow-up
bone surrounding the implant is also required
evaluation of the endodontic treatment is always
(Figure 9.65).
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.62 (a) 7 mm pocket of the mesial root of the left
mandibular first molar (309): 7-year-old male Cocker
Spaniel. (b) Radiograph of affected tooth from Figure 9.62a
confirming bone loss (red arrow). (c) Radiograph of
6-month follow-up after GTR procedure in mesial root of
309 revealing regeneration of bone.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 9.63 (a) Fistula at the area of the left maxillary
fourth premolar (208). (b) Radiograph for the root canal
treatment of 208 with class| endo-perio lesion showing
excessive radiolucent periodontal lesions in all 3 roots
(red arrows). (c) Radiograph at 5-year follow-up. The
periodontium is healthy and radiodense.
126
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(a)
(b)
pue 'uoejnbue sl! 'uoeiedaid ayl jo yidap ayl ainseaw ol auog palup oi pajasui aqoid juejdw! ayl jo ydeiboipey tg'b ainbi
location. (a) Bite projection. (b) Lateral projection.
(a)
(b)
dn-mollo, yiuow-g (g) 'tol jo uool u! paeld juedwl (e) sg'e ani
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.66 (a) Radiograph of mesioccluded left maxillary canine (204) in 7-month-old female Maine Coon cat. (b) Installation of the
orthodontic bracket and beginning of orthodontic treatment.
Dental Radiology for Periodontal Disease   127
(c)
(d)
Figure 9.66 (cont'd) (c) Radiograph 8 weeks after initial treatment. (d) Radiograph 1 year after treatment, revealing normal periodontal
tissues.
The  periodontal  appearance  in  orthodontic
8. Gawor J, Reiter A, Jodkowska K, Kurski G, Wojtacki MP, Kurek A.
treatment: Evaluation of the periodontal tissues of
 Influence of diet on oral heath in cats and dogs. J Nutr. 136:7S,
orthodontically treated teeth is mandatory in
2006.
9. Yun JH, Hwang SJ, Kim CS, Cho KS, Chai JK, Kim CK, Choi SH.
each case. Attention is given to the PDL space and
The correlation between the bone probing, radiographic and his-
quality of the periapical area (Figure 9.66).4)
Aans aa e pa auq jo susu 
J Periodontal Res. 40(6):453-460, 2005.
10. Jeffoat MK. Radiographic methods for the detection of progres-
sive alveolar bone loss. J Periodontol. 63(4 Suppl):367-372, 1992.
Box 9.1 Key points
11. Smith MM, Zontine WJ, Willits NH. A correlative study of the
clinical and radiographic signs of periodontal disease in dogs.
● Periodontal examination is not complete without
JAVMA 186(12):1286-1290, 1985.
radiography.
12. Mulligan T, Williams C. Atlas of Canine and Feline Dental
Radiography. Trenton, NJ: Veterinary Learning Systems, 1998,
 Full mouth radiography is an obligatory part of the 
p.126.
diagnostic plan in older animals or in those more prone
 13. Verstreate FJ. Self Assessment Colour Review of Veterinary
to periodontal disease
Dentistry London: Manson, 1999, p. 194.
· Dental radiographs for periodontal assessment should be
14. Tutt C. Radiographic differentiation between vertical and
 made slightly underexposed.
horizontal bone loss. Proceedings of the 16th ECVD, The Hague,
 Before any radiographs are taken it is useful to clean the
2007, p. 44.
teeth, as the dental calculus is radiodense and can
15. DuPont G, DeBowes LJ. Atlas of Dental Radiography in Dogs and
 obscure pathological lesions on a radiograph.
Cats. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009, pp. 134-135.
 Radiography is proven to be the most reliable method of 
16. Eriksen T, Koch R, Nautrup CP. Microradiography of the feline
evaluation of the results of treatment in periodontology.
marginal periodontium with a microfocal high-resolution x-ray
 endodontics, implantology. and extractions.
systerm. Scand J Dent Res. 102(5):284-289, 1994.
17. Gorrel C. Small Animal Dentistry. New York: Saunders-Elsevier,
2008, pp. 22-68.
18. DuPont G, DeBowes L. Atlas of Dental Radiography in Dogs and
References
Cats. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009, p. 232.
19. Niemiec BA, Gilbert T, Sabatino D. Equipment and basic geome-
1. Hoffman S. Diagnostic imaging in veterinary dental practice.
try of dental radiography. J Vet Dent. 21(1):48-52, 2004
Focal advanced periodontal disease. JAVMA 228(11):1683-1684,
 20. Tetradis S, Carranza FA, Fazio RC, Takei HH. Radiographic aids
2006.
in the diagnosis of periodontal disease. In: Carranzas Clinical
 2. Ivanusa T, Babic A, Petelin M. Diagnostic systems for assessing
Periodontology. New York: Elsevier-Saunders, 2006, p. 562.
alveolar bone loss. Stud Health Technol Inform. 43 Pt B:478-481,
21. Tsugawa AJ, Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Gorrel C. Diagnostic
1997.
value of the use of lateral and occlusal radiographic views
3. Colmery B. The gold standard of veterinary oral health care. Vet
in comparison with periodontal probing for the assessment of
Clin Small Anim. 35:781-787, 2005.
4. Gorrel C. Radiographic evaluation. Vet Clin North Am Small
Res. 64(3):255-261, 2003.
Anim Pract. 28(5):1089-1110, 1998.
22. Wiggs B. Lobprise H. Oral anatomy and physiology. In: Veteri
 5. Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Terpak CH. Diagnostic value of full-mouth
nary Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
radiography in dogs. Am I Vet Res. 59(6):686-691, 1998.
Raven, 1997, p. 78.
6. Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Terpak CH. Diagnostic value of full-mouth
23. Tsugawa AJ, Verstraete FJ. How to obtain and interpret perio-
radiography in cats. Am I Vet Res. 59(6):692-695, 1998.
dontal radiographs in dogs. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract. 15(4):
7. Lang NP, Hill RW. Radiography. J Clin Periodontol. 4:16-28, 1977.
204-210, 2000.
128  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
24. Rozylo KT, Rozylo-Kalinowska I. Radiologia Stomatologiczna
35. Eickholz P Horr T, Klein F, Hassfeld S, Kim TS. Radiographic
Wydawnictwo Lekarskie PZWL Warszawa, 2007, p. 175.
parameters for prognosis of periodontal healing of infrabony
25. Tutt C. Radiography. In: Small Animal Dentistry. Ames, IA:
defects: Two different definitions of defect depth. J Periodontol.
Blackwell, 2006, pp. 120-121.
75(3):399-407, 2004.
26. Wang LZ, Li DY. [Study on odontal & periodontal tissue of
36. Urabe M, Hosokawa R, Chiba D, Sato Y, Akagawa Y. Morpho-
guinea pigs, dogs and monkeys.] Shanghai Kou Qiang Yi Xue.
genetic behavior of periodontium on inorganic implant
13(2):122-125, 2004.
materials: an experimental study of canines. J Biomed Mater
27. Niemiec BA. Dental radiographic interpretation. J Vet Dent.
Res. 49(1):17-24, 2000.
22(1):53-59, 2005.
 37. Kim M, Kim JH, Lee JY, Cho K, Kang SS, Kim G, Lee MJ, Choi SH.
28. Wiggs RB, Lobprise H. Veterinary Dentistry, Principles and Prac-
 Effect of bone mineral with or without collagen membrane in
tice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997, pp. 203-204.
ridge dehiscence defects following premolar extraction. In Vivo.
29. Morgan JP, Miyabayashi T, Anderson J, Klinge B. Periodontal
22(2):231-236, 2008.
bone loss in the aging beagle dog. A radiographic study. I Clin
 38. DeForge DH. Images in veterinary dental practice. Class II
Periodontol. 17(9):630-635, 1990.
endodontic-periodontic lesion. JAVMA 224(4):515-516, 2004.
30. Armbjerg J. Idiopathic dental root replacement resorption in old
39. Kundzinia RS, Komnova ZD, Volozhin Al. [The periodontal
dogs. J Vet Dent. 13(3):97-99, 1996.
reaction to root canal obturation with different filling materials.]
31. DuPont GA, DeBowes LJ. Comparison of periodontitis and root
Stomatologiia (Mosk). 72(1):4-7, 1993.
replacement in cat teeth with resorptive lesions. J Vet Dent.
40. Hong AI, Qing-feng XU, Hong-fei LU, Zhi-hui MAI, Ai-qun AN,
19(2):71-75, 2002.
Guo-ping LUI.
. Rapid tooth movement through distraction
32. Girard N, Servet E, Biourge V, Hennet P. Periodontal health status
osteogenesis of the periodontal ligament in dogs. Chin Med J
in a colony of 109 cats. J Vet Dent. 26(3):147-155, 2009.
(Engl). 121(5):455-462, 2008.
41. Nackaerts O, Jacobs R, Quirynen M, Rober M, Sun Y,
Med. 24(1):4-19, 2009.
Teughels W. Replacement therapy for periodontitis: Pilot
34. Beckman BW. Treatment of an infrabony pocket in an American
radiographic evaluation in a dog model. J Clin Periodontol.
Eskimo dog. I Vet Dent. 21(3):159-163, 2004.
35(12):1048-1052, 2008.
10
The complete dental cleaning
Introduction
also minimize the anesthesia gas contamination of the
operatory Finally since these can be lengthy procedures,
There are numerous therapeutic options available
it is critical that the patient be provided heat support and
(classic and new) for periodontal disease; however, the
be well monitored (EKG, blood pressure, temperature,
basis of periodontal therapy remains plaque control. The
pulse ox at a minimum).7 (See chapter 21 for a detailed
cornerstone of plaque control and the first step for any
discussion of anesthesia/patient care.) Finally, the head
periodontal therapy is a thorough dental prophylaxis.
should be angled downward or the neck supported to
Newer names for this procedure include complete oral
encourage fluid drainage.
health assessment and treatment (COHAT) and oral
 It is important to note that proper periodontal/dental/
assessment, treatment, and prevention (Oral ATP).' The
 oral therapy takes time and patience. A minimum of
new names are designed to convey the fact that a proper
1 hour should be allotted for all dental cases and much
dental procedure in veterinary medicine is more than a
more in many instances. Professional periodontal
i   s a p 
 therapies must be performed with quality (not quantity)
 just prevention of disease.
in mind.
General anesthesia should be multimodal  and
balanced (i.e., not inhalant only). In addition, the
Procedure
endotracheal tube must be properly inflated to avoid
aspiration of procedural water, oral contaminants
A complete dental prophylaxis should include the fol-
(plaque and calculus), or gastroesphageal regurgitation,
lowing steps (as detailed below).35.9 Note that there are
which could lead to an aspiration pneumonia. This will
almost as many recipes for a dental prophylaxis as there
are veterinary dentists. The instructions below are this
author's personal recommendations and may or may not
 Box 10.1 Key dlinical point
correspond with those of other veterinary dentists.
However, the basic procedure is essentially the same. The
Regardless of the name, the goal of this procedure is not only
reader is encouraged to research the procedure in other
clean and smooth teeth but also to evaluate the periodontal
texts and develop the protocol he or she is most comfort-
tissues as well as the entire oral cavity. Any professional
able with.
aq isn siualed Aeujaiaa loj Adeaul jeiuopoad
performed under general anaesthesia, with a well-cuffed
Step 1: Presurgical exam and consultation
endotracheal tube.2-s Only when the patient is properly
This is a commonly neglected step of the professional
anesthetized can a safe and effective deaning and oral
dental prophylaxis 368.1o The veterinarian should perform
evaluation be performed.6 In addition, anesthesia provides
a complete physical and oral exam. The physical exam, in
a much more pleasant experience for the dentalpatient
(see Box 10.2)
combination with preoperative testing, screens for
general health issues that may exacerbate periodontal
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
129
130 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Box 10.2 Non-anesthetic dentistry (NAD)
 As this chapter demonstrates, a complete dental procedure or "prophylaxis" is a very involved process. It takes time as well as
significant attention to detail to be effective. There are numerous steps required to create a positive medical benefit, including
supra and subgingival scaling, polishing, sulcal lavage, oral exam (indluding periodontal probing), and charting.
Of all these critical steps. only the first (supragingival scaling) can be performed without anesthesia. Furthermore, even this
simple and mostly cosmetic step is generally poorly performed, especially on the lingual/palatal surfaces and in the back of
the mouth (Figures 10.a and 10.b).
Wwith NAD, the teeth are scaled by non-professionais in a conscious patient. The combination of unskilled operators and
movement of the patient often leads to roughened tooth surfaces (Figure 10.c). These factors combined with the lack of
polishing lead to much faster recurrence of disease. Furthermore, unskilled operators working without anesthesia can cause
significant iatrogenic trauma such as gingival lacerations.
(a1)
(a2)
Figure 10.a Intraoral pictures of a patient who received NAD 1 week previous. (1) Presentation of the palatal surface of the maxillary
incisors (note the significant amount of residual calculus). (2) The same area following a professional scaling under general anesthesia
(note how clean the teeth are now)
(b1)
(b2)
Figure 10.b These images are from a dog who had received NAD on a monthly basis (most recently 2 weeks previous) for 3 years.
The patient was presented for persistent bad breath and was recommended by the NAD provider "to come every week for a while."
(1) Evaluation under general anesthesia revealed the large amount of dental calculus on the lingual surface of the right mandibular
canine (404) (yellow arrow), whereas the remainder of the teeth looked dlean. (2) Periodontal probing revealed the deep periodontal
pocket on the lingual and facial surfaces of the tooth
The Complete Dental Cleaning 131
(b3)
(b4)
Figure 10.b (cont'd) (3) Following flap creation for surgical extraction, the subgingival dental calculus is evident. (4) Finally, the
 dental radiograph confirms the subgingival calculus (yellow arrow) and severe alveolar bone loss in the area (red arrows) predisposing
the patient to a pathologic fracture (see chapter 6). In addition, note the severe alveolar bone loss to the left incisors (blue arrow).
Moreover, the single most important step of a prophy
laxis (subgingival scaling) cannot be performed without
general anesthesia. Simply said, what animal patient would
allow you to place a sharp instrument under its gums?
 Patients are often seen following NAD with clean crowns 
but with significant areas of subgingival calculus
(Figures 10.b and 10.d). This may be the most damaging 
issue with this service, as it gives the client a false sense
 that he or she is improving the dental health of the pet.
This author has routinely dealt with clients who are very
"ueap. aidsap pasoubep s! aseasip ieruap uay sasdn 
crowns. These clients feel that they have "failed" their
pet. allowing them to progress to disease despite
well-intentioned efforts.
An oral exam is a very important but mostly underappre
dated step of a dental cleaning. As evidenced throughout
Figure 10.c Right maxillary fourth premolar (108) of a patient
this book, oral pathology can have very subte clinical signs.
who recently received NAD. Note the significant damage to the
yet with significant infection (Figures 10.e through 10.g).
enamel of the tooth. This will result in much faster plaque
Without anesthesia, a complete oral exam is impossibie.
accumulation (see chapter 2).
 Furthermore, dental radiographs are necessary for proper
diagnosis and treatment (Figure 10.g2). This valuable diagnostic tool cannot be performed without general anesthesia.
[eo bujeanl jo sueaw e se patepipujeuon s! dvn jeyi uosean Ajuo ayi ou s! uojenjeaa pue bujueap jadoid jo ypel ayl
disease. There is also a strong possibility of iatrogenic damage to the patient. without chemical restraint, the sharp instru-
ments necessary for a proper cleaning can easily lacerate the delicate gingival tissues if the patient moves. This has been
repeatedly seen throughout the country. Furthermore. jaw fractures and neck injuries have been reported following restraint 
'ueyubis s! uoneqnu! jo ype ayr won ejuownaud uonendse jo ysu ayn 'Aieug .'sieuap eisayrsaue-uou, nos
aue 'otn jo siabuep pue suogeijwl snonaunu ayt uo paseg loyne siut jo uouido aui isn! ou ane suaouon asayi
American Veterinary Dental College has drafted a position statement against this procedure (http://avdc.org/Dental_Scaling.
aoad ssaun pebal aoend au ayew seun sel aaey (enuo bupnpuny sateis auos ioey ul (pd eisauisauy inou
under the supervision of a veterinarian. Some providers of NAD are getting around these laws by providing the service within
132
Initial Therapy ofPeriodontal Disease
(d1)
(d2)
Figure 10.d Intraoral pictures of the left maxillary first molar (209) (1) and the right mandibular first molar (409) (2) in two patients
who recently received NAD. Note that the crowns of the tooth are clean, but there is significant subgingival calculus.
(e1)
(e2)
(e3)
Figure 10.e Intraoral dental pictures of the maxillary right fourth premolar (108) of a patient who has been receiving NAD on a regular
basis. Note that the teeth appear outwardly dlean (1). However, there is a significant periodontal pocket (2) and furcation exposure level
Il (3) on this tooth. This would have been diagnosed and treated much earlier (or entirely avoided) with proper oral care.
(f1)
(f2)
Figure 10.f Intraoral dental pictures of the right maxillary canine (104) of a dog who has been receiving NAD on a regular basis.
(1) Note that the teeth appear outwardly clean. (2) However, there is a significant periodontal pocket on this tooth. This would have
been diagnosed and treated much earlier (or entirely avoided) with proper oral care.
The Complete Dental Cleaning  133
(g1)
(g2)
(vn paaiaal jeui e'ot ainbiy u juajed aujue aul jo (goz) nejoaid yunoj Aexew yal aul jo ainpid jeloeul (t) brol annb
1 week ago. The patient was presented for a carnassial abscess. Conscious oral exam by a trained professional revealed the small
(smone panj uoipejanen jeidead paleaaan sydeboen jeiuap jeoeul (z) (mone ang) yooi al jo padse jeisp aui oi ainpey
confirming the source of the infection. Note that these infections are generally present for a long time prior to creating a clinical
 abscess and that bone destruction is also a fairly lengthy process. Therefore, this infection has been present but undiagnosed for a
significant period of time. Proper oral care with a thorough oral exam and/or dental radiology would have allowed for much earlier
 treatment of this significant infection.
veterinary hospitals. vWwhile this is legal, it is considered below the standard of practice. No AVDC diplomate would be likely
to support a veterinarian in a malpractice suit if this was the inciting cause. It should also be noted that in these cases, it is
 the prescribing (i.e. practice owner veterinarian's license at risk, NOT the contracted service provider. Therefore, think
 carefully before allowing this procedure in your practice.
Aaissod ayan saooend Aeuuaiaa uy Ansuap .uonepas., premon puan buuanuon pue bubiawa ue osje ue si aiay
more effective than NAD, it sill shares many of its limitations and dangers. Of large concern, there is still no protection for
puoag sainpaoid ou pue pau Aan io suasge s! lonuo uied suawean Auahiawa loj jatauien ou Aienida pue shun a
a cleaning can be performed. Finally. sedation is no safer and in some cases is more dangerous than balanced and monitored
anesthesia.
jo spuju aua u 'uoneonpa suap si angoeid jepyauaq-uou pue snouahuep sui ahuaeyp ot Aem isaq aun 'uoisnpuon ul 
sasen jo sanons sey isuap Aeuuaian aaa 'anamon ueap Ae Aleauah ane yanou aul jo seaie alqisia au reun ioey aun aas
demonstrating its ineffectiveness as well as those showing its dangers.
disease (e.g-, diabetes or uremia) or compromise
 presentations in which it is particularly valuable. This
anesthetic safety (cardiopulmonary disease, anemia,
 includes patients with significant periodontal disease
hepatopathy).61l The conscious oral examination should
 despite a lack of gingival inflammation or significant
identify most obvious oral pathologies (fractured, intrin-
calculus and also those with dark pigmented gingiva.
sically stained, or mobile teeth; oral masses; and large 
s a o ab s   pe s 
tooth resorptive [TR] lesions) as well as allow for a
disease involving the molar teeth while the rest of the
preliminary assessment of periodontal status.
mouth is fairly healthy. Moreover, these teeth are typically
An additional exam room diagnostic tool is provided
difficult or impossible to evaluate on conscious oral exam,
by a periodontal diagnostic strip.^ This product measures 
 but infection would be demonstrated on the test strip,.1.12
the production of thiols, which are produced by
Following the conscious oral examination, the veteri-
periodontal pathogens. A quick swipe of the maxillary
 narian can then discuss with the owner the various
gingival margin will reveal visual evidence of the severity
disease processes found on the examination as well as the
of periodontal infection, improving compliance with
available treatment options. It is best to utilize visual
 dental recommendations. While this product is certainly
educational materials during discussions with clients, to
a valuable tool for any patient, there are several
aid in their understanding. A list of resources for these
134  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Box 10.3 Scheduling of dental procedures
It is impossible to fully evaluate the conscious veterinary patient. Therefore, it is quite common for dental procedures to take much 
longer than anticipated when unexpected pathology is discovered during the anesthetized exam. Furthermore, providing
appropriate periodontal therapy (as presented in this text), including thorough subgingival scaling, charting, and radiology. is
au ane buueap pue suawssasse jeiuopouad ateudoidde buuoad Aq Auo jeun 'laaamoy 'aou on jueodw s ll buwnsuon-aw
financial investment and anesthetic risk justified.
These factors make scheduling dental procedures within a general practice challenging. which often leads to overschedul-
ing. This results in either unhappy staff inappropriate patient care, or both. A proper presurgical exam will minimize but not
eliminate this issue. Provided below is a rough guide for the minimum amount of time that should be allotted for various
dental procedures. Note that this will be affected by the quality of equipment as well as staff skills. Finally. remember to
 allow time to treat any non-periodontal pathology (such as fractured teeth, tooth resorption, or oral masses) that is noted on
conscious exam.
 Utilizing the AvDC periodontal disease classification below. assign a time slot to each prophylaxis procedure and limit the
-bisap Ajnut ol 'ssanb patenpa ue ale saujapinh patejal-abeis pue suoeryissep aur ieyt anon 'awj algeeae aui oi ase
nate the level of disease. periodontal probing and dental radiographs are required, and these steps can only be performed
after the patient is anesthetized.
 Periodontal Disease Classification (AVDC Nomenclature Committee, www.avdc.org)
● Normal (PDo): Clinically normal; no gingival inflammation or periodontitis clinically evident.
● Stage 1 (PD1): Gingivitis only, without attachment loss. The height and architecture of the alveolar margin are normal
 suawaaloui uonesiny I aheis e si aayi sow je no 'ssol suawuene jo %sz ueui ssal siuopoad Ajee :(zad) z ahens ●
multirooted teeth. There are early radiographic signs of periodontitis. The loss of periodontal attachment is less than 25% as
measured either by probing of the clinical attachment level or radiographic determination of the distance of the alveolar margin
from the cementoenamel junction relative to the length of the root.
● Stage 3 (PD3): Moderate periodontitis: 25-50% of attachment loss as measured either by probing of the clinical attachment
level or radiographic determination of the distance of the alveolar margin from the cementoenamel junction relative to the
length of the root, or there is a stage 2 furcation involvement in multirooted teeth.
[eiup aul jo bugoid Aq jaya panseaw se ssol luawupene jo %os ueul alow :suopojad panueapy :(tad) t ahers ●
attachment level or radiographic determination of the distance of the alveolar margin from the cementoenamel junction relative
to the length of the root, or there is a stage 3 furcation involvement in multirooted teeth.
Stage-Related Guidelines for Minimum Time Scheduling for Dental Procedures
Dog:
● Stage 1:60-75 minutes
● Stage 2: 75-90 minutes
● Stage 3: 90-120 minutes
● Stage 4: 120-180 minutes
Cat
Stage 1: 30min
 Stage 2: 30-60 min
 Stage 3: 60-120min
 Stage 4: 120-150min
materials is included in appendix 4, and/or clinics can
 procedure time and financial costs to the client. The
create their own “smile" book or computer slideshow of
client should be made aware at this point that a complete
common cases for these conversations. This face-to-face
oral examination is not possible on a conscious patient.
discussion will improve client understanding of the dis-
Therefore, the preoperative estimate is only preliminary,
ease processes and associated sequela and should there-
and the client should be warned that it can (and often
fore increase client understanding and acceptance of
will) increase. In addition, the prudent practitioner will
 proposed therapy.
allot for a certain number of dental procedures per day
Based on the oral examination findings, the practi-
based on the anticipated time involved for each case, as
tioner can create a more accurate estimate both of
 dental procedures vary widely in the required amount of
The Complete Dental Cleaning 135
Figure 10.1 Properly attired dental technician performing a dental cdeaning. Her eyes, lungs, and hands are well protected from the
aerosolized bacteria. Furthermore, the gown protects her cdothes from contamination, which decreases the spread throughout the
hospital. Finally, note that this procedure is being performed in a dedicated dental surgery suite.
time. For example, two stage IV dental procedures can
personal protective equipment (mask, goggles, and
take longer than five stage I and Il procedures (see
gloves) at all times to decrease contamination
Box 10.3). By scheduling patients as assigned by stage or
(Figure 10.1).48.12212 Dental procedures also must not be
severity of dental disease, the veterinarian and his or her
performed in “sterile” environments such as surgical
support team will not be rushed, which improves patient
suites. Furthermore, they should not be performed near
care and staff morale (and possibly their health too).12
any sick or compromised patients or near any clean pro-
This small investment of time prior to the procedure will
cedures (including blood draws and catheterizations
improve the experience of everyone involved (veteri-
saq ae sanpanod [ejua at'([reun io snouaau]
narian, technician, receptionist, client, and patient).
confined to their own designated room, ideally with fil-
ters (HEPA) on the ventilation ducts, as airborne aero-
Staff and patient protection
sols have been shown to affect the entire office.3-26
Numerous studies have shown that ultrasonic and sonic
Finally, it is important to remember that aerosols will
scalers create significant pathogenic aerosols (see
contaminate the clothing of the operator and can then be
spread throughout the entire hospital.2 Therefore, gowns
 contaminated and contain not only bacteria but also fungi
are recommended to be worn in the dental operatory
 and viruses.13-15 The infectious organisms are not only sup-
and to be discarded or washed following the procedure
(see Figure 10.1).12
 os a ae   sd e  
numbers of infectious organisms within the water lines of
the mechanized hand-pieces (sonic and ultrasonic scalers,
Step 2: Chlorhexidine lavage
as well as high-speed hand-pieces).16-18s Therefore, a bacte-
The oral cavity is a contaminated area and thorough
rial water filter or chlorhexidine flushing of the system is
dental cleanings are mildly invasive. This means that
recommended to decrease contamination.19
dental cleanings often result in a transient bacteremia,27
 In addition, low levels of aerosolization occur during
which is more severe in patients with periodontitis.28.9
hand scaling as well as simple oral examination.2 These
Dental cleanings cause bacterial aerosolization and
 pathogenic aerosols have been linked to numerous dele-
contamination of the office environment when ultra-
terious effects on the staff of human dental practices (see
sonic instruments are employed (as above). Finally,
below). Staff members performing dental prophylactic
while the incidence of pneumonia is positively related
(or any dental) procedures should be instructed to wear
to the duration of intubation, it can occur with even
136
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Figure 10.3 Careful removal of a large accumulation of dental
calculus with an extraction forceps.
Figure 10.2 Chlorhexidine lavage.
short surgical procedures, so it is ideal to minimize the
are two main types (magnetostrictive and piezoelec-
number of oral pathogens whenever intubation is
tric).4 Both of these ultrasonic scalers vibrate at approx-
planned.3 Rinsing the oral cavity with a 0.12% or 0.2%
solution of chlorhexidine gluconate (Figure 10.2) prior
have an elliptical pattern of vibration, so all sides of the
to commencing the prophylaxis has been shown to
 instrument are useful.4 Piezoelectric systems, however,
 decrease the bacterial load.3.31-34 Allowing 1 minute of
are thought to have a linear pattern of vibration and ergo
contact time has been recommended as an effective
only the sides (not the front or back) of the instrument
minimum. This very short step has been shown to
 are effective at plaque removal.432 A recent study has
decrease the degree of bacteremia following extrac-
shown, however, that piezoelectrics also have an elliptical
tions" and would be expected to be effective in cases of
 motion, concluding that they can actually be used on all
 periodontal therapy as well. The effectiveness of this
surfaces.4 An additional advantage of piezoelectrics is
procedure can be surmised from a study that showed
that they produce significantly less heat than magneto-
that open heart surgery patients had better survival
 strictives and are less damaging to the enamel, which
rates if their mouths were rinsed with chlorhexidine
 means they may be the safer choice.39
gluconate prior to surgery.36 Not only does the reduction
Both types of ultrasonic scalers are very efficient and
 of oral bacteria benefit the patient, it also lowers the
provide the additional benefit of creating an antibacterial
number of aerosolized bacteria and thus reduces the
effect in the coolant spray (cavitation).32.4.43
 degree of staff contamination.3237
Sonic scalers run on compressed air and vibrate at
only 2,000-6,500 Hz,4213z39 although speeds of up to
Step 3: Supragingival cleaning
9,000 Hz have been reported.4 Most reports indicate that
Very large accumulations of calculus can be quickly
 this slower speed results in longer scaling time compared
 to ultrasonics;* however, some report equal time,45 and
However, this must be done very carefully to avoid tooth
 at least one report indicated that sonic scalers are actu-
and gingival damage.? Because current mechanical
 ally faster.* At slower speeds they generate minimal heat,
scalers are very effective in removing large calculus
 and therefore may be a safer alternative to ultrasonics.47
deposits,2 this author does not often use forceps.
 Sonic scalers also have an elliptical pattern of vibration,
Supragingival  cleaning  can  be performed 
via
 so all sides of the instrument are useful.3z It was classi-
 mechanical or hand scaling but is best performed using a
cally believed that they do not offer the antibacterial
combination of the modalities.21
effects of the ultrasonics; however, this fundamental
belief is being challenged.48a49 Sonic scalers run on a
Mechanical scalers
higher amplitude (10 times or more as compared to
Mechanical scalers include both sonic and ultrasonic
ultrasonics), which may be more damaging to the root
types. The most common type of mechanical scaler in
 surface.45° (See chapter 23 for a complete discussion of
veterinary dentistry today is the ultrasonic model. There
 mechanical scalers.)
The Complete Dental Cleaning 137
Mechanical scaling
(See chapters 11 and 23 for detailed information on
subgingival tips.)
When using any of the mechanical scalers, the first con-
The instrument should be gently grasped with the fin-
cern is the power setting of the instrument. Ultrasonic
gers of the dominant hand (Figure 10.6).1oz1 Avoid using
tips have a recommended vibrational velocity (Hz)
a whole palm grip as this tends to reduce tactile sensi-
range, and this should be determined and set prior to ini-
tivity, increase operator fatigue, and result in both
tiating scaling. The power should be set low and adjusted
 decreased operator ability to sense residual calculus and
upward to the minimum required power.? Note that
there may be a different setting for the same instrument/
a tendency toward placing too much downward pressure
on the tooth (see below).
tip when it is utilized subgingivally. The area of maximum
Next, the side of the instrument is placed in contact
vibration for ultrasonic scalers is 1-3mm from the
tip.3951 Piezoelectric scalers only function in the last
with the tooth surface (Figure 10.7) with a very light
(feather) touch.5213s51 Too much pressure on the instru-
 3 mm from the tip; however, magnetostrictive scalers are
ment will not improve its efficiency. In fact, applying
useful (but not nearly as effective) over a much larger
area, which is up to 12 mm for the ferrite rod type.4 Do
excessive pressure on the tooth surface will dampen the
vibration, which may actually make the instrument less
 not use the very tip of the instrument as it is not effective
for calculus removal and can potentially damage the
tooth (Figure 10.4).4.21
Next, it is important to ensure that there is adequate
coolant being delivered through the working end of the
7
when the unit is activated (Figure 10.5).21 If minimal or
.
excessive coolant is released, adjust the water flow to an
动
appropriate level. Utilizing a mechanical scaler without
sufficient coolant can cause numerous deleterious
effects including tooth death.s.52 It is important to note
paonpou aq jou jsnu sdn jeuopoad prepueis je
under the gingival margin.3240 The water coolant will
not reach the working area of the instrument, which
results in overheating and possible tooth damage, espe-
cially when using magnetostrictive scalers. Specific
low-powered periodontal tips are available for subgin-
gival use, and clinicians and staff should familiarize
Figure 10.5 The fine spray of coolant fluid. This indicates proper
themselves with this equipment prior to their use.
 operation of the unit.
Figure 10.6 Proper grip for the use of a mechanical scaler. It is
Figure 10.4 Inappropriate use of an ultrasonic scaler. The tip is
gently held with the tips of the fingers (like a pencil) while the
ineffective for scaling and can damage the tooth
other two fingers are resting on a surface.
138 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
effective?3 and can result in damage to both the instru-
that actually causes pulp damage providing that the instru-
ment and the tooth.s.54
ment has adequate water cooling.525s Although the classic
Use the side surface of the terminal portion of the
recommendations may therefore be somewhat arbitrary,
instrument, keeping the tip parallel to the tooth, and
this author agrees that if the calculus is not removed from
then run across the entire tooth surface using numerous
a tooth in 15 seconds, it may be best to move to another
overlapping strokes in different directions.23 Keep the
 tooth and then return. This lengthy cleaning could also
instrument in motion at all times to avoid tooth damage.21
 indicate that either the equipment is not working prop-
It has long been recommended to strictly limit the
erly (inappropriate power setting or broken/worn tip/
amount of time ultrasonic scalers linger on one tooth.
stack) or that the user's technique is faulty. In these cases,
Iypically, it is recommended that they be kept in constant
check the equipment thoroughly and then redirect the
contact with tooth for no more than 15 seconds,21339
instrument so that the terminal 3 mm of the side of the
but some authors recommend only 5-7 seconds.51
 instrument is in contact with the tooth.
Interestingly, however, an exhaustive literature search can
Once the instrument loses contact with the tooth, the
 scaler can no longer be effective. The instrument should
 o ais   ns u  a
tooth surface in overlapping, wide, sweeping motions to
cover each mm2 of every tooth surface2i39.56 Plaque and
early calculus is difficult to visualize. Therefore, the
 operator should assume that the entire tooth is affected
and clean each tooth completely.
I should be further noted that most mechanical
scalers have a particular spot where they are most effec-
tive at calculus removal39 If calculus appears “tough"
 consider rotating the instrument slightly to ensure the
 proper orientation. This tiny adjustment may result in
dramatic improvement in cleaning efficiency. If calculus
is still not being removed relatively quickly, check the tip
for wear and check the power settings, as these may be
the culprit.5 It has been shown that damage affecting the
terminal 1 mm of the tip reduces efficiency of an ultra-
sonic scaler by 25%, and 2 mm by 50%5* (Figure 10.8).
Mechanical scalers are very efficient in plaque and
ol e uo saes puosn aue jo uosod ado iot ane
calculus removal. In addition, they tend to less operator
The side of the instrument, very near the tip, is applied gently to
fatigue (vs. hand scaling), which may decrease the
the tooth surface.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.8 Measuring tip wear. (a) Image showing a new (right) and used (left) ultrasonic tip. Note that the used tip has lost approxi-
mately 2 mm of its tip. This decreases its efficiency by approximately 50%. (b) Commercial wear chart
The Complete Dental Cleaning 139
incidence of repetitive motion injuries (such as carpal
tunnel).32.59 They can, however, be more damaging to the
tooth56.6o and may leave some calculus behind. Therefore,
it is recommended that a combination of hand scaling
and ultrasonic scaling be performed to ensure the
complete removal of calculus.21,56
Another concern with mechanical scalers is the pro-
duction of a bacteria-laden aerosol, which affects the
instruments must be coupled with good infection con-
trol (see “Staff and Patient Protection" above)
Finally, it should be noted that rotosonic scaling, while
 popular in the past, is no longer a recommended form of
scaling.4 This is due to the fact that these instruments
produce a significantly rougher surface compared to
Figure 10.9 Hand scalers: This sickle instrument is triangular in
hand and ultrasonic/sonic power scalers.54 In addition,
they are by far the most damaging mechanical scaling
shape with sharp edges and tip. Use for supragingival scaling
only.
instrument.39.40
Hand scaling
Equipment
Supragingival hand scaling is best performed with a
scaler. This is a triangular instrument with two sharp
cutting edges and a sharp tip (Figure 10.9).4.214056
Typically, the blade is positioned at a 90-degree angle to
the shaft, and this is called a universal scaler.? However,
area-specific scalers with different terminal angles are
also available, and these may improve cleaning ability in
some areas (especially distal) 213 Scalers are designed for
supragingival use only, as the shape of the instrument as
well as the sharp back and tip can easily damage the gin-
interproximal spaces.4 (See chapter 22 for a detailed
Figure 10.10 Modified pencil grasp.
description of periodontal hand instrumentation.)
Note: Periodontal hand instruments are only effective
when sharp. This means they need to be sharpened on a
root surfaces. Finally, the ring and pinkie fingers are
regular basis (at least weekly if used regularly). Ifa curette
rested on a stable surface, generally the target tooth or
or scaler has not been sharpened in over a few months, it
nearby teeth (Figure 10.11). Other stabilization points
will likely need to be professionally sharpened or replaced.
for the fingers or “finger rests" include the cross arch,
opposite arch, and finger on finger rests.521 This grasp
For sharpening instructions please see appendix 3.
and described method of cleaning allow for maximum
control during the scaling procedure.21
Technique
Hand instruments must also be used with a gentle
Scalers (as well as curettes) are typically held with a mod-
touch.21.s6 The instrument is held with the terminal shank
parallel to the tooth surface (if using a universal scaler,
such as the extended or open grasp or long reach can be
 the handle is also parallel) and the blade placed at the
necessary in certain situations (particularly distal in the
 gingival margin (Figure 10.12). Hand scalers are used in
mouth).3 The instrument is gently held at the textured
a pull stroke fashion (Figure 10.13), which helps avoid
 or rubberized end, between the tips of the thumb and
 inadvertent laceration of the gingiva by pulling away
index finger. The middle finger is placed near the
from the soft tissue.3956 The scaler's cutting surface
terminal end of the shaft and is used to feel for vibrations
should be run drawn against the tooth numerous times
that signal residual calculus or diseased/rough tooth/
 in overlapping strokes until the tooth feels smooth.21
140
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Step 4: Subgingival plaque and calculus
scaling
This is the most important step of the dental cleaning, as
supragingival plaque control is insufficient to treat
sons, this step is also the most difficult.? First, subgingi-
val calculus is harder than supragingival and tends to be
locked into tooth surface irregularities 56 Second, visu-
alization of the subgingival crown and root surfaces is
difficult and may be further limited by bleeding from the
inflamed tissues (requiring good tactile sense). Finally,
the gingival sulcus or periodontal pocket limits the
movement of the instrument." Because of these limita-
tions, the incidence of residual calculus increases with
Fgure 10.11 Ring and pinkie finger rest for the modified pencil grip.
 increasing pocket depth.67
Subgingival scaling has classically been performed by
hand with a curette, but advances in sonic and ultra-
sonic tips now allow their use under the gingival
 margin.214 Numerous studies have shown that sonic
and ultrasonic scaling is equal in effectiveness to tradi-
tional hand scaling.6872 One study actually found them
to be superior to hand scaling for cleaning class Il and
III furcations.73 It is therefore currently recommended
to use a combination of ultrasonic (or sonic) and hand
scaling for best results.21
Hand scaling
A curette has two cutting edges with a blunted toe and
bottom (Figure 10.14).2i40.56 The blunted bottom will
not cut through the delicate periodontal attachment, as
long as excess force is not applied.2 There are two types
Figure 10.12 Hand scaler correctly placed against the tooth. The
of standard curette, universal and Gracey. Universal
shank is placed parallel to the tooth and the blade starts at the
curettes usually have a 90-degree angle and are designed
gingival margin
to be used throughout the mouth providing that the
instrument is adapted to the tooth correctly. Gracey
curettes are area specific and are designed with different
angles to provide superior adaptation to specific areas
of the dentition. The proper curette should be selected
based on its angulation. Curettes are labelled by num-
bers that correlate as the lower the number (i.e., 1-2)
the smaller the terminal angle of the shank, and the
further rostral in the mouth the instrument is used 2156
(See chapter 22 for a complete discussion of hand
instruments.)
Manual subgingival scaling is a very technically
 demanding procedure, and although it will be described
here, the practitioner is directed to continuing educa-
tion programs to hone his or her skills.47 (See appendix
 4 for a list of hands-on training labs.) Subgingival scal-
ing is performed as follows.10.23s.5 First, place the blade
Figure 10.13 Pressure is placed against the tooth and the scaler
moved coronally in a firm, controlled movement. This removes the
of the instrument on the tooth surface just coronal to
calculus from the surface.
the free gingival margin, with the lower shank parallel
The Complete Dental Cleaning  141
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.14 (a and b) A dental curette: Note that the back and tip of the instrument are blunted.
(a)
Figure 10.15 Starting position for subgingival scaling. The blade
is placed against the tooth surface just coronal to the free gingival
margin, with the lower shank parallel to the tooth.
to the tooth surface (Figure 10.15). Next, the curette is
(b)
rotated so that the flat “face" of the blade is against the
tooth surface (Figure 10.16). This is done to minimize
the width of the instrument during insertion and to
allow the blade to slide under the calculus and engage
it. Next, insert the instrument gently to the base of the
sulcus or pocket (Figure 10.17). Once the bottom of the
pocket is reached, the instrument is rotated to create a
90-degree working angulation (Figure 10.18). *When
the terminal portion (or shank) is parallel to the tooth, a
i sd sod s  ao si  t
sharp/working edge of the instrument perpendicular to
the tooth surface, which is the correct orientation for
cleaning. Once properly positioned, slight pressure is
applied down onto the tooth surface. Finally, the instru-
ment is removed in the coronal direction from within
Figure 10.16 (a and b) The curette is rotated so that the flat
the pocket with a firm/short stroke (Figure 10.19). This
"face" of the blade is against the tooth surface.
142
2 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Figure 10.17 The instrument is inserted gently to the base of
Figure 10.19 The instrument is removed from within the pocket
the pocket.
with a firm, short stroke.
 technique is repeated with numerous overlapping
strokes in different apical to coronal directions until the
(a)
tooth/root feels smooth.56
Mechanical scaling
Traditional ultrasonic scalers (especially magnetostric-
tive) should not be used subgingivally to avoid damage
to the gingiva, periodontal tissues, and pulp.32 This
damage occurs due to excessive power settings as well
as too big ofa tip for the tight subgingival area. However,
the most common damage is thermal, because the
water coolant cannot reach the tip of the instrument.
Recently, sonic and ultrasonic scalers with specialized
periodontal tips have been developed for subgingival
use (Figure 10.20).21 These instruments are much easier
to use and thus may provide a superior cleaning in the
hands of novices; however, this has not been confirmed
(b)
by clinical studies.747 In addition, ultrasonic scaling
 may result in decreased levels of bacteria and endo-
toxins on the root surface. This owes to the fact that
ultrasonic waves produce cavitational activity, acoustic
turbulence, and acoustic microstreaming within the
 coolant spray, resulting in bacterial disruption.32.43.7
These activities may improve plaque reduction and
cleanliness of the root surface.7.78
To accomplish subgingival scaling, these instru-
 ments are used in a similar fashion as supragingival
scaling described above, but more care should be taken
not to damage the root surface. Again, this technique
is performed with a gentle touch using numerous
overlapping strokes until the root feels smooth
(Figure 10.21).21
Figure 10.18 (a and b) 0nce the bottom of the pocket is reached,
 For detailed information on subgingival cleaning
the instrument isrotated to create a 90-degree working angulation.
(hand and mechanical), please see chapter 11.
The Complete Dental Cleaning 
143
Figure 10.20 Selection of piezoelectric scaler tips. The thinner
subgingival tips are pictured on the left, with the thicker suprag-
ingival tips on the right.
Figure 10.22 Using a dental explorer along the gingival margin
to feel for residual calculus.
(a)
Figure 10.21 Correct use of a fine subgingival piezoelectric
 Scaler under the gingival margin.
(b)
Step 5: Residual plaque and calculus
identification
After scaling, it is recommended to check the teeth with
an explorer (Figure 10.22), feeling for any rough areas
that indicate small areas of dental pathology (such as dis-
eased cementum or enamel) or residual calculus.21
 Residual plaque and calculus may also be identified by
utilizing a plaque-disclosing solutionF (Figure 10.23) or
by drying the tooth surfaces with air (residual calculus
will appear chalky [Figure 10.24]).5.8,79
Step 6: Polishing
 Dental scaling (both mechanical and hand) will result in
Fgure 10.23 Plaque-disclosing solution: (a) Picture of postoperative
 microabrasion and roughening of the tooth surface,33
cleaning that appears to be complete. (b) After the disclosing solution 
which will result in increased plaque adherence.3930.81
is applied, the significant amount of residual calculus is apparent.
144
1 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.24 Effect of drying: (a) Picture of postoperative cleaning that appears to be complete. (b) However, when the tooth is dried.
the residual calculus is evident (red arrow)
(Figure 10.26a). This not only is less messy than standard
 prophy paste, it contains an antimicrobial and does not
contain other products (e.g-, propylene glycol) that may
interfere with restorative procedures (if indicated).
The polishing procedure is typically performed with a
rubber prophy cup on a slow-speed hand-piece with a
- a  (e od) e aap-
should be run at a slow speed, no greater than 3,000
 RPM.3.56 Faster rotation will not improve the speed or
quality of the procedure and may result in overheating
the tooth. In addition, it is important to use an adequate
amount of polish at all times. Running the prophy cup
without paste is not only inefficient; it may also overheat
the tooth.2 Therefore we recommend coating the teeth
with the polishing substance prior to polishing
Figure 10.25 Postscaling picture of a maxillary fourth premolar
Notice the significant gouging of the surface. This will lead to a
as needed. This will also save time, as the technician will
fast recurrence of plaque and calculus. (See chapter 2.)
 not need to return to the polishing supply as often.
As with scaling, every mm² of tooth surface should be
Polishing smoothes the surface of the teeth, thus retard-
ing plaque attachment.8 In human dentistry, the polish-
polished. Slight pressure must be placed down onto the
ing step is controversial due to the cumulative loss of
tooth to flare the edges of the prophy cup so as to polish
the subgingival areas (Figure 10.27). One tooth may be
enamel throughout the lifetime of the patient and the fact
that proper scaling with either hand or ultrasonic instru-
 polished for a maximum of 5 seconds at a time, to avoid
 Overheating.1339 The tooth can be further polished after
ments has been shown to leave a very smooth surface.21
 a short break (during which other teeth are polished).
However, veterinary dental cleanings are often per-
formed by less experienced operators who may leave the
Step 7: Sulcal lavage
tooth surface (especially the root) rough, leading to
increased plaque attachment (Figure 10.25). For this
During the cleaning and polishing steps, debris such as
reason, polishing continues to be recommended in
 si p po aosl aisd aod pe sn
veterinary patients.3.3.51.60
laden) accumulates in the gingival sulcus (or periodontal
 Practices can choose to use a commercially available
pockets)35 In some cases there are visible deposits, but
 polish, or make their own. This author recommends a
 in all cases there is microscopic debris. The presence of
slurry of flour of pumice and chlorhexidine solution.
these substances allows for continued infection and
These can be mixed in a dappen dish for each patient
inflammation, and therefore a gentle lavage of the sulcus
The Complete Dental Cleaning 145
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.26 Prophy paste: (a) Properly mixed polishing paste. (b) Pumice applied to the teeth prior to polishing. This will decrease the
polishing time and lessen the chances of overheating the tooth.
Figure 10.27 Prophy cup applied to the tooth. Pressure is applied
Figure 10.28 Sulcal lavage. The sulcus is gently rinsed utilizing a
against the tooth to flare out the cup and get it under the gingival
22-gauge blunt-ended cannula.
margin.
   ss   t  s
 is strongly recommended to improve healing.5.3.56 Sulcal
chlorhexidine does not delay wound healing and may
lavage is performed with a small (22-25) gauge blunt-
ended cannula. The cannula is placed gently into the
is evidence that postoperative chlorhexidine may actually
 sulcus and the solution injected while slowly moving
improve healing and alveolar bone height.87
along the arcades (Figure 10.28).
Sterile saline can be used as a lavage solution, but most
Step 8: Fluoride therapy (Optional)
dentists favor a 0.12% chlorhexidine solution.&3.s3p The
This is a controversial step, with some dentists recom-
 use of chlorhexidine was refuted by some veterinary den-
 mending that it be performed in all cases, and some den-
tists due to the cytotoxic effects on periodontal ligament
tists recommending that it never be done.5α The positive
146
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
is removed, which may expose underlying dentin." This
leads to sensitivity of the teeth, which is worst in the
cervical area.∞ Human literature reports that approxi-
 s a d o  
subgingival scaling and root planing.?" The application of
fluoride should help decrease this sensitivity.89
Fluoride preparations are placed on the teeth and
allowed to sit for the manufacturer's recommended
contact time (3 minutes for foam and 10 minutes for gel)
(Figure 10.29). After the appropriate contact time, the
fluoride should be removed either by wiping or blowing
it off with compressed air.* Fluoride should not be rinsed
 away with water, as rinsing will decrease its efficacy.2s9
Additional methods of managing tooth sensitivity
Figure 10.29 Fuoride application.
 include dentin bonding agents or the use of lasers.92
(a)
Discussion of these techniques is beyond the scope of this
book and should only be practiced after advanced training.
Step 9: Periodontal probing, oral evaluation,
and dental charting
This is a critically important step of a complete dental
prophylaxis but is unfortunately often poorly performed
 is  rn a a s  a 
systematically evaluated using both visual and tactile
senses. Careful visual examination should be performed
along with the periodontal evaluation. Salient findings
include (but are not limited to) fractured, mobile, or
 intrinsically stained teeth; foreign bodies; tooth defects
such are caries or tooth resorption; and oral masses. This
author recommends that the patient be placed in dorsal
recumbency for this step, as it will improve visualization.
The periodontal evaluation should begin with deter-
mining the plaque, calculus, and gingivitis indices (see
(b)
chapter 4 and appendix 5 for a description of these
indices). These key pieces of information are frequently
noted prior to the dental cleaning. Following this, the
periodontal status is measured. The only accurate
 method for detecting and measuring periodontal pockets
is with a periodontal probe, as pockets are not always
 diagnosed by radiographs.82.93.94
The periodontal evaluation should be initiated at the
first incisor of one of the quadrants. The measurements
are then continued distally one tooth at a time. Starting at
 midline and moving systematically distal in this fashion
will decrease the chance of a tooth being skipped.
 Periodontal probing is performed by gently inserting
Figure 10.30 Periodontal probing (a) in a dog and (b) in a cat.
the probe into the pocket until it stops and then
slowly “walking" the instrument around the tooth
aspects of fluoride include antiplaque and antibacterial
(Figure 10.30).s.56.93 Depth measurements should be taken
activities, hardening tooth structure, and decreasing tooth
 at six spots around every tooth.45s69 The normal sulcal
sensitivity15s.3.s Minimizing tooth sensitivity is most
 depth in dogs is 0-3 mm, and in cats is 0-0.5 mm.8.51.79.82
This author considers normal sulcal depth in toy breed
root exposure. When root planing is performed, cementum
 dogs to be less than or equal to 2mm (see Box 10.4).
The Complete Dental Cleaning   147
All abnormal findings (visual as well as periodontal
progresses clockwise so that the maxillary left is 200,
 probing depths) must be recorded on the dental chart.
mandibular left is 300, and the mandibular right is the
 Dental charting is easier and more efficient if performed
400 series. Next, starting at the rostral midline, the teeth
four-handed..19 This means that one person evaluates
are counted distally starting with the first incisor, which
the mouth and calls out the findings of pathology to the
is tooth 01. The canines are always number 04 and the
assistant, who records it on the chart. Using the modified
first molars are 09. For example, the left maxillary fourth
 Triadan system will also greatly increase efficiency of
 premolar is tooth 208. This has been extrapolated from
this step.
the fact that the complete dentition of the ancestral carni-
The modified Triadan system uses numbers to identify
vore has been determined by anatomists to consist of
the teeth.656.95 First, each quadrant is numbered starting
each quadrant containing 3 incisors, 1 canine tooth, 4
with the maxillary right quadrant as the 100 series. This
premolars, and 3 molars. (See appendix 2.)
Box 10.4 Probing
(a1)
(a2)
(a3)
(a4)
(a5)
(a6)
Figure 10.a Periodontal probing at six locations on the left maxillary canine of a dog-(1) mesio-buccal, (2) buccal, (3) disto-buccal,
(4) disto-palatal, (5) palatal, and (6) mesio-palatal.
148
3 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(b1)
(b2)
Figure 10.b Probing a patient with gingival enlargement. The attachment loss is the probing depth minus the gingival enlargement.
The periodontal probe measures a 6-7 mm pocket on the buccal aspect of the left mandibular canine (304). Although this is a
significant depth, when measured from the normal gingival margin, the area of enlargement is also 6-7 mm. This means that there is
actually no attachment loss.
(c1)
(c2)
ayl (t) uoissanan jeaibui ayl snyd yidap buiqoid ayl s! ssol luawupene ayl 'uoissanan jeaihuih ym juaed e buigoid y'ol ainb
periodontal probe measures a 6 mm pocket on the mesial aspect of the left maxillary fourth premolar (208) (yellow arrow). Although this
is just a moderate depth, when measured from the cementoenamel junction (white arrow), the attachment loss is 11 mm, which is very
significant. (2) Similarly, there is a mild 5.5 mm periodontal pocket on the buccal aspect of the right mandibular canine (404) (blue
arrow), but with 3.5 mm of gingival recession from the CEJ (purple arrow), this means 9 mm of attachment loss, which is very significant.
(d1)
(d2)
(d3)
Figure 1 0.d The outward appearance of the gingiva is notreliable to determine if disease is present. Al teeth must be probed regardless
'a aseasip jo subis premno ou ym ssol suawupeie jueuhis yim sase jo sadwexa aws ane bumolog 'anueneadde piemino jo
no to minimal gingivitis). (1) Left maxillary canine (204) in a dog with a 9 mm pocket. (2) Right mandibular third and fourth premolar in
 a dog with a 4mm pocket. (3) Right mandibular first molar in a dog with a 13 mm periodontal pocket and normal appearing gingiva.
The Complete Dental Cleaning 149
(d4)
(d5)
(d6)
Hgure 10.d (cont'd) (4) Lingual surface of the right mandibular first molar (409) in a dog with a dass Il furcation. (5) Distal surface of
the left maxillary canine (204) of a cat with a 4mm pocket. (6) Palatal surface of the left maxillary canine (204) of a cat with a 4mm pocket.
(e1)
(e2)
(e3)
Figure 10.e Example of a patient with a severely infected left mandibular second molar (310). This patient had recently been treated
 for halitosis via a "dental" at a general practice. There was no dental charting performed. (1) The patient outwardly had clean teeth 
and minimal evidence of disease. (2) However, when probed, there was a deep and significantly infected pocket between the first and
second molars. (3) Dental radiographs revealed the severe bone loss as well as the periapical rarefaction around 310 (red arrows).
 confirming the locus of infection. In this case, periodontal probing would have elucidated the infection and allowed for proper therapy
much earlier.
It is important that dental charts be of sufficient size
mouth radiographs on all dental patients to further elim-
to allow for accurate placement of pathology. This is
 inate missed pathology.%-98
especially true when practitioners are performing
 Dental radiographs are a critical aid in the evaluation
quality periodontal evaluations. There must be incisal
of dental pathology; however, they are NOT a substi-
as  well as  lateral  views of the teeth for accurate
tute for the clinical exam, for several reasons.4.9 First, a
recording of pathology. Furthermore, the incisal view
change in the radiographic exposure (especially vertical
must have enough space to accommodate the six mea-
angulation) can greatly affect the apparent level of
surements. The minimum size for an acceptable dental
bone.8z94 Next, it is well known that the earliest stages of
 chart is half of a page; however, most veterinary den-
bone loss will not be seen radiographically,100-1o2 Finally,.
tists utilize full-page charts (See appendix 2.) Sample
periodontal bone loss does not become radiographi-
charts are available for free download at www.vetdent-
cally evident until 30-50% of the mineralization is
alrad.com.
lost.9.1o3 Therefore, radiographic findings will always
underestimate bone loss.82.i This can be somewhat (but
Step 10: Dental radiographs
not completely) ameliorated by taking occlusal as well
Dental radiographs should be taken at a minimum of
as standard lateral views.1os Help with radiographic
every area of pathology noted on dental exam. This
interpretation is available for any questionable cases via
n r st ie d red ae s
telemedicine review at www.vetdentalrad.com.(See
normal, fractured or chipped teeth, masses, swellings, or
chapter  9  for a  complete  discussion  of  periodontal
 missing teeth. In addition, numerous studies support full
dental radiology.)
150
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Step 11: Treatment planning
 In this step, the practitioner uses all available information
(visual, tactile, and radiographic findings) to determine
appropriate therapy. It is important to consider overall
patient health, the owner's interest and willingness to per-
form homecare, and all necessary follow-up.56 After
forming an appropriate dental treatment plan for the
patient, the estimate should be revised and the client
contacted for consent. There are numerous therapeutic
 possibilities (including referral) depending on the type
of pathology. The reader is directed to the following
chapters for more advanced periodontal therapies. In
addition, the pursuit of advanced training in other areas
of veterinary dentistry (endodontic, exodontic, and
restorative) is strongly recommended. This type of
Figure 10.31 Application of the barrier sealant.
 pa d no sixa u pn aq u i
hands-on labs.
 It is very important to note that if a patient requires
to review radiographs (and clinical photographs if avail-
extensive treatment that would entail a lengthy anes-
able) with the client. This meeting with the client should
thesia, or if the practitioner would be unduly rushed,
also be used to reinforce clinical findings, discuss the
rescheduling the remainder of the dental work is defi-
 performed treatments, and finally to discuss periodontal
nitely an acceptable alternative. The two parameters
disease in general. It is important to cover both immediate
that directly affect long-term morbidity and mortality
 postoperative instructions and long-term periodontal
 in anesthetized patients are hypothermia and hypoten-
care, including homecare to be provided by the client. It 
sion,jo6.107 which become more pronounced with
is important to note that long-term success of periodontal
extended anesthesia time. Hypothermia is especially a
 treatment frequently hinges on the clien's commitment
concern in smaller patients.1 In fact, anesthetic length
to providing homecare. In fact, professional therapy has
has been shown to increase the complication rate in
been shown to be of little value without homecare.1z
both humans and animals 1o7.1o9 However, if the patient
is stable and all parameters (especially blood pressure
and temperature) are within normal physiologic
Box 10.5 Key points
parameters, there is no universally recommended pre-
determined cutoff for anesthesia. (See chapter 21 for a
A complete dental prophylaxis is an involved procedure
thorough discussion of anesthesia.)
with numerous steps.
All dental prophylactic procedures must be performed
Step 12 (0ptional): Application of a barrier
under general anesthesia.
 Each step must be properly performed to achieve a
sealant
positive outcome.
The barrier sealante is a waxy substance that is clinically
 Sufficient time must be allotted for the procedure to have
proven to decrease plaque and calculus. This author has
significant clinical benefit.
seen positive effects in clinical practice; however, some
 Subgingival scaling is the most important step of a
veterinary dentists dispute the efficacy of the product.
prophylaxis.
Although it has yet not been proven to decrease gingivitis
 A complete oral exam and charting is a critical part of the
and subsequent periodontal disease, due to its placement
procedure.
Hands-on laboratories will improve the efficiency and
at and below the gingival margin, it should theoretically
quality of cleanings.
work. Following a prophylaxis, the teeth are dried and the
product is then applied according to the manufacturer's
directions (Figure 10.31). Continued applications are per-
Notes
formed by the client at home on a weekly basis.
A. OraStrip, PDx BioTech.
Step 13: Client education
B. CET Oral Hygiene Rinse, Virbac Animal Health.
C. Reveal, Butler Schein.
 D. CET Oral Hygiene Rinse, Virbac Animal Health.
E. Oravet, Merial Limited.
The Complete Dental Cleaning 151
Suggested reading
20. Huntley DE, CampbellJ. Bacterial contamination ofscrub jackets
during dental hygiene procedures. J Dent Hyg. 72(3):19-23,
Huffrman LJ. Oral examination. In: Small Animal Dental, Oral and
1998.
Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA ed.).
21. Pattison AM, Pattison GL. Scaling and root planing. In: Carranza's
London: Manson, 2010, pp. 39-61.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 749-797.
Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis. In: Veterinary
22. Harrel SK, Barnes JB, Rivera-Hildalgo E Aerosol and splatter con-
Dental Techniques for the Srmall Animal Practitioner. 2nd ed.
tamination from the operative site during ultrasonic scaling. J Am
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998, pp. 133-166.
Dent Assoc. 129:1241, 1998.
23. Legnani P, Checchi L, Pelliccioni GA, D'Achille C. Atmospheric
References
contamination during dental procedures. Quintessence Int.
25(6):435-439, 1994.
1. Bellows J. Treatment of periodontal disease. In: Feline Dentistry:
24. Osorio R, Toledano M, Liebana J, Rosales JI, Lozano JA. Environ-
Oral Assessment, Treatment, and Preventative Care. Ames, IA:
mental microbial contamination. Pilot study in a dental surgery.
Wiley-Blackwell, 2010, pp. 181-195.
Int Dent J. 45(6):352-357, 1995.
2. Colmery B. The gold standard of veterinary oral health care. Vet
25. Leggat PA, Kedjarune U. Bacterial aerosols in the dental clinic:
Clin North Am. 35(4):781-787, 2005.
A review. Int Dent J. 51(1):39-44, 2001.
3. Niemiec BA. Professional teeth cleaning. J Vet Dent. 20(3):
26. Al Maghlouth A, Al Yousef Y, Al-Bagieh NH. Qualitative and
175-180, 2003.
quantitative analysis of microbial aerosols in selected areas within
4. Bellows J. Equipping the dental practice In: Small Animal Dental
the College of Dentistry, King Saud University. Quintessence Int.
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
38(5):e222-228, 2007.
Blackwell,2004, pp. 13-55.
27. Lafaurie GI, Mayorga-Fayad I, Torres MF, Castillo DM, Aya MR,
5. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis and
Baron A, Hurtado PA. Periodontopathic microorganisms in
 periodontal disease stages. In: Veterinary Dental Techniques, for
peripheric blood after scaling and root planing. I Clin Periodontol.
the Small Animal Practitioner. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders,
34(10):873-879,2007
2004, pp. 175-232.
28. Forner L, Larsen T, Kilian M, Holmstrup P Incidence of bacteremia
 6. Huffman LJ. Oral examination. In: Small Animal Dental, Oral and
after chewing, tooth brushing and scaling in individuals with
Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA ed.).
periodontal inflammation. J Clin Periodontol. 33(6):401-407, 2006.
London: Manson, 2010, pp. 39-61.
29. Daly CG, Mitchell DH, Highfield JE, Grossberg DE, Stewart D.
7. Colmery B. The gold standard of veterinary oral health care. Vet
Bacteremia due to periodontal probing: A clinical and microbio-
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 35(4):781-787, 2005.
logical investigation. J Periodontol. 72(2):210-214, 2001.
 8. Bellows J. Periodontal equipment, materials, and techniques. In:
30. Okuda M, Kaneko Y, Ichinohe T, Ishihara K, Okuda K. Reduction
Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a
of potential respiratory pathogens by oral hygienic treatment in
Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2004, pp. 115-173.
patients undergoing endotracheal anesthesia. J Anesth. 17(2):
9. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
84-91,2003.
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
31. Fine DH, Yip J, Furgang D, Barnett ML, Olshan AM, Vincent J.
pp. 186-231.
Reducing bacteria in dental aerosols: Pre-procedural use of an
10. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Periodontal therapy and sur-
antiseptic mouthrinse. J Am Dent Assoc. 124(5):56-58, 1993.
gery. In: Veterinary DentalTechniques for the Small AnimalPrac-
32. Jahn CA. Sonic and ultrasonic instrumentation. In: Carranza's
titioner. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998, pp. 167-213.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 828-835.
11. Joubert KE. Pre-anesthetic screening of geriatric dogs. JS Afr Vet
33. Harrel SK, Molinari J. Aerosols and splatter in dentistry: A brief
Assoc. 78(1):31-35, 2007.
review of the literature and infection control implications. J Am
12. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Ergonormics and general health
Dent Assoc. 135(4):429-437, 2004.
safety in the dental workplace. In: Veterinary Dental Techniques
34. Day CJ, Sandy JR, Ireland AJ. Aerosols and splatter in dentistry—a
for the SmallAnimal Practitioner. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders,
neglected menace? Dent Update 33(10):601-602, 604-606, 2006.
1998, pp. 497-506.
 35. Tomas I, Alvarez M, Limeres J, Tomas M, Medina J, Otero JL, Diz P.
13. Szymanska J. Dental bioaerosol as an occupational hazard in a
Effect of chlorhexidine mouthwash on the risk of post-extraction
dentist's workplace. Ann Agric Environ Med. 14(2):203-207, 2007.
bacteremia. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 28(5):577-582, 2007.
14. Harrel SK. Airborne spread of disease—the implications for den-
36. Limeback H. Implications of oral infections on systemic diseases
tistry. J Calif Dent Assoc. 32(11):901-906, 2004.
in the institutionalized elderly with a special focus on pneumonia.
15. Pederson ED, Stone ME, Ragain JC Jr, Simecek JW. Waterline
Ann Periodontol. 3(1):262-275, 1998.
biofilm and the dental treatment facility: A review. Gen Dent.
37. Fine DH, Mendieta C, Barnett ML, Furgang D, Meyers R, Olshan A,
50(2):190-195, 2002.
Vincent J. Efficacy of preprocedural rinsing with an antiseptic in
16. Shearer BJ. Biofilm and the dental office. J Am Dent Assoc.
reducing viable bacteria in dental aerosols. J Periodontol.
127:181-189, 1996.
63(10):821-824, 1992.
17. Meiller TF, Depaola LG, Kelley JI, Baqui AA, Turng BF, Falkler
 38. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology In: Veterinary Dentistry,
WA. Dental unit waterlines: Biofilms, disinfection and recurrence.
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
J Am Dent Assoc. 130(1):65-72, 1999.
pp.186-231.
18. Wirthlin MR, Marshall GW Jr, Rowland RW. Formation and
39. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis. In: Veteri-
decontamination of biofilms in dental unit waterlines. I Periodon -
nary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner. 2nd
tol. 74(11):1595-1609, 2003.
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998, pp. 133-166.
19. Bellows JI. The dental operatory. In: Small Animal Dental Equip-
40. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Dental equipment. Wigs RB, Lobprise
ment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell,
HB. Periodontology In: Veterinary Dentistry, Principles and
2004, pp. 3-12.
Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997, pp. 1-28.
152
2 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
41. Lea SC, Felver B, Landini G, Walmsley AD. Three-dimensional
63. Legnani P, Checchi L, Pelliccioni GA, DAchille C. Atmospheric
analyses of ultrasonic scaler oscillations. J Clin Periodontol.
contamination during dental procedures. Quintessence Int.
36(1):44-50, 2009.
25(6):435-439, 1994.
42. Felver B, King DC, Lea SC, Price GJ, Damien Walmsley A. Cavita-
 64. Westfelt E, Rylander H, Dahlen G, Lindhe J. The effect of suprag-
tion occurrence around ultrasonic dental scalers. Ultrason Sono-
ingival plaque control on the progression of advanced periodontal
chem. 16(5):692-697, 2009.
disease. J Clin Periodontol. 25(7):536-541, 1998.
43. Arabaci T, Cicek Y, Canakci CE Sonic and ultrasonic scalers in
65. Canis MF, Kramer GM, Pameijer CM. Calculus attachment:
periodontal treatment: A review. Intl J Dent Hyg. 5(1):2-12, 2007.
Review of the literature and findings. J Periodontol. 50:406, 1979.
44. Loose B, Kiger R. An evaluation of basic periodontal therapy using
66. Zander HA. The attacherment of calculus to root surfaces. J Peri-
sonic and ultrasonic scalers. J Clin Periodontol Res. 14:29-33, 1987.
odontol. 24:16, 1953.
45. Lie T, Leknes KN. Evaluation of the effect on root surfaces of air
 67. Caffesse RG, Sweeney PL, Smith BA. Scaling and root planing
turbine scalers and ultrasonic instrumentation. J Periodontol.
with and without periodontal flap surgery. I Clin Periodontol.
56(9):522-531, 1985.
13(3):205-210, 1986.
46. Clinical Research Associates. Sonic and ultrasonic scalers. Provo,
68. Copulos TA, Low SB, Walker CB, Trebilcock YY, Hefti AE Com-
UT. 6:1, 1982.
 parative analysis between a modified ultrasonic tip and hand
47. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dentalequipment and care. In:
instrurments on clinical parameters of periodontal disease. J Peri-
Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner.
odontol. 64(8):694-700, 1993.
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 31-106.
69. Odeid PR, D'Hoore W, Bercy P. Comparative clinical responses
48. Hermann JS, Rieder C, Rateitschak KH, Hefti AE. Sonic and ultra-
related to the use of periodontal instrumentation. J Clin Peri-
sonic scalers in a clinical comparison. A study in non-instructed
odontol. 31(3):193-199, 2004.
patients with gingivitis or slight adult periodontitis. Schweiz
70. Beuchat M, Bussinger A, Schmidlin PR, Michel B, Lehmann B,
Monatsschr Zahnmed. 105(2):165-170, 1995.
Lutz E Clinical comparison of the effectiveness of novel sonic
49. Derdilopoulou FV, Nonhoff J, Neumann K, Kielbassa AM. Micro-
instruments and curettes for periodontal debridement after
biological findings after periodontal therapy using curettes,
2 months. J Clin Periodontol. 29(7):1145-1150, 2001.
Er:YAG laser, sonic, and ultrasonic scalers. J Clin Periodontol.
 71. Obeid PR, D'Hoore W, Bercy P. Comparative clinical responses
34(7):588-598, 2007.
related to the use of various periodontal instrumentation. J Clin
50. Jacobson L, Blomlo J, Lindskog S. Root surface texture after differ
Periodontol. 31(3):193-199, 2004.
ent scaling modalities. Scand J Dent Res. 102(3):156-160, 1994.
72. Thornton S, Garnick J. Comparison of ultrasonic to hand instru-
51. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
ments in the removal of subgingival plaque. J Periodontol.
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
53(1):35-37, 1982.
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, p. 159-181.
73. Leon LE, Vogel RI. A comparison of the effectiveness of hand scal-
52. Nicoll BK, Peters RJ. Heat generation during ultrasonic instru-
ing and ultrasonic debridement in furcations evaluated by
mentation of dentin as affected by different irrigation methods.
differential dark field microscopy. J Periodontol. 58(2):86-94, 1987.
J Periodontol. 69(8):884-888, 1998.
 74. Kocher T, Rihling A, Momsen H, Plagmann HC. Effectiveness of
53. Trenter SC, Landini G, Walmsley AD. Effect of loading on the
subgingival instrumentation with power-driven instruments in
vibration characteristics ofthin magnetostrictive ultrasonic scaler
 the hands of experienced and inexperienced operators. A study on
inserts. J Periodontol. 74(9):1308-1315, 2003.
manikins. J Clin Periodontol. 24(7):498-504, 1997.
54. Brine EJ, Marretta SM, Pijanowski GJ, Siegel AM. Comparison of
75. Kocher T, Riedel D, Plagmann HC. Debridement by operators
the effects of four different power scalers on enamel tooth surface
with varying degrees of experience: A comparative study on
in the dog. I Vet Dent. 17(1):17-21, 2000.
manikins. Quintessence Int. 28(3):191-196, 1997.
 55. Verez-Fraguela JL, Vives Vallés MA, Ezquerra Calvo LJ. Efects of
 76. Drisko CH. Root instrumentation. Power-driven versus manual
ultrasonic dental scaling on pulp vitality in dogs: An experimental
scalers, which one? Dent Clin North Am. 42(2):229-244, 1998.
study. J Vet Dent. 17(2):75-79, 2000.
77. Walsley AD, Laird WR, Williams AR. Dental plaque removal by
56. Niemiec BA. Periodontal therapy. Top Companion Anim Med.
cavitational activity during ultrasonic scaling. I Clin Periodontol.
23(2):81-90, 2008.
15:539, 1988.
 57. Lea SC, Landini G, Walmsley AD. The effect of wear on ultrasonic
 78. Khambay BS, Walmsley AD. Acoustic microstreaming: Detection
scaler tip displacement amplitude. J Clin Periodontol. 33(1):
and measurement around ultrasonic scalers. J Periodontol.
37-41, 2006.
70:626, 1999.
58. Bellows J. Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Tech-
 79. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Oral exam and diagnosis. In: Veterinary
niques, a Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2004.
Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
59. Holmstrorm SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. General health, safety, and
Raven, 1997,pp. 87-103.
ergonomics in the veterinary dental workplace. In: Veterinary
 80. Silness J. Fixed prosthodontics and periodontal health. Dent Clin 
Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner. 3rd ed.
North Am. 24(2):317-329, 1980.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp.637-664.
81. Berglundh T, Gotfredsen K, Zitzmann NU, Lang NP, Lindhe J.
60. Fichtel T, Chra M, Langerova E, Biberaur G, Vlain M. Observa-
e sed-ad pnu aiil jo ussaod snauos
tions on the effects of scaling and polishing methods on enamel.
implants with different surface roughness: An experimental study
JVet Dent. 25(4):231-235, 2008.
in dogs. Clin Oral Implants Res. 18(5):655-661, 2007.
61. Huntley DE, Campbell J. Bacterial contarmination of scrub jackets
 82. Niemiec BA. Veterinary dental radiology. In: Small Animal
during dental hygiene procedures. J Dent Hyg. 72(3):19-23, 1998.
Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook
 62. Miller RL, Micik RE, Abel C, et al. Studies on dental aerobiology.
(Niemiec BA ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 63-87.
II. Microbial splatter discharged from the oral cavity of dental
 83. Jahn CA. Supragingival and subgingival irricgation. In: Carranza's
patients. J Dent Res. 50:621, 1971.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 836-844.
The Complete Dental Cleaning 153
84. Chang YC, Huang FM, Tai KW, Chou MY. The effect of sodium
99. Niemiec, BA. Case based dental tadiology. Top Companion
hypochlorite and chlorhexidine on cultured human periodontal
Anim Med. 24(1):4-19, 2009.
ligament cells. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
100. Ramadan AB, Mitchell DE A roentgenographic study of experi-
Endod. 92(4):446-450, 2001.
mental bone destruction. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol.
85. Tatnall FM, Leigh IM, Gibson JR. Comparative study of anti-
15:934-943, 1962.
101. Bender IB, Seltzer S. Roentgenographic and direct observation of
nocytes and fibroblasts. Skin Pharmacol. 3:157-163, 1990.
experimental lesions in bone: I. 1961. J Endod. 29(11):702-706,
86. Quirynen M, Mongardini C, de Soete M, et al. The role of
2003.
chlorhexidine in the one-stage full-mouth disinfection treatment
102. Bender IB, Seltzer S. Roentgenographic and direct observation of
 of patients with advanced adult periodontitis. Long-term clinical
experimental lesions in bone: I1. 1961. J Endod. 29(11):707-712,
and microbiological observations. J Clin Periodontol. 27(8):
2003.
578-589, 2000.
103. Mulligan TM, Aller MS, Williams CE. Interpretation of
 87. Bragger U, Schild U, Lang NP. Efect of chlorhexidine (0.12%)
periodontal disease. In: Atlas of Canine and Feline Dental
rinses on periodontal tissue healing after tooth extraction. (II).
Radiography. Trenton, NJ: Veterinary Learning Systems, 1998,
Radiographic parameters. J Clin Periodontol. 21(6):422-430,
Pp. 104-123.
1994.
104. Rees TD, Biggs NL, Collings CK. Radiographic interpretation of
 88. Spackman SS, Bauer JG. Periodontal treatrment for older adults.
 periodontal osseous lesions. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol.
In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
32(1):141-153, 1971.
pp.675-692.
105. Tsugawa AJ, Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Gorrel C. Diagnostic value of
89. Klokkevold PR, Takei HH, Carranza FA. General principals of
 the use of lateral and occlusal radiographic views in comparison
periodontal surgery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology.
with periodontal probing for the assessment of periodontal
St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 887-901.
attachment of the canine teeth in dogs. Am J Vet Res. 64(3):
90. Fischer C, Wennberg A, Fischer ZRG, Attstrom R. Clinical eval-
255-261, 2003.
uation of pulp and dentine sensitivity after supragingival and
 106. Torossian A. Thermal management during anaesthesia and ther-
subgingival scaling. Endod Dent Traumatol. 7(6):259-265, 1991.
 moregulation standards for the prevention of inadvertent periop-
91. Von Troil B, Needleman I, Sanz M. A systemic review ofthe prev-
erative  hypothermia.
..Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol.
alence of root sensitivity following periodontal therapy. I Clin
22(4):659-668, 2008.
Periodontol. 29(Suppl 3):173-177, 2002.
107. Broadbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, Wood JLN. Results of the
92. Lan WH, Liu HC, Lin CP. The combined occluding effect of
confidential enquiry into perioperative small animal fatalities
sodium fluoride varnish and Nd:YAG laser irradiation on human
regarding risk factors for anesthetic-related death in dogs.
dental tubules. J Endodont. 25(6):424-426, 1999.
IAVMA 233(7):1096-1103, 2008.
93. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Clinical diagnosis. In: Carranza's
108. Hall LW, Clarke KW, Trim CM. Veterinary Anesthesia. 10th ed.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 540-560.
London: Saunders, 2001.
94. Tetradis S, Carranza FA, Fazio RC, Takei HH. Radiographic aids
109. Tiret L, Desmonts JM, Hatton F, Vourc'hG. Complications asso-
in the diagnosis of periodontal disease. In: Carranzas Clinical
ciated with anaesthesia—a prospective survey in France. Can
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 561-578.
Anaesth Soc J. 33:336-344, 1986.
95. Floyd MR. The modified Triadan system: Nomenclature for
110. Gengler WR, Kunkle BN, Romano D, Larsen D. Evaluation of a
veterinary dentistry. I Vet Dent. 8(4):18-19, 1991.
barrier sealant in dogs. J Vet Dent. 22(3):157-159.
96. Tsugawa AJ, Verstraete FJ. How to obtain and interpret
111. Roudebush P, Logan E, Hale, FA. Evidence-based veterinary den-
periodontal radiographs in dogs. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract.
tistry: A systematic review of homecare for prevention of
15(4):204-210, 2000.
periodontal disease in dogs and cats. J Vet Dent. 22(1):6-15, 2005.
97. Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Terpak CH. Diagnostic value of full-
112. Needleman I, Suvan J, Moles DR, Pimlott J. A systematic review of
mouth radiography in cats. Am J Vet Res. 59(6):692-695, 1998.
 professional mechanical plaque removal for prevention of
98. Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Terpak CH. Diagnostic value of full
 periodontal diseases. J Clin Periodontol. 32 Suppl 6:229-282,
mouth radiography in dogs. Am IVet Res.59(6):686-691, 1998.
2005.
Advanced non-surgical therapy
Introduction
Scaling is defined as the removal of plaque and calculus
-ugns pue jpaunidns yoq aens yooi aui uo
 [e rs a u ssand ae siod rpoan
val) without the intentional removal of tooth substance.
patients, especially older small and toy breed dogs. Any
 Root planing is the procedure of removing embedded
pockets deeper than normal for the species (i.e., 3 mm in
calculus along with cementum to leave a smooth and
a dog and 1 mm in a cat) are pathologic and in need of
clean root surface.3 These are not actually separate
 procedures, but they differ notably in the amount of
graphs performed under general anesthesia will reveal
applied pressure (or force) against the tooth surface.?
these pockets and allow for proper therapy.
 Non-surgical periodontal therapy involves removing
the infection (ie., plaque, calculus, and granulation
fissue) from the root surface and then smoothing the
diseased/roughened root surface (if necessary).13 This
 therapy markedly decreases the numbers of subgingival
bacteria and also changes the bacterial composition.
More specifically, the bacterial flora returns to a predom-
inantly gram-positive aerobic population that is compat-
ible with gingival health.4 This significant reduction in
periodontal pathogens reduces or even eliminates
 periodontal inflammation.67 Decreasing the infection
 ment, leading to a decrease in pocket depth.8
-sod pue) w g pue w g uaamiaq siaxod ssop u
sibly up to 6mm) that are not associated with tooth
mobility or other pathology (furcation, root caries) are
best treated with scaling and closed root planing.1-39
Pockets deeper than 5 mm (Figure 11.1) and/or those
 sa d o  s
level 1Il and 1ll exposure) (Figure 1l1.2) will not be effec-
tively cleaned without direct root visualization.1.o-13 Root
visualization is best afforded by periodontal flap sur-
gery.l&.13 In other words, a periodontal flap procedure is
Figure 11.1 Intraoral dental picture of the left mandibular canine
 necessary in these cases or the infection will continue.4
daap ooi s! s!yl 'laxpod jeluopouad ww 6 e ym bop e u! (bog)
(See section 4 for a thorough description of surgical
s! uopexa no Aabins de leuonoad rhuueld pooi pasop ioj
periodontal therapy.)
indicated.
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
154
Advanced Non-surgical Therapy  155
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 11.2 Intraoral dental pictures demonstrating furca-
tion level Il (a, b, and c) and Ill (d and e).(a) Right mandibular
first molar (409) of a dog. (b) right maxillary fourth premolar
(108) in a dog with a class ll furcation between the mesio-
buccal and mesio-palatine roots, and (c) left maxillary fourth
premolar (208) in a cat. (d) Through and through furcation
defect of the maxillary left second premolar (206) and
(e) maxillary left fourth premolar (208) in a dog. None of
these cases can be treated with closed root planing:
periodontal flap surgery or extraction is indicated.
Root planing is performed with more tooth-ward force
removed with simple scaling. However, the root surface is
 ss  s a s as 
coated with cementum which is very irregular. Numerous
root planing may result in damage to the root surface,
studies have shown that calculus deposits on the root sur-
ergo more precision is required.3 More surgical time
 face are commonly embedded in these irregularities.15-17
should therefore be allotted for root planing.
Furthermore, if dentin is directly exposed, its tubules may
Healthy enamel is smooth, and thus plaque and calculus
become infected.'5 Finally, exposure of the root surface
deposits on its surface are loosely attached and easily
allows contamination with numerous toxic substances
156
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(particularly endotoxins).18,19 Consequently, removing a
(or hemorrhage) as well as overlying inflammatory
small amount of root surface is required to render the root
tissues can restrict visualization (Figure 11.3). Therefore,
surface free of infection.? This is typically cementum, but
tactile sensitivity is critical to quality non-surgical
unfortunately in some cases, the removal of a small
therapy. If SRP is not meticulously performed, bacterial
amount of dentin is necessary.? It is important to note that
plaque will remain on the tooth, resulting in continued
 this infection/contamination does not penetrate deep into
infection.'3 This is of special concern in general veteri-
the root,∞-22 which means that excessive tooth substance
 nary practices where assistants with minimal to no
removal is unnecessary and should be avoided 3.23
training commonly perform this important method of
therapy Practitioners are strongly recommended to
Options for therapy
become proficient in this skill in order to better teach
their staff these techniques. Hands-on wet-labs should
There are two major techniques currently used for
be a must for every practice, and ideally for every staff
treating minor periodontal pockets. These include
hand and mechanical (typically ultrasonic) scaling
member entrusted to perform this therapy4 (See
appendix 4 for a listing of hands-on laboratories.)
methods.213 Both of these methods are effective but
Additionally, this method of plaque removal is more
have distinct advantages and disadvantages. This author
 recommends using a combination of these methods for
best results.
(a)
The classic form of therapy is performed by hand with
a curette.* It is known as scaling/root planing (SRP) or
dlosed root planing. This is an exceedingly common
 procedure performed routinely in human dental offices
m sdsor Arna ui paad aq pos pe
 a a aq oi d  n a 
cleaning the root surface and thereby establishing an
environment for healing to occur.
Over the last few decades, however, ultrasonic scaling
has become more and more accepted as a method of sub-
gingival plaque and calculus removal. There are several
reasons for its increasing popularity. Ultrasonic scaling is
less technically demanding, requires less surgical time,
and has the ability to sterilize the root surface3.1324-z28 In
fact, when properly performed, mechanical scaling is
equally effective as hand instrumentation for plaque
(b)
 control, root smoothness, and clinical results.29-40
Hand scaling/root planing
SRP by hand has been the standard of care for decades. It
is highly effective in plaque and calculus removal, as well
 as removing the granulation tissue from the periodontal
pocket (subgingival curettage), which in turn reduces
pocket depth and controls infection.
The major advantage of hand scaling (when per-
formed correctly) is the ability to achieve complete
removal of subgingival plaque and calculus (to a depth of
5 mm). Furthermore, it can reliably smooth the root sur-
face and therefore improve reattachment.
The major disadvantage of this form of therapy is that
Figure 11.3 Situations where closed root planing is more chal-
as  anl s m tsp ai aa s n!
lenging due to local conditions. These situations will hamper
eral reasons.? First, subgingival calculus is harder than
visualization. (a) Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a cat with
 supragingival calculus and it tends to be locked in root 
significant  inflammatory  gingival  enlargement.  (b) Intraoral
surface irregularities. Second, the overlying tissues
picture of the mandibular left of a dog. The periodontal probing
restrict subgingival instrumentation. Finally, bleeding
has elicited significant hemorrhage from the inflamed tissues
Advanced Non-surgical Therapy   157
periodontal probe, explorer (preferably pigtail), a two-
ended scaler (jacquette and sickle), and finally a 1/2, 7/8,
and 12/13 Gracey curette. This minimum list of equip-
ment has been packaged and is currently commercially
available.A Additional curettes may improve the cleanli-
ness of the root as well as the experience of the operator
and are recommended for practices providing advanced
periodontal care. Other basic needs should include
 sharpening equipmentl44l and a sterilization cassette.2 It
is absolutely critical that curettes and all periodontal sur-
a pe idod se ds ida  a a
therapy depends on sharp instruments.42.43
See appendix 3 for a sharpening guide.
Preparation for SRP
Following a complete dental prophylaxis, evaluation, and
intraoral dental radiographs, the pockets are ready for
therapy. Appropriate antibiotic and pain management
   d   oe  
therapy (See chapters 14 and 21 respectively for
information on these steps.)
Figure 11.4 Side view of a 7-8 Gracey curette. Note the curved
 Begin by selecting the proper instrument for the area/
face (red arrow), blunt toe (yellow arrow), and extra bend at the
teeth to be cleaned. In general, this should be an area-
shank (purple arrow).
specific Gracey curette. A more detailed guide is pre-
sented in chapter 22, but typically the lower the number
time-consuming and can result inlongerprocedures.13.723
of the instrument, the more rostral in the mouth it is uti-
Provided that the patient is stable, the increased anes-
lized. However, the practitioner should adjust this based
thesia time is worth the benefits afforded by proper
 on clinical presentation and individual preference.
dental care. In fact, a dental cleaning procedure is of little
 Once the correct instrument is chosen, the next step
to no value if periodontal pockets are not effectively treated.
involves proper handling of the curette. Moreover, the
It is also noteworthy to mention that repetitive motion
injuries are common in human hygienists if ergonomics
majority of procedures, this will be the modified pencil
are not followed. Again, proper training should reduce
grip described in chapter 10. In some instances, however,
the chances of this occurring.
alternate grips are necessary.? These situations generally
involve difficult areas to access such as the distal teeth in
Equipment needs for hand SRP
small breed dogs 44 When slightly more reach is necessary.
This procedure requires only a supply of sharp dental
an open or extended grasp may be used, which separates
curettes (Figure 1l.4) (although a fine dental explorer
the middle and ring fingers. If even more distance is
and probe are necessary for diagnostics). Large hand
 needed, a long reach grip can be employed, which
instruments such as hoes, sickles, and files are too big for
grips the instrument further back on the handle. This
 proper adaptation to the root surface, and therefore the
allows for work in tight spaces but sacrifices strength and
quality of cleaning suffers.41 In addition, these large
control.4
 instruments are more likely to infict damage to the deli-
cate gingival tissues. There are fine varieties of these
Detection skills
 instruments available that are effective subgingivally and
 The first step in ensuring complete subgingival plaque
may be considered for advanced practitioners.? Several
and calculus removal is detection.? Many human peri-
curettes are needed to access the various areas of the
odontologists feel that detection skills are as important
mouth. The different types of curettes and the appro-
as properly performed scaling and closed root planing.
priate use of each are discussed in chapter 22. Having at
 Detection of subgingival calculus requires a combination
least one of each angulation/size of curette is ideal, but
 of visual and tactile senses.? Visual detection can be
this may be excessive for the needs of many practices.
aided by the use of disclosing solutions (Figure 11.5),
This author recommends that each practice have the
 proper lighting, and magnification.424. In addition,
following hand equipment at minimum: a dental mirror,
residual calculus can be detected by drying the root
158  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Figure 11.5 Intraoral picture of a patient showing plaque
revealed (blue arrows) with the use of a disdosing solution.
Figure 11.7 "Mapping" the periodontal pocket on the palatal
surface of the left maxillary canine (204) of a dog prior to
treatment.
encountered, the instrument should be carefully run
over the deposit to “"map" it. The operator must then use
this mental map to thoroughly clean the root surfaces.
Figure 11.6 Intraoral picture of the left maxillary canine (204) in
Finally, an intraoral dental radiograph should be
a dog. The tooth was already "deaned": however, when
exposed to determine the level of alveolar bone as well
compressed air is used to dry the tooth and open the gingival
as any root disease (such as resorption or endodontic
sulcus, the residual calculus (blue arrow) is revealed for further
disease), which may complicate therapy. After deter-
cleaning.
mining the level of disease, the proper instrument
choice, and the indicated grip, the practitioner is ready
surface with a gentle stream of compressed air, which
 to begin pocket cleansing.
reveals the calculus as appearing
chalky white
(Figure 11.6).45 Using the compressed air directed into
Scaling/root planing
aisa  aeds res a dn sudo ose e 
viewing. Tactile exploration of the pocket should be
 First, place the blade of the instrument on the tooth sur-
performed with a fine explorer or probe. The explorer is
face just coronal to the gingival margin with the lower
held in a soft modified pencil grasp and used with great
shank parallel to the tooth surface (Figure 11.8).13.13 Next,
care. The instrument is inserted gently within the
the curette is rotated so that the flat “face" of the blade is
sulcus to the nadir (bottom) of the pocket (Figure 11.7).
against the tooth surface (Figure 11.9). This is done to
Once the bottom of the pocket is determined, the
 minimize the width of the instrument during insertion
instrument is run over the tooth surface in light strokes.
 and to allow the blade to slide over the calculus and engage
The instrument should be rotated in the operator's
it apically. The blade is then inserted gently to the base of
hands/fingers, in order to move around the tooth sur-
the pocket (Figure 11.10). The expected pocket depth can
face while maintaining the tip in contact with the tooth
be estimated by reviewing the probing depths. Excessive
surface. When calculus or diseased tooth structure is
force can damage the delicate gingival attachment. Once
Advanced Non-surgical Therapy  1 59
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.8 (a and b) The curette is placed against the tooth surface just above the gingival margin. It is best to begin with the shank
parallel to the tooth in the "working position." This willfamiliarize the operator with the correct angulation when scaling.
Figure 11.10 The curette is then gently inserted to the nadir of
Figure 11.9 The instrument is then rotated toward the tooth sur-
the pocket. Practitioners should be cognizant of the depth to be
face to flatten the "face" of the instrument against the tooth. This
attained based upon the preoperative exam (probing). If the bot-
minimizes the profile of the instrument, which allows for easier
tom of the pocket is not reached, calculus will be left behind and 
insertion into the pocket as well as the ability to slide over the
the treatment will fail. Be careful, however, not to pass through
calculus.
the delicate gingival sulcus.
160  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.11 (a and b) The instrument is then rotated to bring the shank parallel to the root surface. Note that the angle of the root and
tooth may be different, and therefore the angle of the shank needs to be adjusted (see Box 11.1). This situation is one of the many reasons
that a firm knowledge of anatomy is necessary for proper treatment.
the bottom of the pocket is reached, the instrument is
 rotated to create a 70- to 90-degree working angulation
10) uoiod youua ay uym “(ieap! s! 06 oi iasop)
shank) is parallel to the tooth, a 90-degree angle is created*
(Figure 11.11). This positioning will place the sharp/
working edge of the instrument perpendicular to the
 tooth surface, which is the correct orientation for cleaning.
Once positioned, slight pressure is applied down onto the
root surface.* Finally, the instrument is removed from the
pocket in a firm/short stroke (Figure 11.12).
This procedure is repeated in numerous overlapping
 strokes in slightly different directions. It is important to
    n  n  
curved to circular in shape. Therefore, the instrument
 must be rotated through the hand during the cleaning to
keep the proper surface (or *sweet-spot") in contact with
the contours of the tooth surface. Also, it is important to
note that different areas of the mouth require a different
'o pue uoenue iadod ueuu oi qodde
Therefore, practitioners should not be reluctant to move
themselves or the patient numerous times during the
cleaning in order to stay in proper position. In general,
Figure 11.12 Pressure is placed against the tooth and the instru-
 proper operator positioning is opposite the gingiva of the
ment removed from the pocket in a firm, short, and controlled!
quadrant being instrumented.
pull. The instrument should not move more than a few mm above 
 In addition, it is critical to pay particular attention to
e ueui anow aaow saop i! l pausiuy uaym ubiew jeaibujh aul
the interproximal areas of teeth with tight interproximal
few mms, then too much effort is being used, which can damage
contacts (incisors and molars) (Figure 11.13). These “con-
the delicate gingiva.
Advanced Non-surgical Therapy  161
tacts" are prone to development of calculus due to the fact
importance. Not only are these areas likely to develop
that they are protected from the natural cleaning ability of
calculus, they are very hard to clean, and it is very difficult
an animal's mouths as well as homecare attempts. It is
to effectively instrument these areas. This is especially
 these areas in humans that makes flossing of paramount 
true in small and toy breed dogs with very small mouths.
Box 11.1 Key clinical point
Note, the proper 90 degree cleaning angle is created to the root, which is not necessarily the same as the crown. For instance, the
buccal and palatal aspects of the canine teeth are fairly straight and therefore the angle is the same for root and crown 
(Figure 11.a). However, other teeth have a significant angle between the roots and the crown, which will affect the cleaning angle.
For example, the maxilary fourth premolar has an approximately 25-degree angle (Figure 11.b) and the facial surface of the incisors
jo dsenb wy v p'll anbig) os-t albue aabap-ot atewjxoidde ue ot Ajeisip ain Ajenpenh saujueo aul jo jeis!p pue jeisaw pue
anatomy is necessary for proper instrumentation.
(a1)
(a2)
Figure11.a (1 and 2) Intraoral cadaver pictures of scaling the buccal surface of the maxillary canine in a dog. Note, the root and crown
are parallel, which means that the shank should be parallel to the crown for proper scaling position.
(b1)
(b2)
Figure 11.b Intraoral cadaver picture of scaling the buccal surface of the maxillary fourth premolar in a cdog. Note the root and crown 
are not parallel. Thus, if the shank is parallel to the crown it is not in proper contact with the root (1 and 2). For the blade to achieve
 proper scaling position, the shank must be angled ofthe crown approximately 25 degrees (3 and 4) (red arrows).
162
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(b3)
(b4)
Figure 11.b (cont'd)
(c1)
(c2)
(c3)
Figure 11.c Intraoral cadaver picture of scaling the facial surface
of the maxillary incisors in a dog. Note the root and crown are
not parallel. Thus, if the shank is parallel to the crown (1) it is
not in proper contact with the root (2). For the blade to achieve 
proper scaling position, the shank must be angled off the crown 
approximately 40 degrees (3) (red arrow).
Advanced Non-surgical Therapy  163
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 11.13 Areas of tight contact where probing and cleaning
are very challenging. This can lead to ineffective cleaning if great
care is not taken. (a) Maxillary incisors. Note the very tight contacts
between the teeth (blue arrows). Incidentally, the left second incisor 
is non-vital (yellow arrow). (b) Intraoral picture of the right
mandibular first and second molar (409-410) in a dog. Note that 
the probe cannot pass between the teeth. However, the dental
radiograph (c) reveals severe alveolar bone loss (red arrow). This
yhnonoul pue wexa geo jadoid e jo auejodwn aui saojua asm
scaling. (d) Intraoral picture of the left maxillary first and second
molar (209-210) in a dog. Note that the probe cannot pass bet-
ween the teeth. However, the dental radiograph (e) reveals severe 
alveolar bone loss (red arrows). This case further reinforces the
 importance of a proper oral exam and thorough scaling.
Proper cleaning of these areas typically requires special,
 make sure to extend the stroke at least midway across the
small, highly angled instruments as well as extended or
proximal surface to ensure complete cleaning, and clean
cross-arch rests. Remember that the lower shank must be
effectively from both sides (Figure 11.14).
parallel to the tooth surface (or at least very close) to pro-
I is important to note that it is much easier to remove
vide effective cleaning. When instrumenting these areas,
successive small areas of calculus from large deposits,
164  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.14 Intraoral picture of the left mandibular first molar (309) in a dog undergoing closed root planing. The tooth is thoroughly
scaled from the buccal (a) as well as the lingual (b) surfaces for a complete cleaning.
rather than trying to remove it all in one stroke. In the
latter effort, the force is spread out over the whole instru-
ment rather than just a small part (decreased PSI).
 Removal of large calculus deposits should be performed
by engaging an edge of the calculus with the terminal
one-third of the curette and breaking off small pieces
with each stroke as one advances along the tooth. This
will not only decrease operator strain; it will also decrease
the chance of trauma from a vigorous stroke.
After the initial few strokes, the resistance lessens until
only a slight roughness remains. As this occurs, the
strokes should become longer and with less force applied
to the tooth in order to smooth the surface. This is an
important point, since excessive strokes with firm
pressure damage the root surface unnecessarily. Root
planing should continue until the entire root surface is
clean and feels smooth. This is a good indication of
complete cleaning. Finally, a fine explorer should be
carefully run along the root surface (see “Detection
Skills” above) to check for irregularities that may indicate
residual calculus or root pathology (Figure 11.15).
SRP is continued across all affected teeth. Once all
 pockets have been treated, they should be thoroughly
Figure 11.15 Utilizing a dental explorer to feel for residual
lavaged to remove any debris. This may be followed by
calculus.
the instillation of a product for local antibacterial effects
(see chapter 12).
an important consideration. Most subgingival tips are
Mechanical (ultrasonic) therapy
designed for use at lower power settings than standard
supragingival tips.32 Practitioners should refer to
Recent advances in ultrasonic scalers'3.13 have resulted in
the owner's manual for specific settings for individual
the creation of special tips that can be used subgingi-
equipment.
vally." The major design changes include thinner tips
Although there are studies to the contrary,5253 it has
with the coolant spray directed near the tip of the instru-
been shown that the new, thinner ultrasonic periodontal
tips produce root surfaces that are as smooth, if not
Advanced Non-surgical Therapy 165
smoother, than standard curettes.3054-56 Most studies
ultrasonics directly kills bacteria,6 suggesting instead
report that they are more effective than standard curettes
that it is the lavage that results in lower bacterial numbers.
at cleaning furcational disease,57ss but other studies
Many texts as well as equipment manuals recommend
report that curettes are more effective in these areas.59
the addition of dilute chlorhexidine to the coolant solu-
One study did find improved healing following ultra-
tion. This was recently shown to be of no additional
sonic as compared to hand debridement.6" Moreover,
value over standard ultrasonic cavitation.67 However,
 numerous reports have shown that when properly per-
 these studies are based on perfectly performed scaling.
formed, hand and ultrasonic scaling are equally effective
which may not be the typical case in veterinary practice.
 in cleaning teeth, removing bacteria, decreasing inflam-
Therefore inclusion of chlorhexidine to the coolant in
 mation, and increasing attachment.29,32-3,61.62
 the veterinary setting may still be indicated.
There are several major advantages to the use of ultra-
There are two major disadvantages of ultrasonic scal-
sonic scalers in periodontal pockets. First, these instru-
 ing. First, with improper use of the ultrasonic instru-
ments are much less technically demanding to use in
ment, damage may occur to the root, pulp, and/or
comparison to hand curettes.4 This means that a higher 
eodd  pasnn aq a ap ansst o
degree of cleaning may be achieved by less experienced
tip or power selection, excessive pressure on the tooth,
operators. While this is certainly not ideal, it is the reality
long exposure of the tip to the root, insufficient water
 in the vast majority of veterinary practices. It should be
coolant, or a damaged instrument tip.7′ Any of these
noted, however, that proper therapy still
1requires
errors can have significant deleterious effects including
 significant training and experience and that improper
tooth death. The other concern with ultrasonic scaling is
use of these instruments can have significant deleterious
the potential to create significant aerosolization of path-
effects. Consequently, proper training is still critical. In
 Ogenic bacteria. It is therefore very important to institute
fact, some studies show that inexperienced operators do
a protocol for infection control. (See chapter 10 for a
not perform any better with mechanical instruments
thorough discussion of bacterial aerosols.)
verses hand instruments.286 The incongruity of the
ultrasonic method appearing more effective in the veteri-
Equipment needed for mechanical scaling
nary field is likely due to the degree of cleanliness
Mechanical debridement requires only an ultrasonic
  ss rp  axa a p
ae sdil jo Aaea y sdil reuopoad nadond pue aies
 pared to the average veterinary technician/assistant,
 available depending on the location and size of the
where any improvement is vast.
pocket, and therefore a good supply is recommended
Another advantage of mechanical scaling is decreased
(Figure 11.16). The various types of mechanical scalers
time under anesthesia. Ultrasonic scalers 
remove
and tips are covered in detail in chapter 23. It is recom-
mended for the practitioner to be very familiar with his
cially if the deposits are large (which is common in
or her equipment prior to using it.
veterinary patients).3 In addition, ultrasonic scalers
Mechanical subgingival scaling procedure
decreasing chances of repetitive motion injuries.26 When
The handle and ultrasonic insert should ideally be steril-
properly performed, ultrasonic debridement may be less
ized prior to use. To begin the procedure,313 the tip
traumatic than hand scaling, resulting in less patient dis-
should be inspected to ensure that it is not damaged and
comfort; however, this was not seen in a human study.60
 then carefully placed in the handle. Power settings should
Furthermore, the small periodontal tips used with
be checked to ensure appropriate levels for subgingival
ultrasonic scalers may be superior to curettes in deep
use. They should be at the minimum level required to
remove calculus, as excessive power can damage root
due to the fact that deep pockets are more restrictive to
surfaces. The scaling unit is then started and the tip
hand instruments.
inspected for proper function. The water coolant should
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, ultrasonic
be adjusted to create a fine mist at the working tip
scaling may result in decreased levels of bacteria and
(Figure 11.17).
endotoxins on the root surface. This owes to the fact
After the unit is prepared, the instrument is held with
that ultrasonic waves produce cavitational activity,
(u e no) pueq aul pue dse pouad paou j e
acoustic turbulence, and acoustic microstreaming within
rested on a surface to ensure maximum tactile sensitivity.
the coolant spray, resulting in bacterial disruption.24.65.66
The tip should be carefully introduced into the gingival
These activities may improve plaque reduction and
sulcus/pocket and the unit activated. The tip is then
cleanliness of the root surface.6567 However, recent
directed against the tooth surface with a minimum
studies dispute the fact that the cavitational effect of the
amount of force (just touching).1344.46 Heavy forces
166  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Figure 11.16 A selection of ultrasonic tips for a piezoelectric
ultrasonic scaler. On the right are two shorter/thicker scalers for
Supragingival scaling (red arrows). On the left are longer, thinner
instruments for careful subgingival scaling (yellow arrows).
Figure 11.18 Intraoral picture of a smal/fine ultrasonic scaler tip
cleaning a periodontal pocket on the buccal surface of the right
mandibular canine (404) of a dog.
cooling.7576 Therefore, these recommendations may be
somewhat arbitrary Regardless, the procedure should be
interrupted on a regular basis to allow for fluid suction
and tooth/root inspection.
This step should be continued until the root feels
 smooth. Further confirmation of the level of cleanli-
ness should be evaluated visually by directing air into the
sulcus or manually detecting with a fine explorer.?
Figure 11.17 The fine but adequate cooling spray from a well-
Residual calculus can be removed with a sharp curette. It
tuned ultrasonic scaler. (Note that this is a supragingival tip.)
 is important to follow the scaling with subgingival lavage
(as described in chapter 10), especially if an antiseptic
should be avoided as they dampen the motion of the
was not used in the coolant supply.
instrument, thus decreasing its effectiveness.2
In
Combined therapy using both hand
addition, excessive downward force can damage the
and mechanical methods
tooth surface and the instrument.473 Using the side sur-
face of the terminal portion of the instrument, while
 Due to the unique properties of both hand and
keeping the tip parallel to the tooth (Figure 11.18), the
mechanical scaling methods, this author recommends
instrument is run over the entire affected root surface
they be combined to achieve the best results in the short-
using numerous overlapping strokes in different direc-
est time. The combined method is also favored by the
tions.374 It is important to keep the instrument in motion
majority of human periodontists.? By performing careful
 at all times to avoid root damage.3 Typically, it is recom-
ultrasonic debridement, the vast majority of infectious
mended that they be kept in constant contact with tooth
material is removed in a very efficient manner. At the
for no more than 12-15 seconds,1374 but some authors
same time, the root surface receives an antibacterial
recommend only 5-7 seconds.* Interestingly, however,
 treatment. Following the ultrasonic debridement, hand
an exhaustive literature search finds no primary research
 scaling should be performed to remove any residual
 that indicates a length of time that causes pulp damage,
calculus deposits and to further smooth the root
Advanced Non-surgical Therapy  167
surface.38 This synergism results in the ideal healing
11. Perry DA, Schmid MO, Takei HH. Phase I periodontal therapy.
environment in the most time-efficient fashion.
In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
Pp. 722-727,2006.
12. Caffesse RG, Sweeney PL, Smith BA. Scaling and root planing
Box 11.2 Key points
with and without periodontal flap surgery. I Clin Periodontol.
13(3):205-210, 1986.
13. Holmstrom SE, Frost PF, Eisner ER. Periodontal therapy and sur-
● Meticulous cdeaning and smoothing of the root surface is
gery. In: Veterinary Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
necessary for the removal of infection and the healing of 
Saunders, 1998, pp. 167-213.
pockets.
14. Bellows J. Equipping the dental practice. In: Small Animal Dental
 Hand scaling is very effective at dleaning but is technically
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Prirmer. Armes, IA:
demanding and relatively slow
Blackwell,2004, p. 13-55.
 Ultrasonic debridement is very efficient and has an
15. Adriaens P, Edwards C, DeBoever J, et al. Ultrastructural obser-
antibacterial effect on the tooth surface but may leave
vations on bacterial invasion in cementum and radicular dentin
of periodontally diseased human teeth. J Periodontol. 59:
residual calculus
Careful ultrasonic debridement followed by meticulous
493, 1988.
hand scaling eficiently provides the best environment for
16. Zander HA. The attachrment of calculus to root surfaces.
J Periodontol. 24:16, 1953.
healing.
17. Moscow Bs. Calculus attachrment in cemental separations.
●Hands-on CE labs will greatly improve operator speed and
J Periodontol. 40:125, 1969.
quality of patient care.
18. Aleo J, DeRenzis F, Farber P, et al. The presence and biological
activity of cementum-bound endotoxins. J Periodontol. 45:672,
1974.
19. Hatfield CG, Baumhammers A. Cytotoxic effects of periodontally
Notes
involved surfaces of human teeth. Arch Oral Biol. 16:465, 1971.
20. Hughes FJ, Auger DW, Smales FC. Investigation of the distribu-
A. Weldin Periodontal Kit, Miltex.
B. Dentalaire Periodontal Pack, Dentalaire.
tion of cementum associated lipopolysaccharides in periodontal
disease with scanning electron microscope immunohistochemis-
C. Reveal, Butler Schein.
try. I Periodontal Res. 23:10, 1998.
D. Perioptix.
21. Smart JG, Wilson M, Davis EH, etal. The assessment of ultrasonic
root surface debridement by determination of residual endotoxin
levels. J Clin Periodontol. 17:174, 1990.
References
22. Moore J, Wilson M, Keiser JB. The distribution of bacterial lipo-
 polysaccharide (endotoxins) in relation to periodontally diseased
1. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
root surfaces. J Clin Periodotol. 13:748, 1986.
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
23. Garret JS. Effects of non-surgical periodontal therapy on peri-
pp. 186-231.
odontitis in humans: A review. J Clin Periodontol. 10:5151, 1983.
2. Bellows J. Periodontal equipment, materials, and techniques. In:
24. Jahn CA. Sonic and ultrasonic instrumentation. In: Carranza's
 Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 828-835.
Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2004, pp. 115-173.
25. Fichtel T, Chra M, Langerova E, Biberaur G, Vlain M. Observations
3. Pattison AM, Pattison GL. Scaling and root planning. In:
on the effects of scaling and polishing methods on enamel. J Vet
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
Dent. 25(4):231-235, 2008.
Pp. 749-797.
26. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER.General health safety andergo
4. Mousques T, Listgarten MA, Phillips RW. Effect of scaling and
nomics in the veterinary dental workplace. In: Veterinary Dental
root planing on the composition of human subgingival microbial
Techniques for the SmallAnimalPractitioner. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
flora. J Periodontal Res. 7:199, 1980.
Saunders, 2004, pp. 637-664.
5. Renvert S, Wikstrom M, Dahlen G, et al. Effect of root debride-
27. Tunkel J, Heinecke A, Flemmig TE. A systematic review of efficacy
ment on the elimination of Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomi-
of machine-driven and manual subgingival debridement in the
tans and Bacteroides gingivalis from periodontal pockets. J Clin
treatment of chronic periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol. 29 Suppl
Periodontol. 17:345, 1990.
3:72-81, 2002.
 6. Hughes TP, Caffesse RG. Gingival changes following scaling, root
28. Kocher T, Rihling A, Mormsen H, Plagmann HC. Effectiveness of
planing and oral hygiene, a biometric evaluation. J Periodontol.
subgingival instrumentation with power-driven instruments in
49:245, 1978.
the hands of experienced and inexperienced operators. A study on
7. Lowenguth RA, Greenstein G. Clinical and microbiological
manikins. J Clin Periodontol. 24(7):498-504, 1997.
response to non-surgical mechanical periodontal therapy.
 29. Oosterwall PJ, Matee MI, Mikx FHM, et al. The effect of subingi-
Periodontol 2000 9:14, 1995.
val debridement with hand and ultrasonic instruments on subgin-
gival microflora. J Clin Periodontol. 14:528, 1987.
23(2):81-90, 2008.
30. Dragoo MR. A clinical evaluation of hand and ultrasonic instru-
9. Cobb CM. Non-surgical pocket therapy: Mechanical. Ann
ments on subgingival debridement. 1. With unmodified and
Periodontol. 1(1):443-490, 1996.
modified ultrasonic inserts. Int J Periodont Restor Dent.
10. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Phase II periodontal therapy. In:
12(4):310-323, 1992.
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
 31. Gagnot G, Mora F, Poblete MG, et al. Comparative study of
pp. 881-886.
manual and ultrasonic instrumentation of cementum surfaces:
168
3 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Influence of lateral pressure. Int J Periodont Restor Dent. 24:137,
53. Hunter RK, O'Leary TJ, Kafrawy AH. The effectiveness of hand
2004.
versus ultrasonic instrumentation in open flap root planing.
32. Santos FA, Pochapski MT, Leal PC, Gimenes-Sakima PP,
J Periodontol. 55(12):697-703, 1984.
 Marcantonio E Jr. Comparative study on the effect of ultrasonic
 54. Drisko CH. Scaling and root planing without over instrumenta-
instruments on the root surface in vivo. Clin Oral Investig.
tion: Hand vs. power driven scalers. Curr Opin Periodontol. 3:78,
12(2):143-150, 2008.
1993.
33. Copulos TA, Low SB, Walker CB, et al. Comparative analysis
 55. Garnik JJ, Dent J. A scanning electron micrographical study of
between a modified ultrasonic tip and hand instruments on clinical
root surfaces and subgingival bacteria after hand scaling and
parameters of periodontal disease. J Periodontol. 64:694,1993.
ultrasonic instrumentation. J Periodontol 60:144, 1989.
34. Stende GW, Schaffer EM. A comparison of ultrasonic and hand
 56. Kawashima H, Sato S, Kishida M, Ito K. A comparison of root
scaling. J Periodontol. 32:312, 1961.
surface instrumentation using two piezoelectric ultrasonic scalers
35. Torfason T, Kiger R, Selvig KA, etal. Clinical improvement of gin-
and a hand scaler in vivo. I Periodontal Res. 42(1):90-95, 2007.
gival conditions following ultrasonic verses hand instrumentation
 57. Leon LE, Vogel RI. A comparison of hand scaling and ultrasonic
of periodontal pockets. J Clin Periodontol. 6:165, 1979.
debriderment in furcations as evaluated by differential dark field
36. Drisko CH. Root instrumentation. Power-driven versus manual
microscopy. I Periodontol. 58:86, 1987.
scalers, which one? Dent Clin North Am. 42(2):229-244, 1998.
 58. Sugaya T, Kawanami M, Kato H. Effects of debridement with an
 37. Breininger DR, O'Leary TJ, Blumenshine RV. Comparative effec-
ultrasonic furcation tip in degree II furcation involvement of
tiveness of ultrasonic and hand scaling for the removal of subgin-
mandibular molars. J Int Acad Periodontol. 4:132, 2002.
gival calculus. J Periodontol. 58:9, 1987.
 59. Ortero-Cagide FJ, Long BA. Comparative in vitro effectiveness of
38. Derdilopoulou FV, Nonhoff J, Neumann K, Kielbassa AM.
closed root debridement with fine instruments on specific areas of
 Microbiological findings after periodontal therapy using curettes,
mandibular first molar furcations. I. Furcation area. J Periodontol
Er:YAG laser, sonic, and ultrasonic scalers. J Clin Periodontol.
68:1098, 1997.
34(7):588-598, 2007.
 60. Walsh TF, Waite IM. A comparison of postsurgical healing follow-
39. Obeid PR, D'Hoore W, Bercy P. Comparative clinical responses
 ing debridement by ultrasonic or hand instruments. I Periodontol.
related to the use of various periodontal instrumentation. J Clin
49(4):201-205, 1978.
Periodontol. 31(3):193-199, 2004.
61. Beuchat M, Buslinger A, Schmidin PR, Michel B, Lehmann B,
40. Thornton S, Garnick J. Comparison of ultrasonic to hand instru
Lutz E Clinical comparison of the effectiveness of novel sonic
ments in the removal of subgingival plaque. J Periodontol.
instruments and curettes for periodontal debridement after
53(1):35-37, 1982.
2 months. J Clin Periodontol. 28(12):1145-1150, 2001.
41. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental equipment and care. In:
 62. Garnick J, Dent J. A scanning electron micrographical study of
Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner.
root surfaces and subgingival bacteria after hand and ultrasonic
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 31-106.
instrumentation. J Periodontol. 60(8):441-447, 1989.
42. Bellows J. The dental operatory. In: Small Anirmal Dental
63. Kocher T, Riedel D, Plagmann HC. Debridement by operators
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
with varying degrees of experience: A comparative study on man-
Blackwell, 2004, pp. 3-12.
ikins. Quintessence Int. 28(3):191-196, 1997.
43. Klokkevold PR, Takei HH, Carranza FA. General principles of
64. Yukna RA, Scott JB, Aichelmann-Reidy ME, LeBlanc DM, Mayer
periodontal surgery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology.
ET. Clinical evaluation of the speed and effectiveness of subgingi-
St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 887-901.
val calculus removal on single-rooted teeth with diamond-coated
44. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis and
ultrasonic tips. J Periodontol. 68(5):436-442, 1997.
periodontal disease stages. In: Veterinary Dental Techniques for
65. Walsley AD, Laird WR, Williams AR. Dental plaque removal by
the Small Animal Practitioner. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders,
cavitational activity during ultrasonic scaling. I Clin Periodontol.
2004, pp. 175-232.
15:539,1988.
45. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Oral exam and diagnosis. In: Veterinary
Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
 67. Khambay BS, Walmsley AD. Acoustic microstreaming: Detection
Raven, 1997, pp. 87-103.
and measurement around ultrasonic scalers. J Periodontol.
46. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
70:626, 1999.
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
68. Schenk GY, Flemmig T, Lob S, Ruckdeschel G, Hickel R. Lack of
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
antimicrobial effect on periodontopathic bacteria by ultrasonic
47. Niemiec BA, Furman R. Feline dental radiology. J Vet Dent.
and sonic scalers in vitro. J Clin Periodontol. 27:116-119, 2000.
21(4):252-257, 2004.
 69. Taggart JA, Plamer RM, Wilson RF. A clinical and microbiological
48. Niemiec BA, Furman R. Canine dental radiology. J Vet Dent.
comparison of the effects of water and 0.02% chlorhexidine as
21(3):186-1990, 2004.
coolants during ultrasonic scaling and root planing. J Clin
49. Gracis M, Harvey CE. Radiographic study of the maxillary canine
Periodontol. 17:32, 1990.
tooth in mesaticephalic dogs. J Vet Dent. 15(2):73-78, 1998.
70. Grossi SG, Skrepcinski FB, DeCaro T, et al. Treatment of
 50. Gracis M. Radiographic study of the maxillary canine tooth of
periodontal disease in diabetics reduces glycated hemoglobin.
four mesaticephalic cats. I Vet Dent. 16 (3):115-128, 1999.
JPeriodontol. 68:713, 1997.
51. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Dental equipment. In: Veterinary
71. Lea SC, Landini G, Walmsley AD. The effect of wear on ultrasonic
Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-
scaler tip displacement amplitude. J Clin Periodontol. 33(1):
Raven, 1997, pp. 1-28.
37-41, 2006.
52. Schlageter L, Rateitschak-Pliss EM, Schwarz JP. Root surface
72. Trenter SC, Landini G, Walmsley AD. Effect of loading on the
smoothness or roughness following open debridement. An in vivo
vibration characteristics of thin magnetostrictive ultrasonicscaler
study. I Clin Periodontol. 23(5):460-464, 1996.
inserts. I Periodontol. 74(9):1308-1315, 2003.
Advanced Non-surgical Therapy  169
73. Brine EJ, Marretta SM, Pijanowski GJ, Siegel AM. Comparison of
75. Nicoll BK, Peters RJ. Heat generation during ultrasonic instru-
the effects of four different power scalers on enamel tooth surface
mentation of dentin as affected by different irrigation rmethods.
in the dog. I Vet Dent. 17(1):17-21, 2000.
J Periodontol. 69(8):884-888, 1998.
74. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis. In:
76. Verez-Fraguela JL, Vives Vallés MA, Ezquerra Calvo LJ. Effects of
Veterinary Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders,
ultrasonic dental scaling on pulp vitality in dogs: An experirmental
1998b, pp. 133-166.
study. J Vet Dent. 17(2):75-79, 2000.
Local antibiotic usage
One of the current methods being used to promote
I is important to note, however, that only the
gingival reattachment is local treatment with antimicro-
clindamycin product is licensed for use in cats. There
bials. There are several human products available,A-F as
have been occasional  anecdotal  adverse  reactions
well as veterinary-labelled doxycycline and clindamycin
reported with the doxycycline product in this species.
gels. These products are designed to create a long-term/
Therefore, practitioners should use caution and inform
high-dose antimicrobial effect directly within the
clients of the risks of off-label use before treating a feline
 periodontal space, with minimal systemic absorption.1-3
 patient with one of these products.
Studies have shown that they develop local antimicrobial
Once a suitable periodontal pocket is discovered
concentrations exceeding 1,300 ug/ml, in contrast to the 
(Figure 12.1), it should first be treated with closed root
4-8 ug/ml seen with systemic administration.5
 planing. Local antibiotic therapy is an aid to standard
Local antimicrobial administration has been shown to
SRP, not a substitute for it.* After the tooth is scaled and
decrease bacterial counts further than SRP alone.67 They
root cleanliness is confirmed, the pocket/sulcus is
are effective in decreasing periodontal inflammation and
lavaged. The pocket is then ready for the application of
increasing attachment gains (reduced pocket depth)- 25
the medication. (See chapter 11 for details on closed root
and are safe for routine use.23.2 Finally, the use of these
planning.)
products without SRP was shown to be as effective in
 The technique for preparation and application of the
 pocket depth reduction as SRP alone.24.27.28
veterinary-labelled doxycycline product  is described
Tetracycline derivatives also offer several additional
below.4s-so (For instructions on the human-labelled and
(i.e., non-antimicrobial) benefits that include:
clindamycin products, refer to the package insert.)
The product is thoroughly mixed (according to
An anti-inflammatory effect (specifically anticollage-
nase)29-39 This is important since if has been
 package directions) to ensure a homogeneous mixture
(Figure 12.2). The product is then concentrated in
 shown that host modulation is an important factor
 in controlling periodontal disease. Moreover, it 
syringe A, and syringe B is separated and discarded.
Next, the 22-gauge blunt-ended cannula (supplied) is
 has been shown that these products have a direct
effect on cytokines and chemokines.40
2.1
Improved wound healing.41 This also holds true in
periodontal healing,*2 and therefore the addition
Box 12.1 Key clinical point
of a tetracycline product to any periodontal or
Local antibiotics are best suited for use in periodontal pockets
oral surgery should be beneficial.
between 3 mm (or maximum normal depth for the species)
3.
Direct reduction of osteoclast function. One study
and 5 mm. Pockets greater than 5 mm are too deep to
reported that chemically modified tetracyclines
effectively clean with cdosed root planing alone and therefore
(CMT-3 and CMT-8 of doxycycline and minocy-
require surgical therapy.4-8 Practitioners can choose to use
cline, respectively) are potent inhibitors of osteoclas-
the antimicrobial products in these pockets after the surgical
 togenesis and directly induce osteoclast apoptosis 43
procedure.
This may have a direct effect on reducing bone loss.
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
170
Local Antibiotic Usage    171
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.1 Appropriate sites for application of perioceutic. (a) 4 mm pocket between the mandibular third and fourth premolars.
(b) 5 mm periodontal pocket on the palatal aspect of the right maxillary canine (104).
Figure 12.2 Mixing the perioceutic.
Figure 12.4 The cannula is placed gentfy to the base of the
pocket.
attached to the syringe and the air is removed
(Figure 12.3).
After being properly prepared, the cannula is inserted
 gently to the base ofthe pocket (Figure 12.4). Once it has
been determined that the bottom ofthe pocket is reached,
the product is slowly injected. Injection is continued
a m e is s pnpd pe al n
Figure 12.3 Mixed product with the cannula attached, ready for
pocket (Figure 12.5). Overfilling the pocket will not
 placement into the pocket.
improve clinical gains and will make the procedure of
172
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
(a)
Figure 12.7 Gently pushing the product apically into the pocket.
(b)
Figure 12.5 (a) The product is slowly inserted until it is just over-
flowing. (b) Excessive application does not add efficiency. it
Figure 12.8 Rewetting the extruded product gently with water
actually makes the placement into the pocket much more difficult,
from an air-water syringe.
and should be avoided.
filling the pocket much more difficult. Next, the exposed
gel is gently but completely wetted with water or saline
(Figure 12.6). (Do not use the air from the air-water
syringe.) The water hardens (or plasticizes) the gel
instantly. Following this step, the product is gently tapped
into the sulcus (Figure 12.7). An instrument with
sufficient surface area (i.e., a 3 mm elevator as opposed to
a periodontal probe) is used to decrease the chances of
inadvertent piercing of the product, which can result in
its removal from the pocket. It is common for some of
the subgingival product (which did not get wet) to
extrude from the pocket. This gel will likely become
stuck to the placing instrument and result in removal of
the product. To avoid this scenario, as soon as any leak-
 age is perceived, the filling instrument is removed and
Figure 12.6 Weting the product gently with water from an air-
the exposed gel is rewetted (Figure 12.8) and compaction
water syringe.
is reinitiated (Figure 12.9). These steps should be
Local Antibiotic Usage  173
Notes
A. Actisite, ALZA Corporation.
B. Arestin, OraPharma, Inc.
C. Atridox, TOLMAR, Inc.
 D. PerioChip, Dexcel Pharma Technologies.
E. Periofilm, Molteni Farmaceutici.
F. Doxirobe, Pfizer Animal Health.
G. Clindorol, TriLogic Pharma.
References
1. Rapley IW, Cobb CM, Killoy WJ, Williams DR. Serum levels of
tetracycline during treatment with tetracycline-containing fibers.
J Periodontol. 63:817-820, 1992.
2. Ranadive KS, Bhat KM. Local antimicrobial delivery in
Figure 12.9 The tamping and wetting steps are repeated until
periodontal therapy. Indian J Dent Res. 9(4):124-130, 1998.
3. Tonetti M, Cugini MA, Goodson JM. Zero-order delivery with
the product is below the gingival margin.
periodontal placement of tetracycline-loaded ethylene vinyl
acetate fibers. J Periodontal Res. 25(4):243-249, 1990.
4. Walker CB, Gordon JM, McQuilkin SJ, Niebloom TA, Socransky
Box 12.2 Key points
SS. Tetracycline: Levels achievable in gingival crevice fluid and in
vitro effect on subgingival organisms. Part II. Susceptibilities of
periodontal bacteria. J Periodontol. 52(10):613-616, 1981.
·Local antibiotics are an effective adjunct therapy to
5. Gordon JM, Walker CB, Murphy JC, Goodson JM, Socransky SS.
meticulous SRP.
Tetracycline: Levels achievable in gingival crevice fluid and in vitro
● These products are best used in pockets between 3 and
 ui suo ed suse eaiuqns uioa
5 mm (as pockets deeper than 5 mm require surgical
lar fluid after repeated doses. J Periodontol. 52(10):609-612, 1981.
therapy).
6. Goodson JM. Antimicrobial efficacy of Arestin in periodontitis
 Topical tetracycline products provide a high level of
therapy. Presented at the 35th Annual Meeting of the American
antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory effects directly where 
Association for Dental Research, Orland, FL, March 8-11, 2006.
they are needed, without the systemic side effects.
7. Walker CB, Gordon JM, McQuilkin SJ, Niebloom TA, Socransky
SS.Tetracycline: Levels achievable in gingival crevice fluid and
 Doxycycline products are not licensed for use in felines.
 in vitro effect on subgingival organisms. Part I. Susceptibilities
 A helpful tip in the application of the veterinary labeled
of periodontal bacteria. J Periodontol. 52(10):613-616, 1981.
doxycycline product is to wet the gel early and often for
8. Salvi GE, Mombelli A, Mayfield L, Rutar A, Suvan J, Garrett S,
more successful placement.
 Lang NP. Local antimicrobial therapy after initial periodontal
●The veterinary labelled clindamycin product is best applied
treatment. J Clin Periodontol. 29(6):540-550, 2002.
to a dry tooth.
9. Skaleric U, Schara R, Medvescek M, Hanlon A, Doherty F, Lessem J.
Periodontal treatment by Arestin and its effects on glycemic
control in type 1 diabetes patients. J Int Acad Periodontol. 6
(4 Suppl):160-165, 2004.
repeated until no product is visible above the gingival
10. Hellstrom MK, McClain PK, Schallhorn RG, Bellis L, Hanlon AL,
margin, which decreases the chances of the patient
Ramberg P. Local minocycline as an adjunct to surgical therapy in
 dislodging the product before natural dissolution.
moderate to severe, chronic periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol.
To further avoid premature dislodgement of the prod-
35(6):525-531, 2008.
11. Ciancio SG, Cobb CM, Leung M. Tissue concentration and local-
 uct, the client should be advised to avoid brushing the
ization of tetracycline folowing site-specific tetracycline fiber
areas where the product was placed for 4 weeks. The
therapy. I Periodontol. 63:849-853, 1992.
remainder of the mouth can be brushed normally.
12. Goodson IM, Tanner A. Antibiotic resistance of the subgingival
 During this time, alternate forms of plaque control
microbiota following local tetracycline therapy. Oral Microbiol
Immunol. 7(2):113-117, 1992.
(chlorhexidine rinses or barrier sealants) should be uti-
13. Pappalardo S, Baglio OA, Cappello C, Guarrera S, DeBenedittis M,
lized.
PetruzziM,GrassiRELocaldeliveryofantimicrobialdrugs in the
The patient should be rechecked 4-6weeks after
treatment of chronic adult periodontitis. Minerva Stomatol.
placement of the subgingival antibiotics, primarily to
55(11-12):655-661, 2006.
ensure that the surgical site is healing well with no
14. Preshaw PM, Ryan ME, Giannobile WV. Host modulation agents.
 inflammation. Additionally, it allows for a preliminary
In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
pp. 813-827.
assessment of homecare and another opportunity for
15. Dean IW, Branch-Mays GL, Hart TC, et al. Topically applied
the practitioner to discuss continued care with the
client.
247-257, 2003.
174  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
16. Williams RC, Paquette DW, Offenbacher S, et al. Treatrment of
inhibition of gingival crevicular fluid collagenase of patients with
labile diabetes mellitus. J Clin Periodontol. 19(2):146-149, 1992.
spheres: A controlled trial. J Periodontol. 72:1535-1544, 2001.
 34. Sorsa T, Ding Y, Salo T, Lauhio A, Teronen O, Ingman T, Ohtani
17. Fleischer HC, Mellonig JT, Brayer WK, Gray JL, Barnett JD.
H, Andoh N, Takeha S, Konttinen YT. Effects of tetracyclines on
Scaling and root planing efficacy in multirooted teeth.
neutrophil, gingival, and salivary collagenases. A functional and
J Periodontol. 60(7):402-409, 1989.
western-blot assessment with special reference to their cellular
18. Paquette DW, Hanlon A, Lessem J, Williams RC. Clinical rele-
sources in periodontal diseases. Ann NY Acad Sci. 732:112-131,
vance of adjunctive minocycline microspheres in patients with
1994.
chronic periodontitis: Secondary analysis of a phase 3 trial. J
 35. Webster G, Del Rosso JQ. Anti-inflarmmatory activity of tetracy-
Periodontol. 75:531-536, 2004.
clines. Dermatol Clin. 25(2):133-135, 2007.
19. Garrett S, Johnson L, Drisko CH, et al. Two multi-center studies
 36. Golub LM, Lee HM, Ryan ME, Giannobile WV, Payne J, Sorsa T.
evaluating locally delivered doxycycline hyclate, placebo control,
Tetracyclines inhibit connective tissue breakdown by multiple
oral hygiene, and scaling and root planing in the treatment of
non-antimicrobial mechanisms. Adv Dent Res. 12:12-26, 1998.
periodontitis. J Periodontol. 70:490-503,1999.
 37. Guerin C, Laterra J, Masnyk T, Golub LM, Brem H, et al. Selective
20. Wennstrom JL, Newman HN, MacNeill SR, et al. Utilisation of
endothelial growthinhibitionby tetracyclines thatinhibit collage-
locally delivered doxycyline in non-surgical treatment of chronic
nase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 188:740-745, 1992.
periodontitis. A comparative multi-center trial of 2 treatrment
38. Boyle JR, McDermott E, Crowther M, Wills AD, Bell PR,
approaches. J Clin Periodontol. 28:753-761, 2001.
Thompson MM. Doxycycline inhibits elastin degradation and
21. Polson AP, et al. Periodontal pocket treatment in beagle dogs
reduces metalloproteinase activity in a model of aneurismal dis-
using subgingival doxycycline from a biodegradable system.
ease.I Vasc Surg 27:354-361, 1998.
J Periodontol. 67:1176-1184, 1996.
 39. Solomon A, Rosenblatt M, Li DQ, et al. Doxycycline inhibition of
22. Zetner K, Rothmueller G. Treatment of periodontal pockets with
interleukin-1 in the corneal epithelium. Invest Ophth Vis Sci.
doxycycline in beagles. Vet Ther. 3(4):441-452, 2002.
41:2544-2557, 2000.
23. Jeffcoat MK, Bray KS, Ciancio SG, et al. Adjunctive use of a sub-
40. Krakauer T, Buckley M. Doxycycline is anti-inflammatory and
gingival controlled-release chlorhexidine chip reduces probing
inhibits Staphylococcal exotoxin-indued cytokines and chemo-
depth and improves attachment level compared with scaling and
kines. Anitirmicrob Agents Chemother. 47:3630-3633, 2003.
root planing alone. I Periodontol. 69(9):989-997, 1998.
41. Pirila E, Parikka M, Ramamurthy NS, et al. Chemically modified
24. Hanes PJ, Purvis JP. Localanti-infective therapy: Pharmacological
tetracycline (CMT-8) and oestrogen promote wound healing in
agents. A systematic review. Ann Periodontol. 8(1):79-98, 2003.
ovariectomised rats, effects on matrix metalloproteinase-2 mem-
25. Martorelli de Lima AF, Cury CC, Palioto DB, Duro AM, da Silva
brane type1 matrixmetalloproteinase, and laminin-5 gamma2-
RC, Wolff LE Therapy with adjunctive doxycycline local delivery
chain. Wound Repair Regen. 10:38-51, 2002.
in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus and periodontitis. J Clin
42. Gapski R, Barr JL, Sarment DP, Layher MG, Socransky SS,
Periodontol. 31:648-653, 2004.
Giannobile WV. Effect of systermic matrix metalloproteinase inhi-
26. ARESTIN (rminocycline hydrochloride) 1mg Microspheres
[ idouoo jo jooid e edan punom ieuopoad uo u
[Prescribing Information]. Warminster, PA: OraPharma, Inc., 2005.
J Periodontol. 75:493-494, 2004.
 27. Garrett S, Johnson L, Drisko CH, et al. Two multi-center studies
43. Holmes SG, Still K, Buttle DJ, Bishop NJ, Grabowski PS.
evaluating locally delivered doxycycline hyclate, placebo control,
Chemically modified tetracyclines act through multiple
oral hygiene, and scaling and root planing in the treatment of
mechanisms directly on osteoclast
t precursors. Bone 35:
periodontitis. J Periodontol. 70(5):490-503, 1999.
471-478, 2004.
28. Drisko CH. The use of locally delivered doxycycline in the
44. Caffesse RG, Sweeney PL, Smith BA. Scaling and root planing
treatrment of periodontitis. Clinical results. J Clin Periodontol.
with and without periodontal flap surgery. J Clin Periodontol.
25(11 Pt 2):947-952, 1998.
13(3):205-210, 1986.
29. Garcia-Alvarez L, Oteo JA. Nonantimicrobial effects of tetracy-
 45. Perry DA, Schmid MO, Takei HH. Phase I periodontal therapy.
clines. Rev Esp Quimioter. 23(1):4-11, 2010.
 In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
30. Greenwald RA, Simonson BG, Moak SA, Rush SW, Ramamurthy
pPp. 722-727.
NS, Laskin RS, Golub LM. Inhibition of epiphyseal cartilage colla -
46. Zetner K, Rothmueller G. Treatment of periodontal pockets with
doxycycline in beagles. Vet Ther. 3(4):441-452, 2002.
Res. 6(5):695-703, 1988.
47. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Phase II periodontal therapy. In:
31. Golub LM, Goodson JM, Lee HM, Vidal AM, McNamara TF,
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
Ramamurthy NS. Tetracyclines inhibit tissue collagenases. Effects
pp. 881-886.
 of ingested low-dose and local delivery systems. J Periodontol. 56
 48. Bellows J. Periodontal equipment, materials, and techniques. In:
(11 Suppl):93-97, 1985.
 Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a
32. Golub LM, Wolff M, Lee HM, McNamara TF, Ramamurthy NS,
Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell,2004, pp. 115-173.
Zambon J, Ciancio S. Further evidence that tetracyclines inhibit
49. Doxirobe, Pfizer Animal Health, Exton, PA, package insert.
collagenase activity in human crevicular fluid and from other
 50. Niemiec BA. Periodontal disease. Top Companion Anim Med.
mammalian sources. J Periodontal Res. 20(1):12-23, 1985.
23(2):72-80, 2008.
33. Sorsa T, Ingman T, Suomalainen K, Halinen S, Saari H, Konttinen
YT, Uitto VJ, Golub LM. Cellular source and tetracycline-
13
Home plaque control
Introduction
training easier. The importance of homecare should be
discussed again following each dental cleaning with
 Homecare is a critical aspect of periodontal therapy. The
detailed instructions provided. Finally, the client's inten-
initial phase of plaque accumulation is pellicle formation
tion and ability to perform consistent homecare should
on the surface of the teeth, which starts within nanso-
be confirmed prior to performing advanced periodontal
econds of a prophylaxis.' In addition, true bacterial
procedures. With consistency, home plaque control will 
plaque colonizes clean tooth surfaces within 24 hours of
slow the progression of periodontal disease and greatly
cleaning.23 Finally, without homecare, gingival infection
improve periodontal health. However, it will not elimi-
and inflammation quickly recurs.4-α In fact, one author
nate the need for professional cleanings.11
research, clinical trials, and demonstration projects in
Goals of home plaque control
different geographical and social setings have con-
The primary goal of home plaque control is to limit or 
firmed that effective removal of dental plaque is essential
reduce the amount of plaque on the teeth.'2 This in turn
to dental and periodontal health throughout life"9
should decrease the level of gingival inflammation and
Furthermore, it was found in a human review that
professional cleanings were of little value without
ultimately periodontal disease.
 Keep this in mind when reviewing various homecare
homecare.n0
With regards to established disease, a recent study
options and when discussing them with clients.
found that periodontal pockets become reinfected within
Information on the suitability of different methods for
 marginal and subgingival plaque control is covered along
2 weeks of a prophylaxis if homecare is not performed.6
with their descriptions below.
This same study showed that pocket depth returns to
pretreatment depths within 6 weeks oftherapy. Therefore,
Brushing is by far the most effective means to
mechanically remove plaque." Chew-based products
the performance of advanced periodontal procedures for
can be effective if properly formulated (see below).
clients who can/will not perform homecare on their pets
However, oral sprays, rinses, and water additives are
is of dubious value.
Homecare discussion/instructions
 Box 13.1 Key clinical point
 The benefits of routine homecare must be conveyed to
each client on a regular basis. Dental care (including
It is important to note that supragingival plaque and 
calculus has little to no effect on periodontal disease.
homecare) should be discussed with clients on their first
It is the plaque at the gingival margin and in the subgingival
visit to the practice, which is often the well puppy/kitten
area that creates inflammation and initiates periodontal
   a n    
disease. 3-15 Therefore, controlling the plaque at and below
greater benefit if it comes from the entire staff.? The early
the gingival margin is the key to maintaining periodontal
institution of homecare not only leads to the greatest
health.
benefit, it also makes the introduction to the pet and
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
175
176  Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
generally an insufficient means of plaque control, due to
Therefore, it should be the goal of all veterinarians to
the tenacity with which plaque adheres to the teeth, and
-npa Aq siud  jo fe nn unq yooi anod
 the increased resistance of the plaque biofilm to antisep-
cating their clients.
tics (which is reported to be up to 500,000 times that of
singular bacteria'6).
Materials and methods for tooth brushing
Brushes (Figure 13.1)
Types of homecare
The only critical piece of equipment necessary is a tooth
The two major types of home plaque control are active
brush. There are numerous veterinary brushes available,^
and passive. Both types can be effective if performed
and a proper brush should be selected based on patient
correctly and consistently, but active homecare is cur-
size. Double- and triple-sidedB as well as circular feline
rently the gold standard. Active homecare involves the
brushes are effective products and should be considered
participation of the pet's owner, such as brushing or rins-
along with the standard veterinary brushes depending
 ing. Passive methods are typically based on chewing
 on patient size and temperament. This author does not
behaviors via treats or specially formulated diets. It has
recommend the “finger brushes” as they do not effectively
been shown that active homecare is most effective on the
address the subgingival areas of the teeth, which are the
rostral teeth (incisors and canines).' In contrast, passive
most important areas to clean, and they increase the
homecare (chew-based) is more effective on the distal
chances of the owner being bitten. Gauze and washcloths
 teeth (premolars and molars).171s This difference is intu-
 are not recommended for the same reasons.19
itive because the front teeth are easier for clients to
In addition to the veterinary products, human tooth
access, while passive homecare is more effective on the
 brushes may be substituted. A soft-bristled tooth brush
distal teeth, where chewing occurs. In addition, water
 is always recommended. A child's tooth brush is often
and food additives are also currently available.
 aq   sd r  ai p a
effective than the larger veterinary version. An infant
Active homecare
brush may work best for toy breed dogs, cats, or juvenile
Active homecare is defined as the client actively partici-
patients.
pating in the removal of plaque from the tooth surface.
 An important point to consider is the degree of con-
   aq a pe a  s
tamination that accumulates on the bristles of a tooth
applying antiseptic/antiplaque solutions.
brush. This infection (viral and bacterial) multiplies on
the brush and is then reintroduced into the mouth.20-z2
Tooth brushing
This is NOT to suggest that brushing should be aban-
When properly performed, tooth brushing has been
doned, rather that brushes should not be shared between
proven to be the most effective means of plaque control.11
 pets and should be changed regularly.
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.1 Various standard tooth brushes: (a) Double-ended canine tooth brush^, (b) small, soft tooth brush that is personalized with
the clinic information.
Home Plaque Control  177
C.E.T
Figure 13.2 Human sonic tooth brush.
Figure 13.3 Veterinary toothpaste.
Mechanized (sonic and rotary') brushes (Figure 13.2)
Antimicrobial preparations' (see “Antiseptic Rinses"
have been shown to be superior to standard brushes in
below) are also available. These products will improve
human studies.2324 In addition to the numerous human
plaque and gingivitis control beyond that of pastes when
product options, there is currently a mechanized veteri-
used with brushing, and therefore should be considered
as  ae d as e  e
instead of toothpaste in high-risk patients and in cases of
for use in veterinary patients as well and should make the
established periodontal disease.2934 Human toothpastes
process more time efficient, which is important in animal
and products such as baking soda (sodium bicarbonate)
patients for acceptance reasons. The only negative aspect
are not recommended as they contain detergents or
to these brushes is that the movement/vibration of these
fluoride that may cause gastric upset or fluorosis if
instruments can feel awkward and/or may scare the
swallowed.28
 patients.' Therefore, mechanized brushes should only
be used on patients with accepting temperament. This
Brushing technique
author recommends initiating brushing very slowly with
The ideal technique to safely and effectively initiate tooth
a standard tooth brush, and then potentially progressing
brushing in veterinary patients is described in the fol-
to a mechanical type after acceptance of the standard
lowing text.21" Keep in mind, however, that the ideal
brush is achieved.
technique may only be possible in the most agreeable
patients. Clients should be encouraged to work toward
Pastes (Figure 13.3)
this level of care but to accept any degree of homecare
There are a number of veterinary toothpastes available,H
success as valuable. Forcing homecare on a patient is
which greatly increase the acceptance of the tooth brush
counterproductive and may decrease the client-animal
by the pet. Toothpastes typically contain a calcium chela-
bond.1 Similarly, coercing clients too harshly may drive
tor' that has been shown to decrease the level of calculus
them away from your practice.9 Therefore, as with
deposits on the teeth.25-z7 It is important to note, how-
everything, balance is critical.
 ever, that calculus itself is largely non-pathogenic.? As
The keys to compliance with brushing can be stated as
 such, the paste is not a significant player in the reduction
follows. First, start early, because young patients are
of plaque and gingivitis. The mechanical removal of
plaque by the movement of the brush/instrument is the
just holding the mouth and then progress to a finger and
finally start brushing slowly. Next, be consistent; make
 e rs ae n aq ps
this a learned behavior. And finally, make it positive;
(especially for cats), garlic powder, and beef broth are all
using food, treats, or playtime as a reward will greatly
excellent means of increasing palatability, as is dipping
increase the likelihood of acceptance. While brushing
the brush in the patient's favorite canned food. This
 prior to eating is counterintuitive, it is actually perfectly
author recommends these options be used initially, and
acceptable. In humans we are brushing mainly for cavity
the additional benefits of the pastes be added once
control, while in animals it is primarily for periodontal
acceptance of brushing is achieved.
disease control. It is an important point to ensure that
178
3 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Figure 13.4 Proper position of the brush against the tooth
Figure 13.6 Placing a finger behind the canines to allow access
to the mandibular cheek teeth
the cheek to reach these teeth, relying on tactile feel and
experience to ensure proper positioning.
If the patient is amenable and tractable, the client
should progress to caring for the palatal/lingual surfaces
of the teeth. These surfaces must be treated if periodontal
surgery has been performed on them. This is most
common in cases of deep vertical/angular pockets on
the palatal surfaces of the maxillary canine teeth (espe-
cially in chondrodystrophic breeds). To open the mouth,
begin by placing the thumb of the non-dominant hand
behind the mandibular canines (Figure 13.6). This
allows for some leverage and is also the safest place in
the mouth.
The 2-week postsurgical recheck is an excellent time
Figure 13.5 Brushing the buccal surface of the distal teeth.
to provide homecare instructions to your clients. This
will make it more effective but also reinforce that you
believe it is important. Having a technician demonstrate
the patient's temperament is acceptable for this process.
 proper brushing procedures is an ideal technique. More
Advise your clients that getting bitten is not worth it.19
detailed homecare instructions are available at www.
Proper tooth brushing technique begins with the
dogbeachdentistry.com.
brush held at a 45-degree angle to the long axis of the
Regarding the frequency of brushing, once a day is
tooth (Figure 13.4). The brush is then placed at the gin-
ideal, as this level of care is required to stay ahead of
gival margin and moved along the arcades utilizing a
 plaque formation.2.2s Furthermore, every other day
rotary motion. The buccal surfaces of the teeth are the
 brushing was not found to be effective at gingivitis con-
 most accessible and fortunately are the most important,
 trol.35 Three days a week is considered the minimum fre-
as these are the surfaces that generally have higher levels
quency for patients in good oral health.36 Brushing once a
of calculus deposition. Make sure to counsel owners not
week is not considered sufficient to maintain good oral
to attempt to open the pet's mouth on initiation of this
health. For patients with established periodontal disease
procedure. Most veterinary patients greatly dislike their 
(even gingivitis), daily brushing is required to maintain
 mouth being forced open, and this approach may result
Oralhealth,andtwicedailymayberecommended.2.zs3.3739
in increased resistance. Instead, clients should be
 Finally, it should be noted that consistency with homec-
instructed to begin by effectively brushing the buccal
 are is critical. If brushing is suspended for as little as a
surfaces with the mouth closed (Figure 13.5). The distal
 month, the level of gingival inflammation will return to
teeth can be accessed by gently inserting the brush inside
the same level as patients with no therapy.40
Home Plaque Control 179
C.E.T
Oral Hygiene
Reduces Plaque
orWithout
Oral
Brushing
Figure 13.7 Veterinary-labelled chlorhexidine solution.
Cleansing
Antiseptic rinses
Gel
4FL.OZ.(118m)
The other option for active homecare is the application
ChlorhexidineFree
of antiseptic/antiplaque solutions. There are numerous
 products available and it is recommended that veterinary
 professionals review the literature to determine for them-
selves whether or not to recommend a particular prod-
uct.4 It is best to evaluate the research behind product
claims and not simply read the marketing hype. An
Figure 13.8 Commercial zinc ascorbate gel.
invaluable tool for the busy practitioner is the Veterinary
Oral Health Council (VOHC). This group of veterinary
 dentists have evaluated the research and given a seal of
This author has seen good clinical results when clients
 approval to worthy products. A list of these can be found
are able to consistently apply these products. One con-
 on the website www.vohc.org. Remember, however, that
cern with the use of these products is the lack of palat-
the seal may be given for plaque and/or calculus control,
ability, which may hinder homecare efforts.1" Finally,
which may or may not correlate with decreased
chronic use of chlorhexidine has been shown to cause
 periodontal disease. Below is a description of several
dental staining.19s The staining is reversible and can be
products that this author recommends based on his
polished off, and this author has not actually seen it in an 
review of the literature. This discussion is not compre-
animal patient.
hensive and new information/products are continually
Proper application of these products requires only a
available.
 small amount of the solution be used. Ideally, the rinse
The traditional antiseptic of choice is chlorhexidine
should be directly applied to the surface of the teeth and
(Figure 13.7).K The method of action for this product is
gingiva. In most cases, however, getting the solution bet-
that it disrupts the bacterial cell walls and penetrates the
ween the cheek and teeth is the best the client can achieve.
cells, creating a precipitation of the cytoplasm.42 There is
 Although this is not ideal, it is better than no therapy.
no known method of bacterial resistance to this product,
An additional option for home oral care is the use of
 and it is very safe.4143 Chlorhexidine has been shown in
soluble zinc salts (Figure 13.8). In vitro studies showed
 numerous studies to decrease gingivitis if applied consis-
that these products can be effective in decreasing viable
tently over time2932344-49 Chlorhexidine reportedly has
plaque biomass.56 One veterinary-labelled oral zinc
a quick onset and minimal systemic uptake, making it an
ascorbate gelM has been proven to decrease plaque and
excellent choice for oral disinfection.5° An additional
gingivitis,57 and it provides the additional advantage of
 benefit of this product is that it maintains antiseptic
being tasteless (which should improve acceptance,
especially in cats). Furthermore, this product also con-
Furthermore, it appears that the 0.2% strength products
 may be superior to the 0.12% solutions and should be
 synthesis,195s-o which may improve healing following
considered in cases of established periodontal disease.54
 dental scaling and/or oral surgery.
08
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Box 13.2 The validity of pet food claims
In regards to marketing claims, it is critical to note that
AAFCO (Association of American Feed Control Officials)
regulations do not allow prevention or treatment claims
OraVet
for dental disease. However, manufacturers can claim that
the mechanical actions of food products "cleanse, freshen,
PLAQUE PREVENTION GEL
or whiten teeth" without any evidence of efficacy!64
2.5mL.okner
Furthermore, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration Center
for Veterinary Medicine has decided that if a product claims
to be effective in "plaque or tartar reduction or prevention, or
control of breath odor . . . only with respect to the product's
abrasive action, enforcement would be a low priority."64
Therefore, current regulations under AAFCO are inadequate
 for determining the effectiveness of a dental product.65
Figure 13.9 Barrier sealant.
that the compliance rate with tooth brushing with highly
Barrier sealants
motivated pet owners is only around 50% after 6 months.67
A final option for active homecare is the application of a
In fact, one study showed that passive homecare may be
commercially available barrier sealant? (Figure 13.9).
superior to active homecare simply due to the fact that it
This product works by changing the electrostatic charge
is actually performed.6 This should not be misconstrued
to mean that it is more effective, just that the average
of the teeth and creates a hydrophobic surface that is
 designed to prevent plaque attachment.6 This has been 
client is poorly compliant.
shown to decrease the accumulation of plaque and
The downfall of all chew-based passive homecare
calculus.6 There are currently no published studies that 
 - psre ss q asa p sa 
with the entire mouth and therefore areas will be missed.
 givitis or periodontal disease. However, this author has
Passive homecare is most effective on the carnassial and
anecdotally seen some positive effects, likely due to its
surrounding teeth, and in contrast, active homecare is
placement at the gingival margin. It should be noted,
superior for the incisor and canine teeth.7 Therefore, a
however, that not all veterinary dentists support its use.63
combination of active and passive homecare is best.
The review of this product using evidence-based means
supports the use of the professional application but not
Tartar control diets
the homecare version.41 Therefore, it appears that barrier
 It has long been thought that traditional dry dog food is
sealants may be most promising as a treatment in the
good for oral health, and one study appeared to support
postoperative phase, until the mouth is healed, inflam-
these claims.69 However, an additional study showed that
mation resolves, and a more established means ofhomec-
dry food was not superior to moist foods in regards to
 are (such as brushing) can be instituted.
improving oral health. There are, however, several
prescription diets available that do decrease tartar and
Passive homecare
D saise onda sipd asu rdnpq anbe
 Passive homecare is an alternative for minimizing
scrape the teeth free of plaque. Additionally,the individual
periodontal disease and is achieved with special diets,
kibbles of these therapeutic diets tend to be larger than
chews, and treats and potentially water additives. Some of
 standard pet food256s (Figure 13.10). This increases the
these methods are effective, but many are not. Some of the
amount of chewing performed and the efficacy of the
effective products are detailed below; however, there is not
abrasive aspects." Many of the products also contain a
enough room here for a complete discussion of all prod-
calcium chelator to further reduce dental calculus 2s-2z7,72.73
ucts. Practitioners should perform their own research and
 Finally, one product has added green tea polyphenolsp
utilize the VOHC to form proper client recommenda-
 (which are purported to be antibacterial) for an additional
tions, rather than simply reading the marketing hype.
layer of defense.4.7s These studies may support a larger
Since passive homecare requires no work by the owner,
role for nutraceuticals in the near future (see chapter 20).
compliance is more likely. Compliance is especially
However, some studies have reported that it is the kibble
important since long-term consistency is the key factor
 size and not any antimicrobials that improve oral health,76
in the efficacy of home dental care." It has been shown
 and therefore further studies are needed. Numerous
Home Plaque Control  181
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.10 Commercially available dental diet, demonstrating size difference between a "dental diet" (Hill's Science Diet t/d) and a
standard kibble. (a) From left: Canine t/d, Canine t/d "small bites," standard kibble. (b) Left: Feline t/d; right: standard kibble.
arrangement within the kibble. This arrangement requires
the tooth to fully enter the kibble prior to it breaking
apart, allowing the entire tooth (including the marginal
area) to be cleaned. The addition of antioxidants in this
PAYUNTLO BOSRLL
 diet may also be beneficial.
8
PURINA
Raw diets
UETERIERRY
 It is widely believed that “"raw" diets are effective at main-
DIETS
taining oral health. However, there are no current studies
that document this benefit." In fact, one study reported
similar incidence of periodontal disease between African
wild dogs when compared with domestic canines.31
Furthermore, similar studies on feral cats whose diet
consisted mostly of birds reported a similar level of
 periodontal disease as domestic felines on commercial
studies are available, these diets should not be prescribed
for improving dental health.
Figure 13.11 Canine "dental diet."
Tartar control treats
There are numerous treats available for passive homecare,
the original and most common being the biscuit-style
 products have received the VOHC seal as effective in
treats. Plain biscuits have not been shown to aid in the
tartar (and in some cases plaque) reduction.ZQ-u One
reduction of periodontal disease.4 A better choice appears
important point is that even though these products may
to be biscuits coated with HMP, although there are studies
o i e an sno pe anbed s
 that support and detract from their efficacy as well.4.s5
effective on the areas around the cusp tips and not at the
Over the last few years several new edible treats with
varying efficacy have been brought to market. Many of the
calculus is generally non-pathogenic, and therefore
studies are unpublished; however, there are several prod-
minimal control of gingivitis is gained by calculus con-
ucts with VOHC approval in this class (Figure 13.12).wx.Y
trol.41 Of the available diets, only onev has been clinically
The most prevalent and proven effective products in
 proven to decrease gingivitis (Figure 13.11).78-s The main
this class are the rask type and rawhide chews
reason for this product's effectiveness lies in the fiber
(Figure 13.13).73: These products work similarly to
182
2 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
Box 13.3 Key points
VOHC
Daily homecare is recommended since plaque accumulates
in 24 hours.
●Without homecare, the efficacy of professional periodontal
therapy is severely limited.
·Tooth brushing is the gold standard and is most effective
on rostral teeth.
●Passive homecare methods may or may not be effective,
 and any provided benefit willbe mainly on the dlistal teeth.
FORMULA
·A combination of active and passive methods is likely the
best choice.
田
Look for the VOHC seal on dental homecare products.
PETITE
One important point to remember is that many chew
 treats that claim to help control dental disease are very
NETWT.
hard in texture. The chewing of these products may (and
TREATS
often does) result in tooth fracture. A good rule of thumb
is that ifyou cannot make an indentation into the product
Figure 13.12 Commercial dental health treat.
with your fingernail, it is too hard. Also, just because a
product is effective for dental disease does not necessarily
mean it is safe. Owners must be aware of the choking/
obstructive possibilities of many treats. For this reason
the VOHC has recently modified its requirements to
include evidence of safety as well.
Water additives
This is a relatively new area of home dental care, and
 there are several products available in this category.EE
While there are some studies on the human side that
 found that the active ingredients have some efficacy,449
there is currently minimal to no peer-reviewed evidence
that supports their use in controlling periodontal disease
 in veterinary patients. One product with xylitolFF was
shown to decrease plaque and calculus in one study,*2 but
the potential negative systemic effects of the product
(possible hypoglycemia and liver derangement)3-9 must
Figure 13.13 Commercial rawhide chews with added chlorhexi-
be weighed against the possible oral benefit. There is one
dine.
supporting plaque control and has been accepted by the
VOHC despite the lack of publication.
tartar control diets, with the abrasives cleaning the tooth
surface, but additionally may include calcium chelators
Conclusions
(such as sodium hexametaphosphate) or other sub-
stances to further increase their antiplaque efficacy.87
Homecare is a critical aspect of periodontal therapy, but it
However, the addition of chlorhexidine was not found to
is often ignored. Early and consistent client education is
further increase the efficacy of rawhide chews.' As with
 the key to compliance. There are numerous options avail-
the diets discussed above, however, most of the benefi-
able, but tooth brushing remains the gold standard. Of the
cial effect is supragingival and on the cheek teeth. Of the
numerous products available for passive homecare, only a
 available products, only a handfulZ.AA.BE have been clini-
few are truly effective, and the reader is urged to critically
cally proven to decrease gingivitis.68-9∞ VOHC approval
review the clinical studies when deciding which products
has been awarded to several ofthese products as wel.cc.Dr
to endorse.
Home Plaque Control 183
Notes
7. Corba NH, Jansen J, Pilot T. Artificial periodontal defects and fre-
quency of tooth brushing in beagle dogs (Il). Clinical findings
A. CET Dual-Ended Toothbrush, Virbac Animal Health.
after a period of healing. J Clin Periodontol. 13(3):186-189, 1986.
B.
Triple-Pet EZ Dog Toothbrush.
8. Payne WA, Page RC, Olgolvie AL, et al. Histopathologic features
Quadbrush Cat Toothbrush.
of the initial and early stages of experimental gingivitis in man.
D. CET Cat Toothbrush, Virbac Animal Health.
J Periodontal Res. 10:51, 1975.
E.
 Sonicare toothbrush, Phillips.
9. Proceedings of the European Workshop on Mechanical Plaque
F.
 Oral B Vitality toothbrush, Braun.
Control, Chicago, 1998.
G.
 Sonic Canine Premium Pet toothbrush.
10. Needleman I, Suvan J, Moles DR, Pimlott J. A systermatic review of
H.
CET Enzymatic Toothpaste, Virbac Animal Health.
professional mechanical plaque removal for prevention of
I.
Sodium hexametaphosphate.
periodontal diseases. J Clin Periodontol. 32 Suppl 6:229-282, 2005.
I.
CET Oral Hygiene Rinse, Virbac Animal Health.
11. Hale FA. Home care for the veterinary dental patient. J Vet Dent.
K.1
 Nolvadent, Fort Dodge Animal Health.
20(1):52-54, 2003.
L.
CET Oral Hygiene Rinse, Virbac Animal Health.
12. Perry DA. Plaque controlfor the periodontal patient. In: Carranza's
M. Maxiguard oral hygiene gel, Addison Biological Laboratory.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 728-748.
N. Oravet, Merial Limited.
13. Westfelt , Rylander H, Dahlen G, Lindhe J.The effect of suprag-
O. Sodium hexametaphosphate.
ingival plaque control on the progression of advanced periodontal
P.
 Royal Canin DD.
disease. J Clin Periodontol. 25(7):536-541, 1998.
Q. Oral Care canine and feline, Hill's Pet Nutrition.
14. Niemiec BA. Periodontal therapy. Top Companion Anim Med.
R.
Chunk Dental Defense Diet for Dogs, Iams.
23(2):81-90, 2008.
S.
 Eukanuba Adult Maintenance Diet for Dogs, Iams.
15. Harvey CE, Emily PP. Periodontal disease. In: Small Animal
 Purina Veterinary Diets DH Dental Health brand Canine and
Dentistry. St. Louis: Mosby, 1993, pp.89-144.
 Feline Formulas, Purina Nestle Purina Petcare Company.
16. Williams JE. Microbial contamination of dental lines. In: Current
U.1
 Friskies Feline Dental Diet, Purina Nestle Purina Petcare Company.
 and Future Trends in Veterinary Dentistry: Proceedings of the
V.
 Prescription Diet Canine and Feline t/d, Hills Pet Nutrition.
Upjohn Worldwide Companion Animal Veterinary Dental
W. BlueChews, Vetradent Inc.
Forum, 1995, pp.8-11.
X.
Canine Greenies, all sizes and formulations (lite, senior).
17. Capik I. Periodontal health vs. different preventative means in
Y.1
 Bright Bites and Checkups Chews for Dogs, Diamond Foods, Inc.
toy breeds—clinical study. Proceedings of the 16th European
Z. CET hexachews, Virbac Animal Health.
Congress of Veterinary Dentistry, 2007, pp. 31-34.
AA. Pedigree Rask/Dentabone, Mars.
18. Bjone S, Brown W, Harris A, Genity PM. Influence of chewing on
BB. Tartar Shield Soft Rawhide Chews for Dogs, Therametric
dental health in dogs. Proceedings ofthe 16th European Congress
Technologies, Inc.
of Veterinary Dentistry, 2007, pp. 45-46.
CC. Purina Veterinary Diets Dental Chews brand Canine Treats,
19. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis. In: Veteri-
 Purina Nestle Purina Petcare Company.
nary Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998,
DD. Friskies Cheweez Beefhide Treats, Friskies Co., Purina Nestle
pp.133-166.
 Purina Petcare Company.
20. Bunetel L, Tricot-Doleux S, Agnani G, Bonnaure-Mallet M. In
EE.
Oxyfresh, Oxyfresh Worldwide.
vitro evaluation of the retention of three species of pathogenic
FF.
Aquadent, Virbac Animal Health.
microorganisms by three different types of toothbrush. Oral
GG. Healthymouth.
Microbiol Immunol. 15(5):313-316, 2000.
21. Wetzel WE, Schaumburg C, Ansari F, Kroeger T, Sziegoleit A.
Microbial contamination of toothbrushes with different princi-
References
ples of filament anchoring. J Am Dent Assoc. 136(6):758-765,
2005.
1. Quirynen M, Teughels W, Kinder Haake S, Newman MG.
 22. Glass RT, Martin ME, Peter LJ. Transmission of disease in dogs by
Microbiology of periodontal diseases. In: Carranzas Clinical
toothbrushing. Quintessence Int. 20(11):819-824, 1989.
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 134-169.
23. Moritis K, Jenkins W, Hefti A, Schmitt P, McGrady M. A
 2. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
randomized, parallel design study to evaluate the effects ofa Soni-
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
care and a manual toothbrush on plaque and gingivitis. J Clin
pp. 186-231.
Dent. 19(2):64-68, 2008.
 3. Boyce EN, Ching RJ. Logan EI. Hunt JH. Maseman DC. Gaeddert
24. Deery C, Heanue M, Deacon S, Robinson PG, Walmsley AD,
KL. King CT. Reid EE. Hefferren J. Occurrence of gram-negative
Worthington H, Shaw W, Glenny AM. The effectiveness of manual
black-pigmented anaerobes in subgingival plaque during the
versus powered toothbrushes for dental health: A systematic
development of canine periodontal disease. Clin Infect Dis. 20
review. J Dent. 2004 Mar;32(3):197-211.
Suppl 2:S317-9, 1995.
25. Hennet P, Servet E, Soulard Y, Biourge V. Effect of pellet food size
4. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
'saop un uoeinunse sini Suuaaad u saiudsoudaiod pue
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
JVet Dent. 24(4):236-239, 2007.
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
26. Liu H, Segreto VA, Baker RA, Vastola KA, Ramsey LL, Gerlach
 5. Fiorellini JP, Ishikawa SO, Kim DM. Clinical features of gingivitis.
RW. Anticalculus efficacy and safety of a novel whitening denti-
 In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
frice containing sodium hexametaphosphate: A controlled six-
pp. 362-372.
month clinical trial. J Clin Dent. 13(1):25-28, 2002.
 6. Rober M. Effect of scaling and root planing without dental homec.
27. White DJ, Cox ER, Suszcynskymeister EM, Baig AA. In vitro
are on the subgingival microbiota. Proceedings of the 16th
studies of the anticalculus efficacy of a sodium hexametaphos-
European Congress of Veterinary Dentistry 2007, pp. 28-30.
phate whitening dentifrice. J Clin Dent. 13(1):33-37, 2002.
184 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
28. Niemiec BA. Periodontal disease. Top Companion Anim Med.
48. Kantmann CL, Warrick JM, Stookey GK, Newman J, Ewing TH.
23(2):72-80, 2008.
The evaluation of the rate of gingivitis and plaque formation in
29. Maruniak J, Clark WB, Walker CB, Magnusson I, Marks RG,
cats treated with different antimicrobial solutions.Proceedings of
Taylor M, Clouser B. The effect of 3 mouthrinses on plaque and
the 19th Annual American Veterinary Dental Forum, Orlando,
gingivitis development. J Clin Periodontol. 19(1):19-23, 1992.
2005.
30. Overholser CD, Meiller TF, DePaola LG, Minah GE, Niehaus C.
49. Tepe JH, Leonard GJ, Singer R, et al. The long term effect of of
Comparative effects of 2 chemotherapeutic mouthrinses on the
chlorhexidine on plaque, gingivitis, sulcus depth, gingival reces-
development of supragingival dental plaque and gingivitis. J Clin
sion, and loss of attachment in beagle dogs. J Periodontal Res.
Periodontol. 17(8):575-579, 1990.
18:452-458, 1983.
31. Stratul SI, Rusu D, Didilescu A, Mesaros-Anghel M, Lala C, Tion
 50. Salas Campos L, Gomez Ferrero O, Villar Miranda H, Martin
L, Sculean A, Jentsch H. Prospective clinical study evaluating the
Rivera B. Antiseptic agents: Chlorhexidine. Rev Enferm.
long-time adjunctive use of chlorhexidine after one-stage full-
23(9):637-640, 2000.
mouth SRP. Int J Dent Hyg. 8(1):35-40, 2010.
 51. Cousido MC, Tomas Carmona I, Garcia-Caballero L, Limeres J,
32. Hase JC, Attstrom R, Edwardsson S, Kelty E, Kisch J. 6-month use
Alvarez M, Diz P. In vivo substantivity of 0.12% and 0.2%
of 0.2% delmopinol hydrochloride in comparison to 0.2%
chlorhexidine mouthrinses on salivary bacteria. Clin Oral Inves-
chlorhexidine digluconate and placebo, effect on plaque formation
tig., Aug. 8, 2009.
and gingivitis. J Clin Periodontol. 25(9):746-753, 1998.
 52. Tomas I, Garcia-Caballero L, Cousido MC, Limeres J, Alvarez M,
33. Eaton KA, Rimini FM, Zak E, et al. The effects of a 0.12%
Diz P. Evaluation of chlorhexidine substantivity on salivary flora
chlorhexidine-digluconate containing mouthrinse versus 
by epifluorescence microscopy. Oral Dis. 15(6):428-433, 2009.
 placebo on plaque and gingival inflammation over a 3-month
 53. Bonesvoll P. Oral pharmacology of chlorhexidine. J Clin Peri-
period. A multicentre study carried out in general dental prac-
odontol. 4:49-65, 1977.
tices. J Clin Periodontol. 24(3):189-197, 1997.
 54. Tomas I, Cousido MC, Tomas M, Limeres J, Garcia-Caballero L,
34. Hennet P. Effectiveness of a dental gel to reduce plaque in beagle
Diz P. In vivo bactericidal effect of 0.2% chlorhexidine but not
dogs. J Vet Dent. 19(1):11-14, 2002.
0.12%on salivary obligate anaerobes. Arch Oral Biol. 53(12):1186-
35. Gorrel C, Rawlings IM. The role of tooth-brushing and diet in the
1191,2008.
maintenance of periodontal health in dogs. J Vet Dent. 13(4):
 55. Olympio KP, Bardal PA, de M Bastos JR, Buzalaf MA. Efective-
139-143, 1996.
ness of a chlorhexidine dentifrice in orthodontic patients: A
36. Tromp JA, Jansen J, Pilot T. Gingival health and frequency of
randomized-controlled trial. J Clin Periodontol. 33(6):421-426,
tooth brushing in the beagle dog model. Clinical findings. J Clin
2006.
Periodontol. 13(2):164-168, 1986.
56. Wolinsky LE, Cuomo J, Quesada K, et al. A comparative pilot
37. Corba NH, Jansen J, Pilot T. Artificial periodontal defects
study of the effects of a dentifrice containing green tea bioflavo-
and frequency of tooth brushing in beagle dogs (Il). Clinical
nids,
s, sanguinarine, or triclosan on oral bacterial biofilm
findings after a period of healing. J Clin Periodontol. 13(3):
formation. J Clin Dent. 11:535-559, 2000.
186-189,1986.
 57. Clarke DE. Clinical and microbiological effects of oral zinc ascor-
38. Corba NH, Jansen J, Pilot T. Artificial periodontal defects and fre-
bate gel in cats. J Vet Dent. 18(4):177-183, 2001.
quency of tooth brushing in beagle dogs (I). Clinical findings after
58. Pinnel SR, Murad S, Darr D. Induction of collagen synthesis
a period of healing. I Clin Periodontol. 13(3):158-163, 1986.
by ascorbic acid. A possible mechanism. Arch Dermatol.
39. Tromp JA, van Rijn LJ, Jansen J. Experimental gingivitis and fre-
123(12):1684-1686, 1987.
-puy eu yapou sop aeaq ay u Suusnq yoo yo unb
 59. Murad S, Grove D, Lindberg KA, Reynolds G, Sivarajah A, Pinnell
ings. I Clin Periodontol. 13(3):190-194, 1986.
SR. Regulation of collagen synthesis by ascorbic acid. Proc Natl
40. Ingham KE, Gorrel C. Effect of long-term intermittent periodontal
Acad Sci USA 78(5):2879-2882, 1981.
care on canine periodontal disease. J Small Anim Pract. 42(2):
60. Booth BA, Uitto J. Collagen biosynthesis by hurman skin fibro-
67-70, 2001.
blasts. III. The effects of ascorbic acid on procollagen production
 41. Roudebush P, Logan El, Hale FA. Evidence-based veterinary
   
dentistry: A systematic review of homecare for prevention of
675(1):117-122, 1981.
periodontal disease in dogs and cats. J Vet Dent. 21(1):6-15, 2005.
 61. Homola AM, Dunton RK. Methods, compositions, and dental
          s 
delivery systems for the protection of the surfaces of teeth. U.s.
chlorhexidine. A study of plaque growth on enamel inserts in
Patent No. 5,665,333 issued Sept. 9, 1997, and U.S. Patent No.
vivo. J Clin Periodontol. 15:415-424, 1988.
5,961,958 issued Oct. 5, 1999.
43. Robinson JG. Chlorhexidine gluconate—the solution to dental
62. Gengler WR, Kunkle BN, Romano D, Larsen D. Evaluation of a
problems. J Vet Dent. 12(1):29-31, 1995.
barrier sealant in dogs. J Vet Dent. 22(3):157-159, 2005.
44. Hamp SE, Emilson CG. Some effects of chlorhexidine on the
 63. Personal communication with other diplomates of the AVDC.
plaque flora of the beagle dog. I Periodontol Res. 12:28-35, 1973.
 64. Association of American Feed Control Officials, Inc. Official pub-
45. Hull PS, Davies RM. The effect of a chlorhexidine gel on tooth
lication of the Association of American Feed Control Officials,
deposits in beagle dogs. I Small Animal Pract. 13:207-212, 1972.
Oxford, IN, 2010.
46. Hamp SE, Lindhe J, Loe H. Long term effects of chlorhexidine
 65. Larsen J. Oral products and dental disease. Compend Cont Educ
on developing gingivitis in the beagle dog. I Periodontol Res.
Vet., Sept 2010, p. E1-3.
8:63-70, 1973.
 66. Ingham KE, Gorrel C. Effect of long-term intermittent periodontal
47. Eaton KA, Rimini FM, Zak E, et al. The effects of a 0.12%
care on canine periodontal disease. J Small Anim Pract. 42(2):
chlorhexidine-digluconate containing mouthrinse  versus 
a
67-70, 2001.
 placebo on plaque and gingival inflammation over a 3-month
 67. Miller BR, Harvey CE. Compliance with oral hygiene recommen-
period. A multicentre study carried out in general dental prac-
dations follwing periodontal treatment in client-owned dogs.
tices. J Clin Periodontol. 24(3):189-197, 1997.
JVet Dent. 11(1):18-19, 1994.
Home Plaque Control  185
68. Vrieling HE, Theyse LF, van Winkelhoff AJ, Dijkshoorn NA,
82. Verstraete FJ, van Aarde RJ, Nieuwoudt BA, et al. The dental
Logan El, Picavet P. Effectiveness of feeding large kibbles with
pathology of feral cats on Marion Island, part II: Periodontitis,
external odontoclastic resorption lesions and mandibular thick-
Diergeneeskd. 130(5):136-140, 2005.
ing. JComp Pathol. 115(3):283-297, 1996.
69. Gawor JP, Reiter AM, Jodkowska K, Kurski G, Wojtacki MP,
83. Clarke DE, Cameron A. Relationship between diet, dental
Kurek A. Influence of diet on oral health in cats and dogs. J Nutr.
calculus, and periodontal disease in domestic and feral cats in 
136:2021-2023 S, 2006.
Australia. Aust Vet J. 76(10):690-693, 1998.
 70. Harvey CE,Shofer FS, Laster L. Correlation of diet, other chewing
84. Stookey GK, Warrick JM, Miller LL, et al. Hexametphosphate-
activities, and periodontal disease in North American client-
coated snack biscuits significantly reduce calculus formation in
owned dogs. J Vet Dent. 13:101-105, 1996.
dogs. I Vet Dent. 13(1):27039, 1996.
71. Jensen L, Logan E, Finney O, Lowry S, Smith M, Hefferren J,
85. Logan El, Wiggs RB, Zetner K, et al. Dental disease. In: Small 
 Simone A, Richardson D. Reduction in accumulation of plaque,
 Animal Clinical Nutrition (Hand MS, Thacher CD, Remillard RL,
stain, and calculus in dogs by dietary means. J Vet Dent. 2(4):
Roudebush P eds.). 4th ed. Topeka, KS: Mark Morris Institute,
161-163, 1995.
2000, pp. 475-492.
72. Stookey GK, Warrick IM. Calculus prevention in dogs provided
 86. Hennet P, Servet E, Venet C. Effectiveness of an oral hygiene chew
diets coated with HMP. Proceedings of the 19th Annual American
to reduce dental deposits in small breed dogs. J Vet Dent. 23(1):
Veterinary Dental Forum, Orlando, 2005, pp. 417-421.
6-12, 2006.
73. Lage A, Lausen N, Tracy R, Allred E. Effect of chewing rawhide
87. Warrick JM, Stookey GK, Inskeep GA, Inskeep TK. Reducing
and cereal biscuit on removal of dental calculus in dogs. JAVMA
jen sme aneaouu ue usn sop u uenunse snne
197(2):213-219, 1990.
system coated with hexametaphosphate. Proceedings of the 15th
74. Hattori M, Kusumoto IT, Namba T, Ishigami T, Hara Y. Effect of
Annual American Veterinary Dental Forum, San Antonio, 2001,
tea polyphenols on glucan synthesis by glucosyltransferase from
pp. 379-382.
Streptococcus mutans. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo) 38(3):717-720,
88. Gorrel C, Bierer TL. Long-term effects ofa dental hygiene chew on
1990.
the periodontal health of dogs. J Vet Dent. 16(3):109-113, 1999.
75. Hirasawa M, Takada K, Makimura M, Otake S. Improvement
 89. Stookey GK. Soft rawhide reduces calculus formation in dogs.
of periodontal status by green tea catechin using a local
J Vet Dent. 26(2):82-85, 2009.
delivery systerm: A clinical pilot study. J Periodontal Res.
90. Mariani C, Douhain J, Servet E, Hennet P, Biourge V. Effect of tooth
37(6):433-438, 2002.
76. Brown WY, McGenity P. Effective periodontal disease control
the 18th Congressof Veterinary Dentistry, Zurich, 2009, pp. 1315.
using dental hygiene chews. J Vet Dent. 22(1):16-19, 2005.
91. Chapek CW, Reed OK, Ratcliff PA. Reduction of bleeding on
77. www.VOHC.org.
probing with oral-care products. Compend Contin Educ Dent.
78. Logan El, Finney O, Hefferren J. Effects of a dental food on
16(2):188, 190, 192, 1995.
 plaque accumulation and gingival health in dogs. I Vet Dent.
92. Clarke DE. Drinking water aditive decreases plaque and calculus
19(1):15-18, 2002.
accumulation in cats. J Vet Dent. 23:79-82, 2006.
 79. Logan EI, Proctor V, Berg ML, Coffman L, Hefferren JJ. Dietary
 sas pox jo sioaa a o su man  a 'e
 effecton tooth surface debris and gingival health in cats. Proceed.
dogs. Vet Med. 101(12):791-797, 2006.
ings of the 15th Annual American Veterinary Dental Forum, San
94. Dunayer EK. Hypoglycemia following canine ingestion of xylitol-
Antonio, 2001, p. 377.
containing gum. Vet Human Tox. 46(2):87-88, 2004.
 80. Logan EI, Berg ML, Coffman L, et al. Dietary control of feline gin-
95. Xia Z, He Y, Yu J. Experimental acute toxicity of xylitol in dogs.
givitis: Results of a six month study. Proceedings of the 13th
JVet Pharma Thera. 32(5):465-469, 2009.
Veterinary Dental Forum, 1999, p. 54.
96. Dodds JW. Healthymouth Clinical Trials. Data on file at Healthy.
 81. Steenkamp G, Gorrel C. Oral and dental conditions in adult
mouth.
African wild dog skulls: A preliminary report. J Vet Dent. 16:
65-68, 1999.
Antibiotics in periodontal disease
R. Michael Peak
Introduction
 Box 14.1 Key clinical point
In the 1960s, microscopic examination and bacterial
isolation of healthy and diseased peridontium found that
None of these antibiotics can be recommended as a
specific plaque bacteria were responsible for periodontal
monotherapy for periodontal disease. They are
recommended as an adjunctive measure along with scaling.
disease.' In the early 1970s, Lindhe et al. found that
dlosed root planing and subgingival curettage, and/or
plaque bacteria were indeed required for periodontal
periodontal surgery as indicated by the oral exam.
disease to develop in Beagle dogs.? Since the late 1920s,
antibiotics have been known to kill bacteria or stop their
growth, and have been used to prevent or treat oral infec-
tions.? As time has evolved, our knowledge of the specific
Table 14.1 Common Antibiotics Used in Periodontal Disease.
types of bacteria involved with periodontal disease has
Drug
Dosage
Route of 
 Frequency of 
changed, and certain antibiotics have proved more useful
 Administration  Administration
 than others in treating this disease. Various modes of
 delivery for antibiotics have been advocated, from oral
Amoxicillin-
11-22 mg/kg
PO
q 12 h
mouth rinses containing penicillin, to systemically
clavulinate
administered antibiotics, and ultimately locally placed
 Clindamycin 
 5.5-33 mg/Kg
PO
q 12 h
and delivered antibiotics to treat specific areas around
Doxycycline
6y/6w 5-E
PO
q 12 h
teeth. We now know periodontal disease is a multifacto-
Metronidazole
 25-50 mg/kg
PO
q 12 h
rial disease affected by inherent risks that increase the
Tetracycline
22 mg/kg
PO
q8h
likelihood for disease development, including the host 
response to bacteria in the oral cavity or lack thereof, the
 different types of bacteria, and environmental influences.
 targets the obligate anaerobes and ciprofloxacin the
facultative anaerobes.4
Antibiotics used for periodontal disease
(Box 14.1)
Appropriate antibiotic selection
In some instances, combinations of the aforementioned
For most bacterial infections, the selection of the correct
antibiotics may be most appropriate based on sus-
antibiotic relies on the appropriate drug (based on
pected periodontopathogens. Antibiotic combinations
 culture and sensitivity), the appropriate dose (based on 
usually include metronidazole due to its ability to kill
minimum inhibitory concentrations and the target loca-
anaerobic bacteria. Common combinations include
tion of the infection), and the appropriate duration. The
amoxicillin + metronidazole and amoxicillin-clavulinate +
 antibiotic of choice for periodontal infections ideally
metronidazole. Ciprofloxacin + metronidazole has been
 would be specific for periodontal pathogens, allogenic,
suggested in human literature since metronidazole
non-toxic, substantive, not in general use for other
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
186
Antibiotics in Periodontal Disease   187
infections, easy to administer, and inexpensive.4
The rationale is that by reducing the bacterial load in the
 Unfortunately, to date this drug does not exist.
healing periodontal pocket, the bacterial degradation
For determination of the appropriate drug, plaque
enzymes and inflammatory mediators would subse-
sampling along with culture and sensitivity would be
quently be reduced. In turn, this could positively
ideal. Although subgingival antimicrobial sampling is
influence the healing of the periodontal pocket. At this
available for human dental professionals, there are no
point, the administration of postoperative antibiotic
commercially available tests for dogs/cats. Anaerobic
therapy for periodontal disease in companion animals is
sampling can be difficult and contamination of samples
controversial.
is a concern due to the normal flora of the oral cavity. In
Nieves et al. found bacteremia was a common sequela
most cases, antibiotics are chosen empirically, based on
following ultrasonic scaling in anesthetized dogs, and as
previous studies and the likelihood of those bacteria
such, concern was generated over this release of bacteria
playing a role in the periodontal disease process. As a
intothe
 bloodstream during these  procedures.12
very general statement, in health, most of the oral flora
Considering these findings, concern grew for those
asod-n si  pue snnns eai an s
 patients with pre-existing cardiac disease and the poten-
aerobic bacteria. As periodontal disease progresses along
tial development of endocarditis. A clinical case of endo-
the root surface and periodontal pockets form, the sub-
carditis that resulted in death was subsequently reported
gingival bacterial flora changes to a more gram-negative
following a dental prophylaxis procedure, giving more
anaerobic population. This is also true in both dogs
credibility to the need for antibiotic protection during
and cats. (See chapter 3 for a complete discussion of
 dental procedures.13 A recent retrospective study with
 periodontal bacteria.)
 more than 50,000 patients suggested periodontal disease
 Another consideration for selection of the appropriate
was associated with endocarditis and cardiomyopathy. 14
drug is the ability of that drug to get to where the bacteria
Other recent human publications have suggested tooth
reside. Plaque is a unique bacterial biofilm, and as such,
brushing could create similar bacteremia and called for
delivery of the antibiotic directly to the bacteria can
consideration  of  the clinical significance of this
be difficult.7 Some antibiotics such as clindamycin,
consequence.5 However, further retrospective studies on
clarithromycin, and azithromycin may be more effec-
endocarditis in dogs did not support a relationship
tively delivered to the plaque bacteria via their mode of
between infective endocarditis and dental procedures,
action, and may have the ability to penetrate areas of
and called for re-evaluation of recommendations of anti-
active infection through uptake and delivery within
biotic usage with dental procedures.6 Retrospective
 inflammatory cells.4&9 In most instances, plaque disrup-
findings of a collaborative effort of the American Dental
tion via ultrasonic debridement, root planing, and
 Association and the American Heart Association came
subgingival curettage allows any antibiotic that is selected
to similar conclusions.'7 More studies are needed in
to be more effective.
veterinary dentistry to quantify the significance of the
Appropriate dosing and duration would ideally be
bacteremia elicited during dental procedures. Other sug-
determined by minimum inhibitory concentrations of
gested indications for antibiotic administration during
those antibiotics that the oral pathogens were found to
dental procedures include:*
 be susceptible to. Again, this is problematic since culture
and sensitivity testing of periodontal pathogens is not
Cases in which the local tissues around teeth are
routinely performed in veterinary medicine. In most
severely  infected, which necessitates either
instances, we rely on past calculations to choose the
periodontal surgery or extractions. These patients
antibiotic dosage. Unfortunately, as bacteria evolve we
may benefit from decreased inflammation and
may be selecting dosages that are insufficient to elimi-
more rapid healing if the infection is controlled at
 nate the targeted pathogens. The result is underdosing of
the time of the procedure. Administration of
 antibiotics to effectively kill bacteria, a practice that can
the preferred antibiotic (based on the degree of
lead to bacterial resistance.
alveolar bone involvement) should commence at
least 24-48 hours prior to the procedure.
 Cases in which the periodontal infection has pro-
Indications for antibiotic therapy
 gressed to osteomyelitis and despite treatment
in periodontal disease
with extractions or root planing, deep-seeded
Few if any veterinary studies have focused on the benefits
bone infection will remain. In these circum-
of antibiotics post-SRP, but there have been many human
stances, starting antibiotics several days prior to
studies that tout gains in attachment of periodontal tis-
the procedure and continuing for 10-14days
sues following SRP with antibiotics versus SRP alone.0.11
 postoperative is advocated.
188
 Initial Therapy of Periodontal Disease
3.
Cases involving severe ulceration and loss of oral
utilizes the antibacterial properties and anticollagenase
mucosal integrity as in canine or feline stomatitis.
effect of doxycycline to assist periodontal healing and
Usually these patients are managed with other
prevent further periodontal tissue loss following scaling
 treatments such as extractions, dental cleaning.
and root planing.1819 (See chapter 12 for a detailed
 and meticulous homecare.
discussion of local antibiotic usage.)
4.
 Cases involving patients that are immunocompro-
mised such as those with feline immunodefi-
Potential alternative uses of antibiotics
ciency virus or those concurrently receiving
The anticollagenase activity of the tetracycline group of
radiation or chemotherapy.
antibiotics may prove useful in the future of veterinary
5.
Cases involving patients who have received a
dentistry as another tool for the prevention of periodontal
splenectomy.
tissue loss. At low doses (below both the antimicrobial
6.
 Cases involving patients with prostheses such as an
 dose and level that would allow resistance), doxycycline
ocular prosthesis, total hip replacement, 
or
 may be used for prevention in the breakdown of col-
cruciate repair using a non-absorbable material.
 lagen. One human product is a 20 mg tablet given twice
7.
Cases involving patients with other metabolic
derangement such as hepatic, renal, cardiac,
daily that has been approved by the FDA for this use in
 people.4 Azithromycin has also been found to help in the
pancreatic, or adrenal disease. As mentioned
treatment of gingival hyperplasia induced by the
earlier, endocarditis may not be as much of a risk
administration of cyclosporine.2 While long-term use of
during dental procedures as once thought. These
azithromycin cannot be advocated, it may be used as an
guidelines are being reviewed, but others have yet
s n yo p qd d n p
 to be investigated fully and more studies are needed.
 Patients receiving sterile surgeries in other areas,
cases, and thus help in the prevention of periodontal
8.
such as dermatologic surgeries.
disease. (See chapter 20 for a complete discussion ofhost
 modulation agents.)
I should be noted that most patients undergoing
routine dental cleaning do not warrant antibiotic cov-
erage for the resulting bacteremia. Healthy patients
Box 14.2 Key points
should be able to eliminate these bacteria via the
reticuloendothelial  system  without  consequence.
●Antibiotics are not a monotherapy for periodontal disease.
They are used as an adjunctive measure along with
Clinical judgments need to be made in every circum-
professional care and homecare.
 stance as to the need for adjunctive antibiotic therapy,
and discretion is warranted. If antibiotics are chosen,
Indications for antibiotics in dentistry include:
the clinician must consider an appropriate dose for the
o Pretreatment in cases of severe infection requiring
expected bacteria involved and an adequate amount of
extensive extractions or periodontal surgery to decrease
administration time.
 inflammation. This should be continued postsurgery.
o Osteomyelitis.
Local delivery of antibiotics
o Ulcerative disease (such as caudal stomatitis).
o Immune compromised and splenectomized patients.
 Some of the concerns regarding systemic administration
o Patients with prostheses such as eye, total hip joints, or
of antibiotics include the need for high doses of certain
TPLOs.
drugs given systemically to achieve adequate levels
o Systemically compromised patients such as those with
within periodontal pockets, exposure of some beneficial
renal, hepatic, and heart disease.
bacteria to these antibiotics, inadequate levels of antibi-
o Patients having sterile surgical procecdures performed
otic reaching other areas of the body predisposing
concurrent with dental procedures.
development of bacterial resistance, and finally
· Most patients undergoing routine dental cleaning do not
 questions regarding the need for a systemic medication
need antibiotic coverage
in the treatment of a focal disease. Recent advances in
 The antibiotic regimen must be broad spectrum and 
delivery technology have allowed for placement of a
include an anaerobic spectrum due to the types of 
bacteria seen in periodontal disease.
sustained-release antibiotic directly into the location of
the periodontal disease. These “local delivery” antibi-
otics help avert many of the concerns of systemic
antibiotics and allow for selective targeting of the peri-
Notes
odontopathogens in their specific locations. There is a
A. Doxyrobe Gel, Pfizer Animal Health.
 e   eea
B. Periostat, Collagenex Pharmaceutical Inc.
Antibiotics in Periodontal Disease   189
13. Tou SP, Adlin DB, Castleman WL. Mitral valve endocarditis after
References
dental prophylaxis in a dog. J Vet Intern Med. 19(2):268-270,
1. Socransky SS, Haffajee AD. The bacterial etiology of destructive
2005.
periodontal disease: Current concepts. J Periodontol. 63:322,
14. Glickman LT, Glickman NW, Moore GE, Goldstein GS, Lewis HB.
1992.
Evaluation of the risk of endocarditis and other cardiovascular
 2. Lindhe J, Hamp SE, Loe H. Plaque induced periodontal disease in
events on the basis of the severity of periodontal disease in dogs.
beagle dogs: A 4-year clinical, roentgenographical and histometri-
JAVMA 234(4):486-494, 2009.
cal study. J Periodontal Res. 10(5):243-255, 1975.
15. Lockhart PB, Brennan MT, Sasser HC, Fox PC, Paster BJ, Bohra-
 3. Wliams RC. Understanding and managing periodontal diseases:
ni-Mougeot FK. Bacteremia associated with toothbrushing and
A notable past, a promising future. J Periodontol. 79(8):1557,
dental extraction.Circulation 117(24):3118-3125,2008.
2008.
16. Peddle GD, Drobratz KJ, Harvey CE, Adarms A, Sleeper MM.
4. Jolkovsky DL, Ciancio S. Chemotherapeutic agents. In: Carranza's
Association of periodontal disease, oral procedures, and other
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,pp. 79-812.
clinical findings with bacterial endocarditis in dogs. JAVMA
 5. Harvey CE, Thornsberry C, Miller BR, Shofer FS. Antimicrobial
234(1):100-107, 2009.
susceptibility of subgingivalbacterial flora in dogs with gingivitis.
17. Wilson W, Taubert KA, Gewitz M, Lockhart PB, Baddour LM,
JVet Dent. 12(4):151-155, 1995.
Levison M, Bolger A, Cabell CH, Takahashi M, Baltimore RS,
6. Harvey CE, DuPont G. Little mouth, big problems: What is the
Newburger JW, Strom BL, Tani LY, Gerber M, Bonow RO,
safest, most effective approach. In: Antimicrobial Use: Results
Pallasch T, Shulman ST, Rowley AH, Burns JC, Ferrieri P,
Speak Loudest of All. Wilmington, DE: Gloyd Group, 2003,
Gardner T, Goff D, Durack DT. Prevention of infective endocar-
Pp. 35-50.
ditis: Guidelines from the American Heart Association: A guide-
 7. DuPont GA. Understanding dental plaque: Biofilm dynamics.
line from the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever,
JVet Dent. 14(3):91-94, 1997.
Endocarditis and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Car-
 8. Burrell RC, Walters JD. Distribution of systemic clarithromycin to
diovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council on Clinical
gingival. J Periodontol. 79(9):1712-1718, 2008.
Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia,
9. Zetner K, Thiemann G. The antimicrobial effectiveness of
and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary
clindamycin in diseases of the oral cavity. J Vet Dent. 10(2):6-9,
Working Group. J Am Dent Assoc. 139(3):253, 2008.
1993.
18. Polson AP, et al. Periodontal pocket treatment in beagle dogs
10. Ciancio SG. Systemic medications: Clinical significance in
using subgingival doxycycline from a biodegradable system.
periodontics. J Clin Periodontol. 29(Suppl 2):17-21, 2002.
J Periodontol. 67:1176-1184, 1996.
11. Page RC. The microbiological case for adjunctive therapy for
19. Zetner K, Rothmueller G. Treatment of periodontal pockets with
periodontitis. J Int Acas Periodontol. 6(Suppl4):143-149, 2004.
doxycycline in beagles. Vet Ther. 3(4):441-452, 2002.
 12. Nieves MA, Hartwig P, Kinyon JM, Riedesel DH. Bacterial isolates
20. Kim JY, Park SH, Cho KS, Kim HJ, Lee CK, Park KK, Choi SH,
from plaque and blood during and after routine dental procedures
[ n  u j s  
in dogs. Vet Surg. 26(1):26-32, 1997.
overgrowth. J Dent Res. 87(11):1075-1079, 2008.
SECTON4
Periodontal surgical techniques
15
Gingival surgery
Introduction
Gingival surgery consists of two separate types of
GS
Gingival curettage is the technique of debriding the
 pocket epithelium from the periodontal pocket, without
A 1MM
decreasing the pocket depth. Gingivectomy is the resec-
B1MM
tion of attached gingiva. Gingivoplasty is related to gingi-
C 1MM
vectomy, except it is a mild recontouring of the gingiva as
opposed to its wholesale removal.'
PDL
 Most veterinarians think of any scaling performed
below the gingival margin as “subgingival" curettage;
however, this is not quite correct. Gingival curettage is
Figure 15.1 Medical illustration depicting the period ontal anatomy
defined as debriding the internal lining of the pocket
to show the alveolar crest (blue arrow). Reprinted with permission,
down to the level of the epithelial attachment (nadir
J Vet Dent. 25(2):86-95, 2008.
of the pocket). Subgingival curettage is defined as
debridement of the connective tissue apical to the pocket,
True “intentional” gingival curettage is rarely
down to the level of the alveolar crest (Figure 15.1).
performed today. This is partly due to the fact that
Current periodontal pocket therapy has moved away
from performing only gingivectomy without some sort of
 planing, and this is termed inadvertent curettage. In
flap procedure. That being said, gingival resection is a
addition, proper root planing/scaling has been shown
required step in many flap designs and still has indica-
to eliminate the majority of bacteria, allowing the
 tions for pocket reduction. In addition, gingival enlarge-
 patient's immune defenses to control what remains.
ment is a fairly common presentation in dogs, and
 therefore gingivectomy/gingivoplasty is still commonly
Furthermore, the effectiveness of curettage in complete
removal of the diseased tissue is questionable,34 and
used in these cases.2
the consequence of inadvertent removal of the junc-
tional epithelium may result in gingival recession.
Gingival curettage
Most importantly, however, it has been shown in
Gingival curettage is performed to remove the chroni-
 numerous studies that intentional curettage beyond
cally infected soft tissue lining from the periodontal
what accompanies scaling and root planing does not
pocket. This diseased tissue contains areas of chronic
 appear to provide any additional benefit. Finally, it is
infection and commonly contains bacterial colonies and
important to note that curettage alone is insufficient
pieces of calculus. The granulation tissue is lined by
for infection control and therefore must be performed
epithelium, which acts as a barrier to reattachment.
with SRP.
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
193
194  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
Figure 15.2 Intraoral picture of the maxillary left of a dog with
significantly inflamed gingiva. Note that it affects the entire
attached gingiva.
(b)
 The very limited indications for intentional gingival
curettage includes
 Deep intrabony pockets where new attachment is
planned without a flap. These exceedingly rare
cases would include areas between maxillary
molar teeth where access and exposure would be
challenging.
2.
As a “compromise procedure" when periodontal
flaps or extraction are not possible due to finan-
cial or health concerns (or client wishes). Note,
this is less than ideal therapy and should not be
recommended.
3.
 Significant hypertrophic inflammatory gingiva in a
Figure 15.3 Gingival curettage. (a) Intraoral picture of the correct
mild (<6 mm) periodontal pocket (Figure 15.2).
placement of the curette under the gingival margin and parallel to
However, the high likelihood of lack of complete
the long axis of the tooth. (b) Intraoral picture of placing a finger
debridement4 as well as swift recurrence of the pocket
over the gingiva for support during the curettage.
makes intentional gingival curettage a poor choice.
Rather, extraction or periodontal flap surgery should be
 placing the curette deep into the pocket and cutting
encouraged.
down to the bone in a scooping motion (Figure 15.4).
The proper technique for gingival curettage is as
This degree of denudation requires that the gingiva be
follows: Select a curette that will place the working edge
 readapted with 2-3 minutes of finger pressure against 
against the pocket. A universal curette can be used, or
 the tooth, and occasionally interdental sutures may be
        
 indicated.
11-12 for distal surfaces. The instrument is placed in the
Variations on  curettage include ultrasonic  and
sulcus to the bottom of the pocket and pulled out along
chemical techniques. With proper instrument selection
the edge of the pocket, more or less horizontally
and technique, ultrasonic debridement has been found to
(Figure 15.3a). Ideally, the gingiva is supported with a
be as effective as mechanical curettage with less inflam-
finger (Figure 15.3b). The procedure will remove the epi-
 mation and removal of underlying connective tissue.67 In
fact, inadvertent ultrasonic curettage is likely performed
epithelium.
during ultrasonic subgingival scaling (as mentioned
During subgingival curettage, the diseased pocket epi-
above). A fine periodontal tip is the typical choice for this
 thelium is removed along with the junctional epithelium
 procedure. Chemical techniques have been around a
to the level of the alveolar crest. This is performed by
long time but are generally not recommended due to
Gingival Surgery   195
Figure 15.4 Subgingival curettage: The curette has been placed
deep into the periodontal pocket and is being used to "scoop" the
diseased tissue.
     ss 
Figure 15.5 Internal bevel incision.
 produce, and the lack of control they afford.39
One other variation of gingival curettage is called the
excisional new attachment procedure (ENAP).'" It is a
tissue in a relatively shallow periodontal pocket (< 6 mm)
 complete subgingival curettage performed with a knife
that does not cross the mucogingival junction (i.e.
 or blade.
If this extends along most or all of an arcade, the ENAP
ENAP technigue
 procedure may be of benefit.
 An internal bevel incision is made from the gingival
margin apically to below the bottom of the pocket
Gingivectomy
(Figure 15.5).5
Gingivectomy is defined as excision of the gingiva.' As a
 The incision is carried interdentally mesially and
periodontal pocket therapy, it is performed to reduce
distally, maintaining as much interdental tissue as
pocket depth, provide visibility and accessibility for
possible to remove the pocket epithelium circum-
ferentially around the tooth (Figure 15.6).
proper cleaning and smoothing, and provide a proper
environment for healing and better anatomy for homec-
The excised tissue is removed with a curette and
are. Although gingivectomy was widely used in the past
careful root planing is performed (Figure 15.7).
eds auo psn si lin idean pod eooad no
4.
 The incised edges are approximated and interdental
    sn oi e a 
sutures are placed (Figure 15.8). If the edges do
treatment of periodontal disease," both of which are rare
not meet easily, careful bone recontouring may be
 in veterinary medicine. One is for reduction of suprabony
necessary.
pockets' with fibrous gingiva (which would not likely
There are minimal indications for true gingival curet-
respond favorably to conservative therapy), and the other
tage other than the small amount of inadvertent curettage
that occurs with scaling/root planing. In most cases,
Gingival hyperplasia/enlargement is a benign lesion
periodontal flap surgery or extraction is a far better
but can have a similar appearance to neoplasia. There
choice. This author uses this technique primarily in cases
is a documented case where both benign gingival
where there is significant inflammatory granulation
hyperplasia and malignant lesions were found in
196  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 15.6 Extending the incision. (a) Mesial extent. (b) Distal
extent. (c) Flap released.
the same patient.?" Therefore, any suspect gingival
With generalized gingival enlargement, the gingival
enlargements should be sampled and submitted for
tissue grows thicker and may cover part of or
histopathologic evaluation. Additionally, dental radio-
the entire crown (especially the mandibular incisors)
 graphs should be made to evaluate the underlying bone
(Figure  15.11).
This overgrowth
1 often creates
 prior to initiating the surgical procedure.12 If the radio-
 pseudopockets that hinder plaque control (natural as
graphs reveal bony changes that raise the index of suspi-
well as homecare), resulting in increased plaque and
cion for neoplasia (Figure 15.10), an incisional biopsy
calculus formation.? Consequently, gingival enlarge-
(including some bone) should be performed prior to
ment may result in early onset of periodontal disease
planning definitive surgery.21
(see Figure 2.7). Therefore, it is important to remove
Gingival Surgery  197
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.7 Removal of excised tissue with a curette. (a) Preoperative. (b) Postoperative.
alternative types of periodontal surgery (such as apical
repositioned flaps) or extraction should be considered.
Note that the 2 mm of attached gingiva has been the
recommendation for decades; however, recent publica-
tions have put that requirement into question.23.24 The
basis for this is long-term stability of teeth without this
amount. However, these are reports from human den-
tists, where homecare is generally much more effective,
and thus these compromised teeth will have a much
better chance of long-term health. In veterinary patients,
 2 mm should still be maintained, especially in gingivec-
tomy cases.
Treatment and management of gingival
enlargement
Figure 15.8 Closure.
In cases that may be drug induced, the offending
medication should be discontinued or changed, if pos-
the excess gingival tissue and restore
normal
sible. This alone may result in the resolution of the
physiological contours (gingivoplasty).
hyperplasia. If changing the medication regimen is not
Gingival enlargement can affect the entire mouth or
possible, the gingival enlargement is likely to recur after
 present as either single (localized) or multiple nodular
the surgical treatment.
lesions.1213 The principles of surgery are the same for
Control of oral inflammation is very important, espe-
treating small areas of focal hyperplasia and cases where
cially after surgery. This should include daily tooth
the whole mouth is affected. Proper case selection and
brushing (and/or chlorhexidine rinses) and regular
technique are critical. The most important detail is that
professional cleaning. Non-responsive or recurrent cases
there must be a minimum of 2 mm of attached gingiva
of gingival enlargement may need to be periodically
remaining at the end of the procedure.22
retreated with a gingivectomy.
Gingivectomy is contraindicated if less than 2mm of
attached gingiva will remain after the procedure, if the
Gingivectomy equipment options
defect extends below the muco-gingival junction, or if
There are several equipment options for this procedure,
osseous examination or surgery is necessary.' In these cases,
including scalpels/knives, electrocautery lasers, and
198  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Box 15.1 Gingival enlargement
sl at (6 sl ainbiy) (3s) uawahiequa jeaibuji s! sjuaed Aeuuajaa jewjue ews u Awopaaibulh ioj uoeipui uowwo isow ayl iey Ag
condition was previously known as gingival hyperpfasia; however, this is a histologic diagnosis. GE is a common disease in dogs'β and is
defined as a proliferation of normal cellular components of the gingiva, especially the connective tissue.2 It occurs more often in certain
breeds, such as Boxers and Collies, in which it may have a familial tendency.2.14 GE has a higher prevalence in males, possibly due to the 
ao suesnauoue suessaddnsounuwi bupnpu suoepau leno leaas y paeosse uoeai hnp e aq ot umouy sill Aieud
inhibitors, amlodipine, and calcium channel blockers. 6.17 The immunosuppressant cyclosporine has been implicated more frequently in 
recent years due to its increased use as a treatment for atopic dermatitis.13.19
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.9 Gingival enlargement. (a) Intraoral picture of a dog with gingival enlargement secondary to phenobarbital therapy.
(b) Intraoral picture of the maxillary right in a dog with extreme gingival enlargement secondary to cyclosporine administration.
Figure 15.10 Intraoral dental radiograph of the left mandibular
fourth premolar (308) of a patient with suspect gingival enlarge-
Figure 15.11 Intraoral picture of a canine patient with severe
ment. The image reveals significant bony destruction, which is
 gingival enlargement. The mandibular incisors are completely
suspicious for a neoplastic process. This was confirmed histopath-
 overgrown by the gingiva.
ologically as fibrosarcoma.
Using electrocautery as a surgical instrument provides
chermicals. Currently, knives/blades are the equipment of
the major advantage ofhemostasis, which allows superior
choice for many veterinary dentists; however, lasers and
visualization.° Some researchers report favorable results
radiosurgery are favored by some.25
with the use of electrocautery;272 however, there are
Gingival Surgery   199
several potential complications that can occur if it is used
improperly.' If the root is touched with the instrument,
 o  n    si
necrosis.? In addition, if the bone is touched, irreparable
damage can occur. In fact, there are more complications
associated with the improper use of electrocautery as
compared to knives/blades, especially when these instru-
ments are used in close proximity to the bone. These
complications can include delayed healing, increased gin-
gival recession, bone injury, furcation exposure, bone
necrosis/sequestration, and tooth mobility33 Therefore,
the use of electrocautery is discouraged for inexperienced
operators or for any procedures expected to come close to
the bone. When performing radiosurgery, it is important
to use the proper power setting on the radiosurgery unif.
Too much power results in thermonecrosis of the tissue,
while inadequate power causes the electrode loop to drag
through the tissue. It is important to keep the electrode
tip moving, as prolonged application of the current can
cause tissue destruction."2 Furthermore, cutting should be
 done at intervals, with 5-10 seconds allowed for cooling
 in between applications, as this significantly reduces the
heat buildup." The use ofa large loop (Figure 15.12) facil-
itates leaving a properly beveled edge to the gingiva.
Lasers can also be used to perform gingivectomies.
 There are several advantages to laser therapy including
Figure 15.12 Electrocautery with a large wire loop used for a
hemostasis, minimal wound contraction, and a bacteri-
surgical gingivectomy. Notice the smoke being produced.
cidal effect.3435 However, several studies show that
healing is delayed with laser usage compared to scalpel
gingivectomies3637 In addition, the procedure time
delayed to allow for healing, whereas homecare can be
instituted sooner with the surgical flap technique.43
ment is significantly longer if performed with a laser.
In cases that require large areas to be treated, or if
Therefore, lasers are not currently recommended for
minimal attached gingiva will remain, the surgical flap
widespread gingivectomies,533 but recent developments
technique should be utilized. Also, if the entire attached
in lasers (especially the erbium group) show promise for
gingiva is affected (as is typical with the hereditary form),
the flap technique allows proper thinning/beveling of the
continually review this rapidly changing field.
resultant tissue and gives a superior result. Finally, the
Chemical techniques were used in the past and involve
flap technique should be used in cases where osseous
the application of caustic products to the gingiva. These
surgery will or may be necessary.
products include paraformaldehyde and potassium
hydroxide.4041 They are not recommended due to the lack
Procedure for standard gingivectomy
 of control and delayed healing associated with their use.
 Measure the depth of the pocket in several areas on
each tooth and note the buccal surface of the gin-
Gingivectomy techniques
giva at the base of the pocket.2642 Then, mark a
There are two main options for the gingivectomy
bleeding point 3 mm coronal to the base of the
procedure, standard and surgical flap,15.12642 The stan-
 pocket (Figure 15.13). This can be done with a
dard technique is faster and easier but is best suited for
standard periodontal probe and needle but is
small areas, as the raw/beveled edge of gingiva will need
more accurate and efficient if a periodontal
 to heal by secondary intention. Furthermore, this tech-
pocket marker is used (Figure 15.14). The 3 mm
 nique causes increased loss ofkeratinized tissue, increased
allows for 1 mm of gingival recession following
patient discomfort, and increased bleeding compared to
surgery “die back" and 2mm of physiological
the surgical flap technique.'? When using the standard
pocket depth. When accomplished, the contour
surgical technique, postsurgical homecare must be
 of the defect will be outlined (Figure 15.15).
200
 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.13 (a) Measuring the amount of hyperplasia with a periodontal probe. In this case, the depth is approximately 9 mm. (b) Marking 
the "bleedling point" with a needle approximately 3 mm coronal to the base or approximately 6 mm from the margin. Note: this author finds
it challenging to mark right at the probe and therefore will hold the probe a few mm above the mark for the bleeding point.
Figure 15.14 Gingivectomy marking tool.
2.
 The gingivectomy incision(s) are made. These can
 be performed with a Kirkland or Orban knife or
with a #11 or #15 scalpel blade used on a scalpel
handle. The incision can be continuous and thus
connecting the teeth or discontinuous and around
each tooth. The incision is started apical to the
Figure 15.15 Bleeding points combined to outline the defect for
mark and carried coronally at a 45-degree bevel to
proper incision.
Gingival Surgery  201
Figure 15.17 Gingivoplasty with a coarse diamond bur.
Figure 15.16 Initial incision with a #15 scalpel blade angle 45
degrees to create a thin margin.
just below the bleeding point line, making sure 
that the incision starts at least 2 mm coronal to the
MJG (Figure 15.16). Proper beveling restores an 
 anatomically natural contour, speeds recovery,
and avoids a blunt gingival margin that would
promote plaque accumulation.
 Remove the excised gingiva with a sharp curette and
clean the exposed root surfaces and granulation
tissue with a combination of ultrasonic and hand
scaling. (See chapters 10 and 11.)
4.
 If indicated, gingivoplasty can be performed to
remove any uneven areas and to accomplish final
contouring of the gingiva. Knives, blades, lasers,
and cautery can be used for this technique, but
this author prefers coarse tapered diamond or
12-fluted finishing burs (Figure 15.17),225.30 When
 shaping with the diamond bur, follow the under-
lying bony contours.
5.
Gingival bleeding (perhaps significant) can be
 expected. Bleeding generally stops on its own, but
several minutes of direct pressure with moistened
 gauze may speed hemostasis. Electrocautery or
hemostatic solutions can be used if necessary
(Figure 15.18).
Figure 15.18 "Spot" electrocautery for small areas of hemorhage.
202   Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Figure 15.20 Preoperative picture of significant gingival enlarge-
ment over the right mandibular fourth premolar and first molar
(408 and 409) in a dog. In this case, it is fairly obvious where the
attachment should be.
Figure 15.19 Postoperative picture demonstrating a smooth and
regular margin that is nicely beveled
6.
 Ideally, a periodontal pack is applied to the surgical
 site(s). However, lack of patient acceptance and
difficulty maintaining these products are issues
with veterinary patients. One product that does
 appear to work better than most is a light-cured
Figure 15.21 Internal "reverse" bevel incision performed with a
liquid dam.26.A
#15 scalpel blade.
7
Re-evaluate the
surgical site for smoothness
(Figure 15.19).
Periodontal flap method
areas where the physiologic attachment level is
well known (Figure 15.20).
The flap technique'2 for treating gingival enlargement is
very similar to the envelope flaps utilized for periodontal
The initial internal bevel incision is made a minimum
of 3mm above the muco-gingival margin with a
flap surgery.
#15 blade. This incision should be scalloped and
1.
 Measure the depth of the pocket/overgrowth in
should recreate the interdental papilla (Figure 15.21).
 several areas on each tooth and mark the buccal
 Next, the scalpel blade is used to thin the gingiva by
surface of the gingiva at the base of the pocket
removing the interior aspect of the tissue
(as above). This can be done with a standard
(Figure 15.22). This will return the gingiva to a
periodontal probe and needle but is more
normal physiologic width. Subsequently, the
accurate and efficient if a periodontal pocket
interdental areas are cut with a blade or knife and
marker is used. When accomplished, the 
the excess gingiva is removed (Figure 15.23).
contour of the defect will be outlined.
 m p ae sn nss s a 
Experienced surgeons may skip this step in
scissors and the roots scaled and planed.
Gingival Surgery  203
Figure 15.22 Thinning the excess gingival tissues to a normal
Figure 15.24 Flap is closed interdentally with simple loop
width from the inside, thus leaving the external surface of the 
 sutures. Note the thin marginal edge with intact keratinized tissue.
keratinized tissue intact for faster healing.
5.
The flap is replaced and if necessary trimmed to fit
(a)
the tooth/bone interface correctly.
6.
 Interdental sutures are used to close the flaps
(Figure 15.24).
Conclusions
Gingivectomy was commonly used in the past as a means
of pocket reduction. However, current thoughts on the
biology of periodontal disease and the need to maintain
keratinized tissues with other surgical methods (pri-
marily flaps and regenerative techniques) have greatly
reduced its role in pocket reduction. The most common
indication for gingivectomy in veterinary medicine is
generalized gingival enlargement. Standard gingivec-
tomy technique utilizes a standard bevel incision to cre-
ate an anatomically appropriate margin. The flap
(b)
technique, while significantly more technical, achieves
similar if not superior results without the significant
hemorrhage and long healing time associated with the
standard method (Figure 15.25).
Box 15.2 Key points
● Gingivectomy is most commonly used for cases of gingival
enlargement.
·Periodontal flap procedures are preferred in cases of deep
periodontal pockets.
While radiosurgery and lasers have been utilized, most
 Gingivectomy is contraindicated if there will be less than
2 mm of attached gingiva remaining after surgery.
Figure 15.23 Removing the excess tissue. (a) Reflecting the cre-
● The surgical gingivectomy, while more technical, is less
ated flap of tissue. (b) Excised area after removal with knife. Note
painful and allows a quicker return to function/homecare.
the thin marginal edge with intact keratinized tissue.
204
 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 15.25 Recheck pictures of gingivectomy procedures demonstrating more rapid healing time with the periodontal flap surgical
technique in contrast to the standard gingivectomy technique. (a) 3-week recheck picture of the patient in Figures 15.12-15.19 . Note
the significant inflammation to the incised gingival margin (blue arrow) after a longer period of time. Homecare efforts were still producing 
hemorrhage. (b) 2-week recheck picture of the patient in Figures 15.20-15.24. Notice the gingiva is completely healed with no evidence
of inflammation.
Note
11. Glickman I. The results obtained with the unembellished gingi-
vectomy technique in a clinical study in humans. J Periodontol.
A. Paint on Dam, Den-Mat Corp.
27:247, 1956.
12. Camargo PM, et al. Treatment of gingival enlargement. In:
References
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
Pp. 918-925.
1. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology In: Veterinary Dentistry,
13. Wiggs RB, & Lobprise HB. Veterinary Dentistry, Principles and
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997, p. 116.
Pp.186-231.
14. Burstone MS, Bond E, Litt CR. Familial gingival hypertrophy in
 2. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
the dog (boxer breed). AMA Arch Pathol. 54(2):208-212, 1952.
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
15. Davan D, Kozlovsky A,et al. Castration prevents channel blocker-
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, p. 159-181.
 3. Waerhaug J. Microscopic demonstration of tissue reaction inci-
Toxicology 17(7):396-402, 1998.
dent to removal of subgingival calculus. J Periodontol. 26:26, 1955.
16. Lafzi A,Farahani RM, Shoja MA.Phenobarbitol-induced gingival
4. Stone S, Ramfjord SP, Waldron J. Scaling and gingival curettage:
hyperplasia. J Contemp Dent Pract. 8(6):50-56, 2007.
A radioautographic study. J Periodontol. 37:415, 1966.
17. Eggerath J, English H, Leichter IW. Drug-associated gingival
5. Takei HH, Carranza FA. Gingival surgical techniques. In:
enlargement: Case report and review of aetiology, management
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
and evidence-based outcomes of treatment. J NZ Soc Periodontol.
Pp. 909-917.
88:7-14, 2005.
 6. Zach I, Cohen G. The histologic response to ultrasonic curettage.
18. Nam HS, McAnulty JF, et al. Gingival overgrowth in dogs
J Dent Res. 40:751, 1961.
associated with clinically relevant cyclosporine blood levels:
 7. Sanderson AD. Gingival curettage by hand and ultrasonic instru-
Observations in a canine renal transplantation model. Vet Surg.
ments: A histologic comparison. J Periodontol. 37:279, 1966.
37(3):247-253, 2008.
 8. Glickman J, Patur B. Histologic study of the effect of antiformin
19. Nishikawa S, Nagata T, et al. Pathogenesis of drug-induced gingi-
om the soft tissue wall of periodontal pockets in humans. J Am
val overgrowth. A review of studies in the rat model. J Periodon-
Dent Assoc. 51:420, 1955.
tol. 67(5):463-471, 1996.
9. Beube FE. An experimental study of the use of sodium sulphide solu-
20. Sitzman C. Simultaneous hyperplasia, metaplasia, and neoplasia in
tion in treatment of periodontal pockets. J Periodontol. 10:49, 1939.
an 8year-old boxer dog: A case report. J Vet Dent. 17(1):27-30, 2000.
10. Yukna RA. A clinical and histological study of healing following
 21. Carranza FA, Hogan EL. Gingival enlargement In: Carranza's
the excisional new attachment procedure in rhesus monkeys.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 279-294,
J Periodontol. 47:701, 1976.
582-583.
Gingival Surgery  205
22. Lewis JR, Reiter AM. Managerment of generalized gingival
33. Glickrman I, Imber LR. Comparison of gingival resection with
enlargement in a dog-case report and literature review. I Vet Dent.
electrosurgery and periodontal knives: Biometric and histologic
22(3):160-169, 2005.
study. J Periodontol 41:242, 1970.
23. Tackas VI. Root coverage techniques: A review. J West Soc Peri-
34. Ando Y, Aoki A, Watanabe H, Ishikawa I. Bacteriocidal effect of
odontol Periodontal Abstr. 43(1):5-14, 1995.
erbium YAG laser on periodontopathic bacteria. Lasers Surg Med.
24.
Wolf HF, Rateitschak EM, Rateitschak KH, Hassell TH. Color
19:190, 1996.
 Atlas of Dental Medicine: Periodontology 3rd ed. Stuttgart:
35. Yamaguchi H, Kobayashi K, Osada R, et al. Effects of irradiation
Thieme, 2005.
of an erbium:YAG laser on root surfaces. J Periodontol. 68:1151,
 25. Force J, Niemiec B. Gingivectormy and gingivoplasty for gingival
1997.
enlargement. J Vet Dent. 26(2):132-137, 2009.
36. Pogrel MA, Yen CK, Hanser LS. A comparison of carbon dioxide
26. Holmstrom SE, Frost PF, Eisner ER. Periodontal therapy and
laser, cryosurgery, and scalpel wounds in healing. Oral Surg Oral
surgery In: Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal
Med Oral Path. 69:269, 1990.
Practitioner. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 233-290.
37. Loumanen M. A comparative study of healing of laser and scalpel
 27. Fisher SE, Frame IW, Browne RM, et al. A comparative histological
 incision wounds in rat oral mucosa. Scand J Dent Res. 95:65, 1987.
study of wound healing following CO, laser and conventional sur-
 38. Goultschin J, Gasit D, et al. Changes in teeth and gingiva of dogs 
gical excision of the buccal mucosa.Arch Oral Biol. 28:287, 1980.
following laser surgery: A block surface light microscope study.
 28. Malone WF, Eisenmann D, Kusck J. Interceptive periodontics
Lasers Surg Med. 8(4):402-408, 1988.
with electrosurgery I Prosthet Dent. 2:555, 1969.
 39. Ishikawa I, Aoki A. Lasers in periodontics. In: Carranzas Clinical
 29. Wilhelrmsen NR, Ramfjord SP, Blankenship JR. Effects of electro-
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 1035-1037.
-ad I siauu ss u je iiua a u Aaains
40. Loe H. Chemical gingivectomy: Effect of potassium hydroxide on
odontol. 47:160, 1976.
periodontal tissues. Acta Odontol Scand. 19:517, 1961.
30. Pope JW, Gargiulo AW, Staffileno H, et al. Effects of electrosur-
41. Orban B. New methods in periodontal treatment. Bur. 14:116,
gery on wound healing in dogs. Periodontics 6:30, 1968.
1942.
31. Kalkwarf KL, Freici RF, et al. Histological evaluation of gingival
42. Force J, Niermiec B. Gingivectomy and gingivoplasty for gingival
response to an electrosurgical blade. J Oral Maxillofac Surg.
 enlargement. J Vet Dent. 26(2):132-137, 2009.
45(8):671-674, 1987.
43. Carmargo P, Melnick P, Pirih F, et al. Treatment of drug induced
32. Azzi R, Kenney EB, Tsao TF, et al. The effect of electrosurgery
gingival enlargement: Aesthetic and functional considerations.
upon alveolar bone. J Periodontol. 54:96, 1983.
Periodontol 2000 27:131, 2001.
16
Periodontal flap surgery
Introduction
cleaning of the root surface. If this step is not performed
correctly, the effectiveness of the flap will be greatly
The goals of periodontal flap surgery are the reduction
diminished. (See chapter 17 for a detailed discussion
or elimination of pathologic periodontal pockets
regarding treatment of the exposed root surface.)
ar d n e s a  a
 Performing a periodontal flap surgery including the
care and maintain a disease-free state. Ideally, the
above steps allows for gingival reattachment and thus a
decrease in pocket depth (at least by shrinkage). These
commonly necessary to perform resection or apical
are advanced procedures but can be learned by general
repositioning. Consequently, periodontal flaps are
 practitioners. For a list of hands-on training classes,
performed to.1.2
 please see appendix 4.
 Establish direct root visualization and improved
It is important to clarifythat while periodontal surgery
accessibility for effective cleaning during the
is very effective for regaining attachment and salvaging
 procedure, at future treatments, and for homecare.
teeth, the maintenance of the reduced pocket is a critical
2.
 Allow access to the hard tissues for reshaping in
part of the periodontal therapy.235 Therefore, without a
order to create a healthier surface.
commitment to regular periodontal care (consistent
3.
 Eliminate the pathologic pocket walls.
homecare and professional cleanings), these surgeries
4.
Cover exposed surfaces (ie., lateral sliding flap/free
will ultimately fail. This should be communicated to the
gingival grafts).
client prior to performing surgery.
Visualization and hard tissue access are possible with a
Indications
modified Widman flap. If reduction of pocket depth
is a goal, an undisplaced or apically repositioned flap is
 As pockets deepen, cleaning becomes increasingly diffi
necessary (see below).
cult and surface irregularities increase, thus complicating
 An additional indication for periodontal flaps is
closed periodontal therapy6-" Periodontal pockets
 improved aesthetics.β While aesthetics is currently much
 greater than 5-6mm (Figure 16.1) require direct root
more important in human dentistry, future generations
visualization for effective cleaning,2? owing to the fact
of veterinary dentists will likely be asked to perform
 that residual calculus after closed root planing is seen
these “cosmetic" surgeries. For example, free gingival
with regularity in pockets greater than 6mm." In
 grafting for root coverage of rostral teeth is a common
humans, this is known as the “5 mm standard?li1z In
cosmetic surgery in humans.
 addition to deep pockets, periodontal flap surgery is
After the flap is created, the first step is to remove the
indicated for teeth with even moderate alveolar bone
infection from the root surface. Following this, the root
loss (Figure 16.2), furcation exposure level Il and
surface is smoothed, root conditioning performed, and
IIl (Figures 16.3 and 16.4), and inaccessible areas
the incisions are closed. It is critical to note that the most
(Figure 16.5).? Also, areas with deep bone craters or
important step of any periodontal surgery is the complete
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
206
Periodontal Flap Surgery  207
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.1  Deep periodontal pockets are an indication for periodontal surgery. (a) Intraoral dental picture of the left mandibular canine
(304) in a dog. This tooth has a 9 mm periodontal pocket on the mesial surface. (b) Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary canine
(204) in a cat. This tooth has a 7 mm periodontal pocket on the palatal surface. (c) Intraoral dental picture of the left mandibular first molar
(309) in a dog. This tooth has a 13 mm periodontal pocket on the mesial surface. Each of these pockets require direct visualization (via a
periodontal flap) for complete cleaning.
Finally, any area that has not responded favorably to con-
elimination of current infection, this form of attachment
servative treatment (closed scaling/root planing) should
 is generally considered tenuous at best. Animal patients 
be treated surgically.
 may be more resistant to reinfection,'3 but further
research is required before we rely on this structure to
maintain periodontal health. Moreover, in human 
Results of pocket therapy
patients, strict homecare and regular professional
The ultimate goal of any periodontal therapy (including
therapy may be able to maintain this arrangement,414 but
surgery) is the elimination of the pathologic pocket. This
this level of care is exceedingly rare in veterinary patients
will occur only with meticulous scaling/root planing
today.
(open or closed).4 Shallow pockets can be returned to a
Consequently, it is recommended to more perma-
relatively normal state via closed root therapy. However,
nently reduce pocket depth in animal patients. This is
conservative treatment (i.e., closed root planing) of deep
pockets will generally result in reduction of pocket depth
 tissue regeneration), which at the time of this writing can
via a long junctional epithelium. While this results in an
  s  s    s
208  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Therefore, pocket reduction is generally accomplished
 in tight, interdental areas. A wide selection of shar p peri-
by resection techniques (gingivectomy or ideally apical
osteal elevators and curettes should be available. Gentle
 repositioning flaps). If the result of the initial therapy or 
 tissue handling is critical; therefore 1 x 2 forceps should
 surgery is less than ideal, these techniques should be
 not be utilized. Less traumatic 7 x 7 or DeBakey tissue
considered.
forceps are preferred. Small, fine (iris) scissors should
also be available,6 and this author prefers LaGrange
Equipment needs
 scissors. Finally, small needle holders should be utilized,
ideally Castroviejo. These basic instruments have been
 packaged for convenience and are commercially avail-
These small blades are best for the fine incisions required
able (see chapter 22).^ It is recommended to have this
minimal set of instruments, as well as a sharpening stone,
in a sterile pack. Additional equipment that should be
considered includes gingivectomy/interdental knives,
heavy curettes/sickles (e.g., Pritchard), and chisels (for a
complete discussion of periodontal hand instruments
 please see chapter 22).
Suture should always be swedged on, preferably on a
reverse cutting needle,17 unless the tissue is exceedingly
friable, in which case a taper needle may be best. Any
absorbable material is acceptable, but monofilament is
preferable as it avoids the “wicking" effect of the braided
material.17.1s In humans, the minimum coaption time is
approximately 5 days;5 and thus quick-dissolving mate-
rials are ideal. Chromic cat gut, polyglecaprone, poly-
glactin 910,F and polyglycolic acidP are all well suited
 materials.1719 Recently, an antibiotic impregnated suture
Figure 16.2 Intraoral dental radiograph of the left mandibular
first molar (309) in a dog. There is moderate angular bone loss
has become available that was shown to decrease bacte-
(red arrows) to both the mesial and distal aspects of this tooth (red
 rial infection.2o.21 The suture should be very fine (4-0 to
arrows). (See dhapter 9 for a discussion of radiographic diagnosis
6-0) to minimize the trauma to the delicate periodontal
of periodontal disease.) Periodontal surgery is indicated for this
tissues.17
case, as well as guided tissue regeneration (see chapter 18)
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.3 Furcation exposure level lIl is an indication for periodontal flap surgery. (a) Intraoral dental picture of the right maxillary
fourth premolar (108) in a dog. This tooth has a grade Il furcation exposure on the mesial surface. This pocket requires direct visualization
(via a periodontal flap) for complete dleaning. Note the location of the furcation is unusual, as well as the lack of gingival inflammation,
confirming the importance of a complete oral exam in all cases. (b) Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary first molar (109) in a dog.
This tooth has a grade Ill furcation exposure on the buccal surface. This area requires direct visualization (via a periodontal flap) for
complete cleaning.
Periodontal Flap Surgery  209
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.4 Furcation exposure level ll is an indication for periodontal flap surgery. (a) Intraoral dental picture of the right mandibular
fourth premolar (408) in a dog. This tooth has a grade Ill furcation exposure. This area requires direct visualization (via a periodontal flap)
for complete cleaning. (b) Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary first molar (209) in a dog. This tooth has a grade Ill furcation
exposure. This area requires direct visualization (via a periodontal flap) for complete cleaning. Extraction should also be considered for
this case.
Proper lighting and magnification are strongly recom-
mended for periodontal surgery, to provide the visuali-
zation necessary for meticulous plaque and calculus
s os, ym pe aq u li i
lights or head lights. There are numerous manufacturers
of head loupes, and these are very helpful. A new product
   p  q s 
 package works well for this author.?
Surgical  suction  is  strongly
7recommended for
periodontal surgery;"5 this too will help provide the
appropriate visualization necessary for surgical proce-
-d dno  st eou sneo adod pe sanp
i q i anp    ar 
high vascularity of the periodontal tissues and the
inflammation that accompanies periodontal disease. In
addition, a thorough debridement of granulation tissue
Figure 16.5 Inaccessible areas are an indication for periodontal
(which is highly vascular) is necessary for proper healing.
flap surgery. Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary third
and fourth premolars (207 and 208) in a dog. There is a deep
A selection of hemostatic agents should be available
periodontal pocket between the teeth with a very tight contact.
in the event of hemorrhage. Periodontal surgery requires
This would limit the effectiveness of dlosed root planing. This area
the creation of gingival/periodontal flaps that are often
in the area of significant vessels (e.g., the infraorbital
complete cleaning. Extraction of 207 should also be considered as
and mental arteries). The reader is directed to chapter 1
 part of the treatment plan.
   d ss i  
gery. Identifiable vessels should be ligated if possible,5
Additional materials should include an absorbable
barrier membrane such as polyglactin 910 knitted mesh,F
(Figure 16.6).22 Generalized oozing can usually be con-
cross-linked bovine type I collagen, ossifflex, doxirobe, or
trolled with direct pressure (ideally with a cold pack) or
 PGLA. Finaly, a bone augmentation particulate that may
the application of a vasoconstrictor (e.g-, epineph-
be natural or synthetic should be part ofthe armatairum.
rine).is.zz If this is ineffective, hemostatic agents may be
(See chapter 18 for a detailed discussion of these products.)
 utilized, such as absorbable gelatin sponges,K oxidized
210  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.6 Intraoral dental picture of a handheld electrocautery
unit on the gingiva of the maxilary right canine (104) in a dog.
regenerated cellulose, micorfibrillar collagen,M or
thrombin.N.15.22
(C)
Surgical preparation
All periodontal surgical procedures should start with a
complete dental prophylaxis (including closed root plan-
 ing/scaling) to decrease oral contamination. Ideally, this
is performed as a separate procedure 2-4 weeks prior to
the surgical treatment, and followed by oral hygiene ±
chemotherapeutics.5.232  This  protocol  will reduce
inflammation, resulting in less friable tissue, and may
even resolve some lesions entirely.15.25s26 In addition, it
 allows the practitioner to fully discuss the therapy and
future care necessary for success. It also allows for proper
 scheduling, and more importantly shorter anaesthetic
time, which may be in the patient's best interest. Many
owners may be resistant to the additional cost, but proper
client education can be very effective.
 Prior to initiating surgery, a complete oral exam
Figure 16.7 (a-c) Sounding the maxillary left of a dog.
with careful periodontal probing is performed (see
-n Aq pauouad aq pnous Suipunos zsre'(tot xog
 pressing on the tissues, the operator can get a sense as
lizing the periodontal probe, not in the sulcus/pocket,
to the extent and configuration of the intrabony com-
but on the surrounding tissues (Figure 16.7). By
 ponent of the pocket and furcational defects.2sz9 Next, a
Periodontal Flap Surgery   211
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.8 Carrying the incision (a) distal and (b) mesial to the target tooth for additional visualization.
dental radiograph should be exposed of the surgical
The sulcal incision (creation
area to document attachment levels.530 Once the sur-
of an envelope flap)
gical site is determined, proper pain and antimicrobial
The initial incisions (three in total) for the periodontal
(if indicated) management is administered. (See chap-
flap are the most critical part of the surgery, as the sulcal
ters 14 and 19, respectively, for complete information on
incision'5.19 is different from any other incision used in
these subjects.)
    ea   o a
The entire surgical procedure (including bone
is because these initial incisions not only release the
o nd paud aq pous (ans pue uune
gingiva from the underlying hard tissues but also excise
making the initial incision. This gives the practitioner
the diseased pocket epithelium and granulation tissue.
 the greatest chance of successful treatment while mini-
 Furthermore, the sum of these incisions creates a sharp
 mizing surgical trauma.
marginal edge of the resulting flap, which allows for
superior apposition when it is replaced. There are three
Flap types
distinct cuts that comprise the sulcal incision, which will
There are numerous options for flap design, depending
be detailed below.
on the clinical presentation. The most common flap
Prior to creating the incision, the extent of the flap
should be determined. All involved teeth in the area
or one with vertical releasing incisions.2 This allows for
should be involved from the beginning, to allow for a
increased exposure but is somewhat more invasive.
smooth incision. In most cases, carrying the incision a
 Another commonly used flap for periodontal surgery is
little mesial and distal of the target tooth is necessary for
the envelope flap. This is created along the arcade,
adequate visualization and access (Figure 16.8).
without vertical incisions. Less common flap designs
The initial or “first"’ incision is created reverse (or
include the lateral sliding flap, palatine flap, and flaps
 internal) bevel as opposed to the standard bevel used in
for regenerative surgeries, which are subsets of the
 gingivectomies.2s The incision is initiated in the healthy
above types. The initial incision is the same for all flaps
aftached gingiva at or near the gingival margin and
but the incision point will vary slightly (as detailed
directed toward the alveolar crest ( Figure 16.9). The inci-
below).
sion should curve around the tooth or teeth to create a
 Periodontal flaps are typically made full thickness,
scalloped appearance, allowing for superior adaptation
which means the periosteum is released from the under-
(Figure 16.10).
lying hard tissue and kept with the flaps.19 However, any
After the initial incision is made across the area to be
flap design can be created as partial thickness, which
treated, the crevicular incision is performed. A delicate
leaves the periosteum attached to the underlying alveolar
blade (e.g., 12D) is directed parallel and adjacent to the
Jo eane ue sa pioe oi auop keidi si s er'aog
buccal or lingual/palatal aspect of the tooth down into
bone uncovered and is most common with lateral sliding
the pocket to end at the alveolar crest, just inside the first
flaps or free gingival grafts.
incision (Figure 16.11). These two incisions will create a
212
2 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.9 (a and b) The initial (first) 45-degree intemal bevel incision.
Figure 16.10 Scalloping the incision along the tooth.
Figure 16.12 The "third" incision. Releasing the wedge of
infected tissue with a scalpel blade.
wedge  of  infected
tissue (pocket epithelium and
 granulation tissue).
 A periosteal elevator is then utilized to reflect the
Figure 16.11 The crevicular (second) incision. The blade is
directed parallel and adjacent to the buccal aspect of the tooth
healthy flap tissue from the alveolar bone. Once these
down into the pocket to end at the alveolar crest, just inside the
steps are accomplished, the surgeon will have excellent
first incision.
visibility of the infected area.
Periodontal Flap Surgery  213
The next step involves removing the wedge of infected
The traditional interdental  incision splits the
tissue by releasing it from the bone/teeth with a scalpel
interdental papilla in the middle, causing half of the
blade or Orban knife (third incision) (Figure 16.12).
 papilla to stay with the buccal flap and the other half
Finally, the wedge of tissue is removed, usually with a
with the lingual/palatal flap (Figure 16.14). Recently,
curette (Figure 16.13).
the papilla-sparing flap has been recommended as a
superior alternative in interdental areas for non-
displaced flaps.' With this technique, the interdental
incisions are made in the gingival crevice so that all of
the papilla stays with one side of the flap (Figure 16.15).
This is less important in animal patients as true papillae
are only really seen in tight contact areas such as the
incisor and molar teeth.
The sulcal incisions above basically create a horizontal
(envelope) flap (Figure 16.16). In most instances, this is
sufficient exposure to properly clean and treat the root
surface. Following therapy (see chapters 17 and 18), the
flap is replaced (without tension) and sutured interden-
 tally. If further visualization is required or repositioning
is planned, vertical incisions will be necessary to create a
full flap (see below).
Fullflap
The full flap is created when further exposure is necessary
or the flap is to be repositioned (coronally, apically, or
laterally). It is a more invasive procedure with increased
complication potential (e.g., hemorrhage and dehiscence)
and therefore should not be performed when an envelope
flap is sufficient.
The full flap is initiated by creating the same three
sulcal incisions as listed for the envelope flap above.
 Once accomplished, vertical or oblique releasing inci-
sions are created mesial and/or distal to the target teeth.
The incisions must not be made over the root or through
Figure 16.13 Removing the infected tissue with a curette.
the papilla in tight occlusal areas (such as between the
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.14 (a and b) Traditional papilla splitting technique on the mandibular incisors of a dog.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.15 (a and b) Papill-sparing technique. Note the papilla stays with the palatal aspect of the flap. (See below.)
(a)
[b]
(c)
(d)
dely adolaaua ue jo anpid aaleadoison (a) g'gt ainbig ui sualed aul jo ainpid aaleiadoison (e) aiean sde adolaaug gt'gl an
on the maxillary right canine of an additional patient. Note that the incision is carried to healthy adjacent teeth for increased exposure.
(c) Postoperative picture of an envelope flap over the entire maxillary right quadrant of a cat. (d) Postoperative picture of an envelope flap
Over several mandibular left premolars of a dog
Periodontal Flap Surgery 215
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.17 Creation of a "full" flap. Intraoral dental picture of the mandibular right of a dog. Vertical releasing incisions are created
on the (a) mesial line angle of the third premolar (407) and (b) distal line angle of the fourth premolar (408).
molar and incisor teeth) as this will damage the
 periodontal attachment. Rather, the incisions should be
created on line angles of the target teeth, or one mesial
and distal to the target tooth (teeth)z.1931 (Figure 16.17).
It is important for these incisions to either avoid or
include the papilla completely. Line angles are theoretic
lines where two edges of a tooth meet.532 If there is a
diastema between the teeth (most notable around the
 canine teth) an interdental incision may be preferred32
(Figure 16.18) These incisions should be made very
slightly divergent(so that the base is slightly  wider
iddns poona ueu on (eae leiu au u
(Figure 16.19).
After the extent of the flap is created, it is elevated
Figure 16.18 Intraoral picture of the left canine (204) showing 
from the alveolar bone (as the envelope flap above). In
the wide diastemas (red arrows). Creating the vertical incisions
general, flaps are created full thickness, which means 
here is preferable to line angles, as less trauma is created on the
keeping the periosteum attached to the flap and com-
periodontal ligament and attached gingiva. These areas should be
pletely denuding the alveolar bone. This elevation is
used when possible.
performed
bluntly
with
1  a periosteal 
elevator
(Figures 16.20 and 16.21), and if performed carefully is
fairly easy to master. The main disadvantage of a full
thickness flap is that when the bone is stripped of
its periosteum, a small amount of marginal bone will
be lost.33
Partial thickness (split) flaps
These flaps'" are created by sharply dissecting the
epithelium  and a small amount of underlying
connective tissue away from the alveolar bone, leaving
it covered with a thin layer of connective tissue and
periosteum. These flaps are more challenging than the
bluntly created full thickness flaps above. The major
advantage to partial thickness flaps is that they leave
Figure 16.19 Slightly divergent full thickness incisions.
216  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
the alveolar bone covered in soft tissue, which allows
for faster healing and decreases the loss of marginal
bone as compared to the full thickness flap above.34
This is because full thickness flaps (i.e., where the bone
 is exposed) will result in approximately 1 mm of
bone loss.33
 Partial thickness flaps can be performed in any case
where bone reconturing/augmentation is not planned.
However, they are definitely indicated when the surgeon
plans on leaving bone exposed (e.g-, apical reposition-
 s sr  a s  
aa uass d aa pe are sde ss
with scissors or a scalpel) between the periosteum and
the alveolar mucosa. This is a tedious procedure
and often results in tearing (therefore, practice with
Hgure 16.20 Bluntly releasing the flap with a periosteal
this technique is recommended prior to performing on
elevator.
a patient).
Technique
1.
The standard initial incisions are made to remove
the packet wall (Figure 16.22).
2
The vertical incisions are created as above, but are
 shallower and should not go all the way to the
bone (Figure 16.23).
 The flap is sharply dissected from the underlying
tissue (Figures 16.24 and 16.25).
This leaves the periostium intact (Figure 16.26).
Specific flap types
Modified widman flap
Figure 16.21 Fap reflected, revealing exposed bone.
This flap' is designed to provide access for proper root
instrumentation with immediate/direct closure of the
surgical area. This type of flap has been utilized for
decades and was originally called the “unrepositioned
mucoperiosteal flap"35 It is the most conservative flap,
as it is not designed to remove the periodontal pocket
wall but just the lining, while allowing adequate access
for cleaning as well as good coaptation of tissues
 postoperatively.3 This type of flap will not directly
reduce the pocket depth, other than by long junctional
epithelium. Despite this, studies have shown this
conservative method (without pocket elimination and
aggressive bone contouring) to be equal or superior to
the  more   aggressive  surgeries  for  maintaining
attachment height and shallow pocket depth.26.37 Since
Figure 16.22 Creation of a "split thickness" flap. Intraoral dental
the pocket wall is not to be removed, the initial
picture after the initial three incisions are made and the wedge of
internal bevel incision is made very close to the
tissue removed.
gingival margin.
Periodontal Flap Surgery  217
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 16.23 (a and b) Shallow vertical incisions are created at
the extent of the flap area.
Figure 16.25 (a and b) The flap is sharply dissected from the
underlying periosteum with a LaGrange scissors.
Figure 16.24 The flap is sharply dissected from the underlying
Figure 16.26 Postoperative flap. Note the bone is still covered
 periosteum with a scalpel.
with connective tissue and periosteum.
218  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.27 (a and b) Modified Widman flap of the maxillary incisors of a dog. Initial incision that is started very near the free gingival
margin and created very steeply (almost parallel to the tooth).
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.28 (a and b) The flap is bfuntly dissected with a periosteal elevator.
 The gingiva is reflected with a periosteal elevator
Technique
(Figure 16.28) and the crevicular incision created
1.
 The initial incision is made very steep starting close
from the bottom of the pocket to the bone
to the gingival margin (0.5-1 mm) (Figure 16.27)
(Figure 16.29). This creates a triangular wedge
and scalloped around the tooth to maintain the
of tissue that contains the diseased pocket
 proper anatomy. The incision should split the
epithelium.
 papilla. However, it should be created in such a
3.The third incision is made in the interdental area to
way that the gingival thickness in the area of the
 separate the gingival collar and it is removed
papilla is the same as the remainder of the flap 
(Figure 16.30).
(i.e., the majority of the papilla is left with the 
 4. The teeth  are  thoroughly  scaled and  planed,
lingual/palatal gingiva). It is critical to maintain
and any granulation tissue is removed ± root
a minimum of 2 mm of attached gingiva.
conditioning (see chapter 17) (Figure 16.31).
Periodontal Flap Surgery  219
(a)
Figure 16.31 Scaling the exposed root surfaces.
(b)
Figure 16.29 (a and b) The crevicular incision is created with a
 scalpel blade.
Figure 16.32 The flap is dosed interdentally. Note the knots are
tied off(palatal to) the incision line.
5.
Minimal to no bone contouring is performed, unless
it is required for proper flap adaptation.
6.
 The flaps may be thinned if necessary, to allow
 proper adaptation of the flap to the tooth around
 its entire circumference as well as to each other
interdentally.
7.  Interrupted sutures are placed interdentally (see
below), so that no bone is left exposed
(Figure 16.32).
Undisplaced flap
This is the most aggressive periodontal flap as it is
designed to completely remove the periodontal
Figure 16.30 The wedge of tissue has been removed.
pocket. In essence, it is a combination of gingivectomy
220  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
(d)
Figure 16.33 (a-d) Undisplaced flap on the maxillary right of a dog. Measuring pocket depth and creating bleeding points with a needle.
and periodontal flap. Despite the significant sacrifice
Technique
of attached gingiva, this is currently the most common
 Using a periodontal probe, the pocket depths are
flap utilized in human periodontology. Prior to
measured and bleeding points marked on the
 performance of this procedure, the practitioner must
buccal surface of the gingiva at the apical extent of
ensure that a minimum of 2 mm of attached gingiva
the pocket (Figure 16.33).
will remain after the surgery. If not, a different flap
2.
 The internal bevel incision is made following the
must be selected (or the tooth extracted). Note that
 scalloping of the teeth along the bleeding points
the 2 mm of attached gingiva has been the recom-
(Figure 16.34). It is important to note that this
mendation for decades; however, recent publications
scalloping is generally carried to a point apical to
have put that requirement into question.3839 The basis
the alveolar crest. Furthermore, the thicker the
for this is long term stability of teeth without this
gingiva, the deeper the scallop. If thinning of
amount of attached gingiva. However, these are
the flap is desired for proper adaptation, it should
 reports from human dentists, where homecare is gen-
be performed at this time.
erally much more effective, and thus these compro-
 3. The crevicular incision is created to separate the flap
mised teeth will have a much better chance of
from the gingival collar (Figure 16.35). A full
long-term health. In veterinary patients, 2 mm is still
 thickness flap is created via blunt dissection with
recommended.
 a periosteal elevator (Figure 16.36).
Periodontal Flap Surgery
221
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 16.34 (a and b) The initial internal bevel incision is created.
Figure 16.36 (a and b) The flap is biuntfy dissected with a
 periosteal elevator.
The gingival collar is separated from the bone
with a sharp instrument (knife or blade)
(Figure 16.37).
5.
 The teeth are thoroughly scaled and planed and any
 granulation tissue is removed ± root conditioning
(see chapter 17) (Figure 16.38).
6.
 After cleaning and osseous surgery (if indicated),
the flap should rest at the bone/tooth junction
(Figure 16.39).
If not, further scalloping/
trimming is recommended to allow for proper
attachment.
A continuous sling suture (see below) is utilized to
maintain the flap in proper position at the root/
bone interface. Note that this will result in the
interproximal bone being denuded. This will heal
Figure 16.35 The second or crevicular incision is created parallel
 over time, but the area should be protected with a
to the tooth.
 periodontal pack.
222
2 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
Figure 16.37 The third incision is made and the gingival collar
removed.
b
Figure 16.39 (a and b) The flap should rest at the tooth/bone
Figure 16.38 The roots are thoroughly scaled, and other root and
bone treatments performed as necessary.
interface.
Apically displaced flap
Technique
Periodontal flaps can also be sutured at different levels on
The internal bevel incision is similar to that for a mod-
the tooth. Apical repositioned flaps' are utilized to move
ified Widman flap.' However, since it is designed to
the gingival atachment apically. This reduces pocket
preserve as much of the attached gingiva as possible,
depth while maintaining the vital attached gingiva. This
it should be started no more than about 1 mm from
results in easier care of the diseased areas and decreased
the gingival margin and directed steeply toward the
infection. These flaps are generally used in areas with
alveolar crest (Figure 16.40). The incision should
horizontal bone loss where regeneration of the lost bone is
follow but not accentuate the natural scalloping.
not currently possible. This is most common in the man-
The crevicular incisions are made, followed by the
dibular incisor area. However, an additional indication is
interdental incisions to remove the pocket wall.
in areas of grade Il furcational defects. This procedure
：
Vertical incisions are then made mesial and distal to
lowers the gingival height, allowing for superior homec-
the flap. It is important for these incisions to cross
are in the furcational area. These flaps can also be used to
the mucogingival junction ( MGJ) (red arrows) to
widen the zone of attached gingiva. This technique
allow repositioning of the flap (Figure 16.41).
requires a technical and time-consuming split thickness
The flap is then elevated from the underlying bone.
flap to be created in order to maintain the periosteum
a.
If a full thickness flap is planned, this is
 over the bone to be exposed. This allows for the regenera-
 accomplished via blunt dissection with a
tion of gingival tissues above the repositioned flap.
periosteal elevator.
Periodontal Flap Surgery 223
(a)
(a)
[b]
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.40 (a and b) Apical repositioning flap. cadaver
 specimen. Initial internal bevel incision.
Figure 16.42 Sharp dissection with a (a) scalpel blade and (b) a
LaGrange scissors. (c) Continued careful elevation of the flap with
a scalpel blade.
b.In cases where a split thickness flap is
necessary, it is performed with a blade or
knife to leave the periosteum attached to the
bone (Figures 16.42 and 16.43).
5.
After cleaning and osseous surgery (if indicated)
Figure 16.41 Vertical incisions created slightly divergent mesial
(blue arrow) and distal to the target tooth. Note the mesial inci-
(Figure 16.44), the flap should rest at the bone/
sion is in the diastema, and the distal incision on the mesial line
tooth junction.
angle of the first premolar. Finally, the incisions must cross the
6. The flap is then sutured into place at the root/bone
MGJ (red arrows).
interface (Figure 16.45).
224 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
a. Ifa full thickness flap is elected, a sling suture
should be used to keep the flap from moving
apically (see below).
D.
If a split thickness flap is elected, it can be
sutured to the periosteum with a direct loop
 or a combination loop-anchor suture. (See
also Figures 16.46 through 16.48.)
Coronally displaced flaps
Coronal repositioning flaps are designed to move the
gingival attachment coronally on the tooth to gain
additional attachment. This procedure is often per-
formed in combination with guided tissue regeneration
to gain new bone.? It can also be used in areas of gingival
 recession to gain soft tissue attachment. If performed
Figure 16.43 The split thickness flap.
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.44 Scaling the exposed root surface.
Figure 16.46 Treatment of a complicated crown root fracture of a
right mandibular canine (404) of a dog (standard endodontic
therapy was also performed). Note the 10mm periodontal pocket 
that has resulted from the subgingival fracture (a). (b) Vertical inci-
Figure 16.45 The flap is moved and sutured apically to reduce
 sions created slightly divergent mesial and distal to the target
pocket depth.
tooth. Both incisions are created in the diastema and cross the MGJ.
Periodontal Flap Surgery  225
(c)
(d)
Figure 16.46 (cont'd) (c) The full thickness flap is elevated. (d) Following scaling and osteoplasty (to give a sharp and smooth alveolar crest).
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.47 Closure. (a) Apical repositioning and closure. (b) Note that the pocket is only 4 mm deep postoperatively
 properly, this procedure can result in increased attach-
ment, but if ineffective may also result in increased
pocket depth.
Technigue
 Two vertical incisions are created to delineate the
flap, making sure to carry them beyond the muco-
gingival junction4 (Figures 16.49a).
2.
A conservative reverse bevel incision is then made
to the base of the pocket to remove the diseased
pocket epithelium (Figure 16.49b).
3
A split thickness flap is carefully created using sharp
Figure 16.48 Two-week recheck picture. Note the excellent
dissection technique (Figure 16.49c).
healing  and lack of inflammation.  Additionally, the gingival
 The exposed root surface is carefully scaled and
+
margin is now below the fracture, allowing for pocket reduction.
 planed (Figure 16.49d).
226
6 Periodontal Surgical Technigues
(a)
(b)
(G)
(d)
(e)
Figure 16.49 Coronally displaced flap on a maxillary fourth
premolar with  gingival recession and  cdass Il  furcation
exposure. (a) Slightly divergent vertical releasing incisions are
created mesial and distal to the target tooth. Note the gingival
recession and furcation exposure to the tooth. (b) Conservative
intemal bevel incision to maintain as much attached gingiva as
possible. (c) Sharp dissection to create a split thickness flap.
(d) Partial thickness flap is elevated for scaling. Note the intact
periosteum covering the exposed bone. (e) Flap is moved
coronally on the tooth to cover the defect.
5
Citric acid therapy should be performed (see
The standard coronally positioned flap can be very
chapter 17).
effective in increasing keratinized gingiva, but these flaps
6.
The flap is repositioned without tension more
 are not always successful due to insufficient amounts of
coronal on the tooth surface (Figure 16.49e) and
aftached gingiva.42 Therefore, on occasion, the addition
sutured in place.
 of a free gingival graft is necessary (see below).
Periodontal Flap Surgery  227
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 16.50 Semilunar flap to increase the keratinized attached gingiva. (a) Gingival recession on a mandibular fourth premolar.
(b) The semilunar incision is created following the curvature of the receded gingival margin, stopping 2-3 mm apical to the papillae.
() A split thickness flap is created by using sharp dissection coronallyunder the flap. (d) Afterrelease, the flap slices naturally into place.
Semilunar flap
4.
 Hold the flap in place for a few minutes to allow
healing to begin; no sutures are necessary The
An alternate form of coronally positioned flap has been
 devised called the semilunar flap.43
  m (aisoad aa paaao) e papn
by secondary intention.
Technique
Palatine flaps
1.
 A semilunar incision is created following the curva-
ture of the receded gingival margin.41 This must 
 The palate is a unique area for periodontal surgery since
stop 2-3mm apical to the papillae to ensure
it is composed of inelastic/keratinized tissue.' Therefore,
continued blood supply to the flap. The incision
it cannot be displaced nor can a split thickness flap be
may extend to the alveolar mucosa if necessary
created. Since the palatal flap cannot be displaced to
(Figures 16.50b).
 properly adapt to the root bone interface, the initial inci-
 A split thickness flap is created by using sharp dis-
sion is critical for proper flap placement. This flap must
section coronally under the flap (Figure 16.50c).
be created in such a way that it adapts well around the
3.
 Once fully released from the periosteum, the flap
entire portion of the tooth. In general, the edges are too
will naturally slide coronally into position
 thick for proper attachment and must be thinned prior
(Figure 16.50d).
to closure. Thick palatine tissue will not adapt well and
228  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
 often separates from the tooth, delaying and compli-
Technique
The initial incision is made circumferentially around
papilla that adapts well to the tooth is critical for proper
each tooth and the interdental spaces are “reverse
healing.
scalloped" to avoid the papillae entirely. The
If the tissue is not excessively thick, a standard
papillae can be left with either side of the flap;
internal bevel can be used. For thick areas, a horizontal
however, they are typically left on the lingual/
 gingivectomy will thin the tissue sufficiently to allow
palatal flap (Figure 16.51a).
proper attachment. If this is not done or is performed
 A sharp instrument (typically an Orban knife) is
insufficiently, it is best to trim the flap prior to releasing
introduced into the incision and used to care-
 from the underlying bone, as it is easier to work with
fully dissect the flap off the underlying bone
when attached. If thinning is necessary, it can be done
(Figure 16.51b).
 by holding the flap with Adson forceps and thinning ift
3
The papillae are reflected with theflap( Figures 16.51c
with a sharp, small blade tapering to the tip of the
and d).
papilla.
4.
The flaps are not thinned but rather should main-
 It is best to anticipate whether significant osseous
tain as much attached gingiva and thickness as
surgery will be necessary. Probing for defects (sounding)
possible.
along with careful radiographic review will assist with
proper flap creation. If no osseous surgery is planned,
Conventional flap
 the internal bevel incision can be placed near the gingival
 This is performed similarly to the above papilla preser-
margin (as Widham above). If significant bone work is
planned, the incision should be made more apical.
vation flap technique but with only the crevicular inci-
Vertical incisions are rarely indicated, as repositioning
sion performed. In this case, however, the papilla is split
is not possible on the palate. In fact, they should be
in the middle. The halves are then reflected with their
avoided if possible, due to the pain they create and the
respective flap.
difficulty of closing this inelastic tissue. Finally, these
flaps must be performed carefully and conservatively to
Flaps to increase/replace attached gingiva
avoid the palatine vessels.
On occasion, patients will present with areas of minimal
to no attached gingiva, while the remainder of the tooth
Flaps for regenerative surgery
is fairly healthy. This can occur secondary to standard
Owing to the advances in human periodontology, bone
periodontal disease but is more common due to trauma
regrowth (guided tissue regeneration) is now possible. If
or toxic injuries. The most definitive treatment for
the clinical presentation is compatible with the procedure,
these teeth is extraction. However, there are other
this is the preferred method of pocket reduction. (For a
therapeutic options to cover these areas and salvage the
discussion of indications, materials, and techniques, see
teeth. These types of procedures can also be used to
chapter 18.)
increase the level of attached gingiva for aesthetic rea-
 Flaps for regenerative surgery procedures should be
 sons. Affected areas can be treated via three different
designed to maintain the maximum amount of attached
 surgeries: free gingival autograft, free connective tissue
gingiva. Therefore, the initial internal bevel incision is 
 autograft, and lateral sliding (or pellicle) flap. For all of
not performed in this case, only the second (crevicular)
 these flaps (as well as any periodontal flap) the critical
incision is made to release the flap. These flaps are typi-
 steps are a thorough scaling and root planing in addition
cally made full thickness, and either envelope or full flap
 to the removal of any pocket epithelium (see chapters 11
designs can be used. In addition, these flaps should result
and 17).
 in primary closure over the membrane/graft. Finally,
Classically, the incisions for these types of flaps are
 papilla-sparing techniques should be utilized when there
 created split thickness, leaving a layer of periosteum.25
is sufficient interdental space.
However, recent studies have shown that placing the
graft directly on the bone leads to less postoperative
Papilla preservation flap
mobility, decreased swelling and hemorrhage,4 and
This type of flap keeps the papilla in place and allows for
significantly less shrinkage of the flap.4s46 In addition, the
superior healing. It is of most value in the incisor region,
bluntly dissected full thickness flap is much easier to
as true papillae are only seen there and also in the molar
create. The main disadvantage of this technique is that
region. These flaps are a challenge in the molar region
healing may be delayed,474s which is more of concern in
due to tight contacts that do not allow the papilla to be
animal patients because we cannot control their oral
kept intact.
activity.
 Periodontal Flap Surgery   229
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 16.51 Papilla preservation flap on the maxillary incisors of a dog. (a) The incision is made circumferentially and the interdental
spaces "reverse scalloped" to avoid the papillae entirely.In this case, the papillae will be left with the palatal flap. (b) Buccal flap released.
(c) Papillae carefully raised to stay with the palatine flap. (d) Flap created. Note the papillae are intact and attached to the palatine flap.
Free gingival autograft
This technique was first described in 1963 and has been
improved and modified since that time.* Autografts are
used to increase the width of the keratinized attached
gingiva where the defect extends very close to or beyond
 the mucogingival junction (Figure 16.52). This technique
is typically employed in areas where there is insufficient
adjacent gingival tissue (to utilize a lateral sliding flap).
Technique
 Prepare recipient site.
a.
Create a bed for grafting by marking a
3-4 mm area and removing the soft tissue.
The area should be approximately twice the
Figure 16.52 Deep gingival dleft beyond the MGJ on the right
size of the defect to allow for 50% contrac-
mandibular canine (404) of a dog.
tion during healing (Figure 16.53).
230
 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
(c)
[d]
Figure 16.53 (a) Preparing the recipient site by debriding the edges of the lesion. (b) Shallow incisions are made to define the edges of
the recipient bed. (c) The site is created split thickness with sharp dissection. (d) Prepared recipient site.
b.   Using sterile tinfoil, create a template for the
recipient bed, which will help guide the inci-
sions for the donor site (Figure 16.54).
 Place a moistened sponge over the site to
C.
 keep it moist and help control hemorrhage.
 Obtain graft from the donor site.
a.
Select the donor area that has enough attached
 gingiva to supply the graft while maintaining
2-3mm of  remaining attached gingiva
coronal to the graft. The maxillary canine and
mandibular first molar are the most com-
monly used places in veterinary patients.
b.
Place the template over the graft site
(Figure 16.55).
Figure 16.54 Placing tinfoil over the site and cutting to match
C.
 Carefully make shallow incisions to outline
the prepared bed.
the graft.
Periodontal Flap Surgery  231
(a)
Figure 16.55 Tinfoil is placed over the maxillary canine.
d. Carefully create a split thickness graft that
maintains the periosteum over the donor
site. It is best to start elevation on the corner
and using a fine suture to hold the corner,
(b)
use sharp dissection to free the graft
(Figure 16.56). **This is very tedious and
should be performed using very fine/sharp
instruments and with the aid of magnifica-
tion.** The graft should be 1.0-i.5 mm
thick.5 Note that the thickness of the graft is
critical to successful healing. A graft that is
too thin risks necrosis, and if too thick
makes diffusion of nutrients and new
circulation to the superficial layer challeng-
 ing, thus also risking failure.4 If the obtained
 graft is too thick it can be carefully thinned
with a blade.
 Transfer and immobilize the graff.
Figure 16.56 (a and b) Sharply dissecting the graft from the donor
a.
 Use extreme care when handling the graff, as
site, making sure to leave a layer of periosteum.
it will be very sensitive to any injury.
b。
 Remove the sponge and any excess clot (as a
thick clot can interfere with healing).51
Place the graft onto the recipient site and
place pressure down onto the bone for 3-5
minutes. This step helps to remove any air or
blood that may be creating deadspace and
also initiates healing.
d.
 Inspect the edges of the graft for any clots or
loose tissue.
e.
Suture with fine (5-0 to 6-0) swedged on
suture with a simple interrupted pattern
every 2 mm (Figure 16.57). Care must be
 taken not to move the graft during suturing.
f.
Consider adding a sling or cruciate suture
 over the recipient site (anchored on both sides
Figure 16.57 Transfer graft to recipient bed and close with
 in native tissue) to help stabilize the graff.
simple interrupted sutures of a fine material.
232   Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Free connective tissue autograft
keratinized sites carries the genetic message to become
This procedure4 was first described by Edel in 1974.52 It
keratinized. The major advantages of this technique are
a uo uaei si ye aul ieq poey aq aq papaod
is a variant on the free gingival graft above. It takes
underside of the palatine tissue. This allows for a much
advantage of the fact that connective tissue from
larger selection of donor sites, as well as significantly
 decreases postoperative pain and complications because
      n  
disadvantage is that this type of graft cannot easily be
measured with a template. Therefore a slightly larger
 graft piece should be harvested and subsequently
trimmed to size.
The preparation of the recipient site and transport/
securing of the graft is the same as for free gingival
graft above. To harvest the free connective tissue
autograft:
 Make an elliptical incision in the palate in a relatively
avascular area that ideally does not have
significant rugae (Figure 16.58).
2.
Carefully elevate the flap and harvest the connective
tissue (Figure 16.59).
3
Close the incisions with simple interrupted sutures
Figure 16.58 Harvesting a connective tissue graft. Making an
(Figures 16.60 and 16.61).
elliptical incision in the palate in a relatively avascular area.
(a)
[b]
Figure 16.59 Harvesting the flap. (a) Careful elevation of
the flap. (b) Sharp removal of the graft. (c) The harvested 
graft.
Periodontal Flap Surgery  233
Figure 16.60 Primary closure of the site.
Figure 16.63 Creating an extemal bevel on the side away from
the graft.
Lateral sliding (pedicle) flap
This flap25415354 can also be used to cover denuded
areas of root. It has been utilized since the 1950s and
is very effective in the correct situation. The main
indication for this type of flap is an area of denuded
bone with sufficient healthy attached gingiva directly
adjacent to it (Figure 16.62). (Note that inflamed/infected
tissue will not function well as a graff.) Ideally, the donor
site is edentulous (i.e., the diastema behind the canine
Figure 16.61 Graft placed in defect.
teeth). However, for mandibular incisors, the frenulum
can become an issue with tension; therefore taking the
 graft apical to the mandibular incisors is recommended.
Preparation of recipient site: Create bevelled incisions
along the defect. The recipient side (away from
the graff) is bevelled externally (Figure 16.63) and
the graft side internally (Figure 16.64), to create a
greater surface area for healing.
2.
 Flap preparation:
a.  Lateral sliding flaps can be made split or full 
 thickness. Full thickness flaps are easier and
 a jo  oans  mo e
site but result in longer healing times and a
potential for lost crestal bone at the donor
site. Therefore, the combined approach is
recommended (see below).
Starting halfway down the attached gingiva,
create a partial thickness vertical incision. The
incision should be made 1.5 times the dis-
Figure 16.62 Lateral sliding flap for a deep gingival dleft beyond
 tance from the near edge of the defect as the
the MGJ on the mandibular left canine (304) of a dog.
 defect is wide (Figure 16.65). This incision
234 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
Figure 16.64 Creating an internal bevel on the side of the graft
that faces the defect.
(b)
should be carried past the MGJ to the same
 point apically as the defect (Figure 16.66).
h.
Make a split thickness horizontal incision
from the defect edge to the vertical incision
(Figure 16.67).
Elevate the flap starting full thickness at the
 defect edge (Figure 16.68), switching to split
thickness once the area to be left denuded is
reached (Figure 16.69).
d.
 Fenestrate the periosteum at the base of the
flap to release tension (if necessary).
3.
Transfer and closure of the flap, and protection of
Figure 16.65 Measuring the width of the defect. (a) Measuring
the donor site:
the defect with a periodontal probe. (b) Determining and marking 
 Transfer the flap to the recipient site and
the width of graft necessary.
match edge to edge (Figure 16.70).
b.
Ensure that no tension is present.
Place finger pressure on the flap for 3-5
 minutes to initiate healing and force out any
 air or clots that might delay healing.
 Close with simple interrupted sutures placed
1.5-2.0 mm apart (Figure 16.71).
Place a cruciate suture over the site anchored
into normal tissue (Figure 16.72).
Consider a periodontal or aluminium foil
 dressing (especially if a full thickness flap
was used).
Frenectomy and frenotomy
The frenulum is a muscular fold of tissue that attaches
Figure 16.66 Vertical incision at the point determined by
lips and cheeks to the gingiva or alveolar mucosa and
measuring. This incision crosses the MGJ and is shallow to allow 
 for split thickness harvesting.
 Periodontal Flap Surgery  235
(a)
Figure 16.67 Split thickness horizontal incision.
(b)
Figure 16.69 Sharply dissecting part of the graft away from the
defect to create a split thickness graft. This is the area that will
Figure 16.68 Bluntfy dissecting the area of the graft that will
be left denuded. (a) Sharp dissection. (b) Graft harvested. Note the
 cover the defect. This is done to keep a periosteal attachment with
area toward the defect is completely denuded revealing bare
the graft.
bone (blue arrow), while the area away from the graft (which will
be left uncovered) retains a soft tissue covering (white arrow).
frenula, one maxillary and two mandibular.55 The maxil-
lary frenulum runs from the lip to the gingiva just apical
to the first incisors (Figure 16.73). The mandibular
frenula arise from the mandibular lip and extend to the
 level of the mandibular canine teeth (Figure 16.74). The
latter are much more important in periodontal disease
and surgery.
The goal of these procedures is to release the tension
from the frenulum, which may contribute to attachment
loss, as well as to remove a potential food trap. It is gen-
erally performed when there is significant periodontal
 disease to the mandibular canine, and therefore is often 
performed at the same time as other flap surgeries in
this area.
 The two procedures are similar in intent and approach
Figure 16.70 Graft is rotated to cover the defect and trial fit to
and differ in extent. Frenotomy incises the muscular
ensure no tension is present.
236  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Figure 16.74 Mandibular frenulum (yellow arrows).
frenulum, whereas a frenectomy completely removes it.
 For periodontal purposes, a frenotomy should suffice
and will be presented here.
Figure 16.71 Closure with simple interrupted sutures.
Technique
 Using a blade or ideally LaGrange scissors, cut the
frenulum horizontally close to its attachment at
the gingiva (Figure 16.75).
Using sharp/blunt dissection, incise the frenulum to
relieve the muscular attachments (Figure 16.76a).
 Once this is performed, the lip should hang freely.
This  will  create  a diamond-shaped  defect
(Figure 16.76b).
Using a simple interrupted pattern, suture from
mesial to distal (Figure 16.77).
 Suture patterns for periodontal surgery
Figure 16.72 Cruciate suture placed over the site
Following thorough root cleaning ± osseous surgery
(see chapters 17 and 18), the flap is replaced.1" It is crit-
ical to ensure that there is no tension on the incision
line. If tension is present, the incision line will likely
dehisce and the flap will fail. This can lead to disastrous
 results for the treated teeth, potentially necessitating
 suturing. If tension has been sufficiently released, the
flap should temporarily stay in place without sutures
(Figure 16.78). If the flap pulls back at all (Figure 16.79),
tension is present and must be eliminated before
suturing.
 Tension can be released by fenestrating the perios-
teum.2z.56.57 This is done by pulling up on the flap gently
and carefully incising the thin layer of periosteum on the
Figure 16.73 Maxillary frenulum.
underside at the base of the flap. This can be done with
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.75 Frenotomy of the mandibular frenula. (a) Horizontal incision of the frenula with a LaGrange scissors. (b) Flap created.
(a)
(b)
Figure  16.76 (a)  Sharp/blunt  dissection  to  relieve the
 muscular attachments. (b) Frenula hanging loose.
Figure 16.78 Intraoral picture of a maxillary fourth premolar that
to ensure that there is no tension. The flap stays in position, indicating
Figure 16.77 Horizontal cdosure.
that tension has been released and the flap can be sutured.
238   Periodontal Surgical Techniques
a scalpel blade (Figure 16.80), but this author prefers
sharp/blunt dissection  with a  LaGrange  scissors
(Figure 16.81). Once lack of tension is assured, the flap is
replaced and held in position for a few minutes to initiate
healing.
The gingiva is very friable compared to skin and must
be sutured precisely to ensure healing. Imprecise or
rough suturing techniques that may be adequate for
healing in other oral procedures will likely have unto-
ward effects in periodontal surgery. Therefore, special
 care should be taken when securing the gingival flaps.
When suturing the gingiva, ensure that the needle
enters the tissue at a right angle and at a distance of at
least 2-3 mm from the margin' (Figure 16.82). If the
interdental papilla is part of the suture, make sure to
Figure 16.79 Fap with tension present. When the flap was
 pierce the tissue below where the papilla begins narrow-
placed in position, it pulled apically, indicating that tension is still
ing." The initial suture bite should be on the flap (or
present. If the flap is sutured at this point, it will dehisce and fail.
The tension must be released priorto closure.
unattached) side,′7 which is usually the buccal side. This
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 16.80 Fenestrating (cutting) the periosteum with a scalpel
blade. (a) Starting the incision. (b) Partially cut periosteum showing
the white glistening periosteum (blue arrows) contrasting with the
darker underlying connective tissue (yellow arrows). (c) Fully cut
periosteum, revealing the white glistening periosteum (white
arrows) contrasting with the darker underlying connective tissue
(yellow arrows).
Periodontal Flap Surgery239
(a)
(b)
c
(d)
(e)
Figure 16.81 Fenestrating (cutting) the periosteum with a LaGrange scissors. (a) Bluntly inserting the cdosed scissors between the
periosteum and the buccal mucosa. (b) Separating the scissors to create a space between the two tissue layers. (c) Opening the scissors
and placing one blade in the created space and one above. Make sure that the lower blade is between the two layers so that both are
not cut. (d) Cutting the periosteum. (e) Fully cut periosteum, revealing the white glistening periosteum (white arrows) contrasting with
the darker underlying connective tissue (yellow arrows). (f) Fenestrating the periosteum in a clinical case with a LaGrange scissors.
240  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
Figure 16.82 Correct first bite when suturing the gingiva. The
needle enters the tissue from the buccal aspect, at a right angle,
and at a distance of at least 2-3 mm from the margin.
(b)
is done to avoid placing pressure on the flap during
 subsequent sutures, as the needle dulls during numerous
passes through the tough attached gingiva. Since cutting
 needles are generally used, it is critical to advance the
 needle through the tissue using wrist motion to follow
the curve of the needle. The suture should be advanced
completely through the initial side prior to piercing the
  n   n s   
increased drag. Finally, the knots should be tied off
the incision line' with one throw over manufacturer's
recommendation (to account for tongue motion).57
The most common and simplest suture patterns for
periodontal surgery are interdental ligations. However,
sling sutures are also used and are valuable because they
(C)
 are less likely to buckle the flaps and are better at dis-
tributing masticatory tension. These are complicated
 patterns and should be practiced prior to attempting
 them in a patient.
Interdental ligation
The most basic suture is the direct loop suture, which
is very similar to the simple interrupted pattern
(Figure 16.83). This is generally utilized in cases where
the gingival tissue can be directly opposed without
tension. This is the most correct form of closure and
should be used whenever possible.
A variation of this pattern that is useful for tight inter-
dental contacts, such as between maxillary fourth pre-
molars/first molars as well as between mandibular molar
Figure 16.83 Direct loop suture. See Figure 16.82 for the first
teeth, is the “Niemiec” pattern. With this technique, the
step: needle is passed through the buccal mucosa. (a) Needle is
 needle is passed backwards through the interdental space
passed through the lingual side of the flap from the inside.
(Figure 16.84) to pierce the lingual/palatal side first
(b) Suture is pulled carefully through the tissue. (c) The suture is
(Figure 16.85) and then pass interdentally and finally
Periodontal Flap Surgery  241
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.84 (a and b) "Niemiec" stitch in the tight occlussal space between the mandibular fourth premolar and first molar. Needle is
aeds jewixodiaui aui yonoui isy pua junig jo ,pemeg, passed
Figure 16.85 Needle pierces through the lingual mucosa from 
Figure 16.87 The suture is tied. One throw over manufacturer's
 the lingual aspect and then through the interproximal space.
recommendation is advised.
  hi a re    e 
normally (Figure 16.87).
Another type of suture pattern is the “figure-8” which
puts the suture between the flap edges. This pattern is
used when the flap edges cannot be directly opposed,
which is most commonly encountered with apical repo-
sitioning flaps (Figure 16.88).
For wide interdental spaces, a horizontal mattress
 si d as s an aq u as 
the mesial and distal edges of the papilla snug against the
bone and tooth.
Sling ligation patterns
Figure 16.86 Buccal mucosa is pierced from the "inside"
Sling ligation patterns have the advantage of using the
connective tissue side.
 tooth as an anchor for the flap, rather than relying on the
242
2 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
C
Figure 16.88 Figure-8 suture. See Figure 16.82 for the first step:
needle is passed through the buccal mucosa. (a) Needle is
reversed and passed through the lingual gingiva from the lingual
aspect. (b) Suture is pulled carefully through the tissue. (c) The
suture is tied. One throw over manufacturer's recommendation is
advised.
gingival sutures. Sling ligations are typically used when
gingiva and passed through the interdental space
 m se ena ue aenu o pae ae sde a
(Figure 16.91), and then around the tooth and back out
as when the edges are not designed to touch. They are
 bucally in the next distal interproximal space. Next, the
especially valuable on the maxillary arcade, as the pala-
 needle is reversed and passed back through the gingiva
tine tissue is fibrous and the buccal tissues are more
from the outside (Figure 16.92a). This is continued
elastic. These suture patterns do not attach the wound
(Figures 16.92b and c) until the last tooth, at which point
edges together (although the edges can touch) but use
the suture is anchored around the tooth immediately
the teeth as anchors for the sutures. They can be done in
distal to the flap (Figure 16.93). This suture is carried to
an interrupted or continuous pattern.
the palatal/lingual side and the process is repeated mesi-
The interrupted sling pattern (Figures 16.89 and 16.90)
ally (Figure 16.94). The suture is then anchored around
is initiated by passing through the outer edge of the gin-
the tooth immediately mesial to the flap and tied
giva and then through the interdental area and around
(Figure 16.95).
 the tooth. Once in the next interdental area, the gingiva 
The anchor suture (Figure 16.96) pattern is used on
is again pierced from the outside and passed around the
the ends of the flaps when there is no tooth distal to the
tooth to return to the initial area and the knot is tied.
flap. This pattern can be used with either continuous or
The continuous sling suture pattern is initiated at the
 ss n  as  
mesial interdental space and carried distally, as it is easier
 passing the needle through the outer edge of the facial
to place the knot in this position. The initial suture bite
 flap. Next, the tooth is encircled and the lingual/palatal
through the gingiva is placed from the outside of the
 flap pierced from beneath. Finally, the knot is tied.
Periodontal Flap Surgery243
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.89 interrupted sling suture pattern. See Figure 16.82 for the first step: needle is passed through the buccal mucosa. (a) Next,
 the needle is passed through the interdental area and around the tooth. (b) The needle is reversed and passed again through the buccal
side of the buccal mucosa.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.90 (a-c) The suture is passed back around the lingual
aspect of the tooth and the knot is tied. One throw over manufac-
turer'srecommendation is advised.
244  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
A more challenging variation of this knot is the closed
anchor. It is used to close flaps that have an edentulous
 area on one or both ends. The closed anchor requires
tying a direct suture to close the proximal flap followed
by carrying one of the sutures around the tooth to anchor
the tissue against the tooth, and finishes by tying the two
ends of suture.
For vertical incisions, wide diastemas, or edentulous
 areas, simple interrupted sutures should be used, placed
2-3 mm apart? (Figure 16.97). However, practitioners
should be familiar with several other suture patterns that
may be useful in various situations.
Postoperative care
Figure 16.91 Continuous sling suture pattern. Needle is passed
through the buccal mucosa (as in Figure 16.82 above).
In primates, initial healing of the flap starts within 24
hours as a blood clot forms. Within l week there is an
epithelial attachment to the tooth, and at 2weeks new
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.92 (a-c) Next, the needle is passed through the inter-
dental area and around the tooth. The needle is reversed and
passed again through the buccal side of the buccal mucosa.
Periodontal Flap Surgery  245
collagen fibers begin to appear.3 However, the attach-
ment at this point is still weak due to the presence of
immature collagen fibers. Complete healing does not
 occur (at least in primates) until 1 month following sur-
 gery. Therefore, the patient should be placed on soft food
(and no hard toys) for a minimum of 2 weeks. Brushing
should also be avoided during this time to minimize
trauma to the sutures and/or wound dehiscence.
Alternate plaque control strategies should be used for the
s  se  ad se 
or antiseptic rinses).
 Postoperative medications, such as antibiotics and
pain medications, should be prescribed as indicated. (See
chapters 14 and 21 for details.)
Patients should be rechecked in 2weeks to evaluate
Figure 16.93 Anchoring the suture around the first molar, which
soff tissue healing, followed by an anesthetized exam
is the tooth immediately distal to the flap.
and radiographs scheduled at 6-9months postop and
regularly thereafter to evaluate the success of the
 procedure and the degree of infection.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 16.94 (a-c) This suture is carried to the palatal/lingual
side and the process is repeated mesially. Pierce the lingual side
of the flap from the inside, and carry around the buccal surface of
the tooth. Continue until the first tooth is reached.
246  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Figure 16.95 The knot is tied. One throw over manufacturer's
Figure 16.97 Simple interrupted sutures closing a full flap.
recommendation is advised.
Box 16.1 Key points
(a)
● Periodontal surgery is indicated for pockets greater than
 5-6 mm or with furcation exposure level Il or Il
 The use of proper instruments greatly improves the
efficiency and speed of periodontal procedures as well as
the therapeutic outcome.
·Periodontal flaps can be created with or without vertical
releasing incisions.
 Periodontal pockets with alveolar bone loss are ideally
treated with regenerative techniques.
●  The efficacy and benefit of periodontal surgery should be
questioned in the absence of homecare.
Notes
A. Diplomate Periodontal surgery kit, Dentalaire.
(b)
B. Monocryl, Ethicon, Novartis Animal Health.
C.
VICRYL RAPIDE, Ethicon, Novartis Animal Health.
D.B
Hu-Friedy Mfg. Co.
E. MONOCRYL* Plus, Ethicon, Novartis Animal Health.
F.
Vicryl Mesh, Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson.
G. Osteoallograft, Veterinary Transplant Services.
H. Consil, Nutramax.
1.
Perioptix.
I.
Vetspon, Ethicon, Novartis Animal Health.
K.(
Gelfoam, Pfizer.
L.S
Surgicel, Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson.
M. Collaplug, Zimmer Dental.
N. Thrombostat, Parke-Davis, Pfizer.
References
1. Carranza FA, Takei HH. The flap technique for pocket therapy. In:
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
Figure 16.96 Anchor suture pattern. See Figure 16.82 for the first
Pp. 937-949.
Step: needle is passed through the buccal mucosa. (a) The tooth is
. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
encircled and the lingual/palatal flap pierced from beneath. (b) The
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
dey aleedas e woy anins e sey osje ahewi s!yi alon pall s lou
Pp. 186-231.
Periodontal Flap Surgery247
3. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Phase II periodontal therapy. In:
26. Shoukry M, Ali B, Naby MA, Soliman A. Repair of experimental
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
plaque-induced periodontal disease in dogs. J Vet Dent.
pp. 881-886.
24(3):152-165, 2007.
 d no s n  na s   l 
27. Huffman LJ. Oralexamination. In: Small Animal Dental, Oral and
compared over 2 years. J Periodontol. 52:655-662, 1981.
Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA ed.).
5. Holmstrolm SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Periodontal therapy and sur-
London: Manson, 2010, pp. 39-61.
gery. In: Veterinary Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
28. Measley BL, Beybayer M, Butzin CA, et al. Use of furcal bone
Saunders, 1998, pp. 167-213.
sounding to improve the accuracy of furcation diagnosis.
6. Rabbini GM, Ash MM, Caffesse RG. The effectiveness of subgin-
J Periodontol. 65:649, 1994.
gival scaling and root planing in calculus rermoval. J Periodontol.
29. Easley J. Methods of determining alveolar osseous form.
52:119, 1981.
J Periodontol38:112, 1967.
7. Greensteifi G. Contemporary interpretation of probing depth
30. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
assessment: Diagnostic and therapeutic implications, a literature
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
review. J Periodontol. 68:1194,1997.
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
 8. Waerhaug J. Healing of the dentoepithelialjunction following
 31. Carr GB. Surgical endodontics. In: Pathways of the Pulp (Cohn S,
subgingival plaque control, II, as observed on extracted teeth.
Burns RC eds.). 6th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 1994, pp. 535-536.
J Periodontol. 40:119, 1978.
32. Smith MM. Line angle incisions. J Vet Dent. 20(4):241-244,
9. Bellows J. Equipping the dental practice In: Small Animal Dental
2003.
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
 33. Caffesse RG, Ramfjord SP, Nasjleti CE. Reverse bevel periodontal
Blackwell, 2004, p. 13-55.
flaps in monkeys. J Periodontol. 39:219, 1968.
10. Caffesse RG, Sweeney PL, Smith BA. Scaling and root planing
34. Carranza FA, Carro JJ. Effect of removal of periosteum on post-
with and without periodontal flap surgery. J Clin Periodontol.
operative result of mucogingival surgery. J Periodontol. 34:223,
13(3):205-210, 1986.
1963.
11. Perry DA, Schmid MO, Takei HH. Phase I periodontal therapy.
 35. Morris ML. The unrepositioned mucoperiosteal flap. Periodontics
 In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
3:147, 1965.
pp. 722-727, 2006.
36. Ramfjord SP. Present status of the modified Widman flap
12. Zetner K, Rothmueller G. Treatment of periodontal pockets with
 procedure. J Periodontol. 48:558, 1977.
doxycycline in beagles. Vet Ther. 3(4):441-452, 2002.
 37. Ramfjord SP, Nissle RR. The modified Widman flap. J Periodontol.
13. Magnusson I, Runstad L, Nyman S, et al. A long junctional
45:601, 1974.
epithelium: A locus minoris resistentiae in plaque infection.
          
J Clin Periodontol. 10:333, 1983.
Periodontol Periodontal Abstr. 43(1):5-14, 1995.
14. Philstrolm BL, Ortiz Campos C, McHugh RB. A randomized
39. Wolf HF, Rateitschak EM, Rateitschak KH, Hassell TH. Color
4 year study of periodontal therapy. I Periodontol. 52:227, 1981.
 Atlas of Dental Medicine: Periodontology. 3rd ed. Stuttgart:
15. Klokkevold PR, Takei HH, Carranza FA. General principles of
Thieme, 2005.
periodontal surgery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology.
40. Stahl Ss, Froum SJ. Human suprabony healing responses follow-
St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 887-901.
ing root demineralization and coronal flap anchorage. J Clin
16. Bellows J. Periodontal eqipment, materials, and techniques. In:
Periodontol. 18:685, 1991.
Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a
41. Takei HH, Azzi RR, Han TJ. Periodontal plastic and esthetic sur-
Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2004, pp. 115-173.
gery. In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders,
17. Silverstein LH, Kurtzman GM. A review of dental suturing for
2006, pp. 1005-1029.
optimal soft-tissue management. Compend Contin Educ Dent.
26(3):163-166, 169-170, 2005.
 Prevention. Chicago: Quintessence, 1984.
18. Manor A, Kaffe I. Unusual foreign body reaction to a braided silk
43. Tarno DP Semilunar
coronally repositioned flap. J Clin
suture: A case report. J Periodontol. 53:86-88, 1981.
Periodontol. 13:182, 1986.
19. Takei HH, Carranza FA. The periodontal flap. In: Carranza's
 44. Donnenfeld OW, Marks R, Glickman I. The apically repositioned
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 926-936.
flap: A clinical study. J Periodontol. 37:381-387, 1964.
20. Ming X, Nichols M, Rothenburger S. In vivo antibacterial effcacy
45. James WC, McFall WT Jr, Burkes EJ. Placement of free gingival
of MONOCRYL plus antibacterial suture (Poliglecaprone 25 with
grafts on denuded alveolar bone. Part I: Clinical evaluations.
triclosan). Surg Infect (Larchmt). 8(2):209-214, 2007.
J Periodontol. 49(6):283-290, 1978.
21. Ming X, Rothenburger S, Yang D. In vitro antibacterial efficacy of 
46. James WC, McFall WT Jr, Burkes EJ. Placement of free gingival
MONOCRYL plus antibacterial suture (Poliglecaprone 25 with
grafts on denuded alveolar bone. Part II: Microscopic observa-
triclosan). Surg Infect (Larchmt). 8(2):201-208, 2007.
tions. J Periodontol. 49(6):291-300, 1978.
22. Holmstrolm SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Exodontics. In: Veterinary Dental
47. Caffesse RG, Burgett FG, Nasjleti CE, Castelli WA. Healing of free
Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998, pp. 215-254.
gingival grafts with and without periosteum. Part I. Histologic
 23. Morrison EC, Lang NP, et al. Effects of repeated scaling and root
evaluation. J Periodontol. 50(11):586-594, 1979.
planning and/or controlled oral hygiene on periodontal attache-
48. Caffesse RG, Burgett FG, Nasjleti CE, Castelli WA. Healing of free
ment level and pocket depth in beagle dogs. I. Clinical findings.
gingival grafts with and without periosteum. Part II. Radio-
J Periodontal Res. 14:428-437, 1979.
autographic evaluation. J Periodontol. 50(11):595-602, 1979.
24. Grove TK. Treatrment of periodontal disease. Vet Clin North Am
49. Bjorn H. Transplantation of gingiva propia. Sveriges Tandlak T.
Small Animal Pract. 28:1147-1164, 1998.
22:684,1963.
25. Greensteifi G. Contemporary interpretation of probing depth
50. Mormann W, Schaer F, Firestone AR. The relationship between
assessment: Diagnostic and therapeutic implications. A literature
success of free gingival grafts and transplant thickness.
review. J Periodontol. 68:1194, 1997.
Revascularization and shrinkage—a one year clinical study.
248  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
51. Nabers JM. Free gingival grafts. Periodontics 4(5):243-245,
55. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Oral anatomy and physiology. In:
1966.
Veterinary Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia:
 52. Edel A. Clinical evaluation of free connective tissue grafts used to
Lippincott-Raven, 1997, pp. 55-103.
increase the width of keratinised gingiva. J Clin Periodontol.
 56. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Oral surgery. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
1(4):185-196, 1974.
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
53. Beckman BW. Lateral sliding pedicle flap for gingival cleft at the
pp. 232-228.
maxillary canine tooth. I Vet Dent.22(4):282-285, 2005.
 57. Niemiec BA. Extraction techniques. Top Companion Anim Med.
54. Rawlinson JE, Reiter AM. Repair of a gingival cleft associated
23(2):97-105, 2008.
with a maxillary canine tooth in a dog. J Vet Dent. 22(4):234-242,
58. Wound Closure Manual. Somerville, NJ: Ethicon Inc. 1985,
2005.
pp. 1-101.
17
Treatment of the exposed root surface
Introduction
The goal of periodontal surgery is to create a smooth and
clean tooth surface for reattachment.' This is facilitated
with the visualization afforded by the periodontal flap
 procedure (Figure 17.1). Once the root surface is clean
and smooth, additional therapies such as root condi-
 tioning and guided tissue regeneration may be indicated.
Root scaling/planing
As with non-surgical periodontal therapy, the key to suc-
cessful periodontal surgery is to produce a clean and
smooth root surface. This allows for reattachment of
the periodontal tissues. Therefore, the first and most
important step of the treatment of the dental hard tissues
is a thorough SRP2-4 This is best performed with a
combination of ultrasonic and hand scaling.* Start with
an ultrasonic scaler (on a low power setting) on the root
of the root surface.
surface to remove the vast majority of the plaque and
calculus (Figure 17.2). Following this, a sharp curette is
should be scalloped around the tooth, as this allows for
used to plane the exposed root surface to as smooth as
superior flap apposition.? It should be noted, however,
 possible a finish (Figure 17.3). Alternatively, a fine scaler
that due to the sacrifice of some alveolar bone, this
may be used in these cases since the flap has greatly
concept is not universally accepted.6
decreased the chance of soft tissue laceration. (See
There are several equipment options for this step.6
chapter 11 for a complete discussion of SRP)
Classically, it was performed by hand with bone chisels
or periosteotomes. Today, however, a fine diamond or
Bone treatment (osteoplasty)
finishing bur is more expedient and may result in a
Uneven or jagged edges of alveolar bone (Figure 17.4)
superior finish. However, the speed and relative lack of
will hinder healing and therefore periodontal reattach-
control of powered instruments as well as the potential
ment.35 Therefore, these surfaces should be treated to
for heat production can make these more dangerous.
promote maximum patient benefi. The purpose of
Regardless, rotary methods appear to be the recom-
osteoplasty is to return the remaining alveolar bone to a
mended technique in veterinary texts.3" (See chapter 18
knife-sharp edge (Figure 17.5). Additionally, the bone
 for a complete discussion of osseous surgery.)
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
249
250  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Figure 17.2 Ultrasonic debridement of the exposed root surface
with a periodontal (subgingival) tip on low power.
Figure 17.4 Postscaling: surface is smooth and clean
more dentinal tubules.11 ** The smear layer is a thin layer
with small crystalline characteristics that appears on the
surface of teeth that have undergone dental instrumenta-
tion and interferes with reattachment* Finally, they
slightly demineralize the root surface and expose a
collagen fiber matrix.'2 These properties have been
shown to improve fibroblast reattachment in several in
vitro studies.13-15 One additional effect of chemical root
conditioning is that the dentinal tubules become wider
and more funnel shaped; however, it is not yet known
whether this is a beneficial effect or not. 16.17
Root conditioning has largely fallen out of favor on the
human side due to inconsistent in vivo results.1s-z3
However, it has shown positive results in the studies per-
formed in dogs.24-z This is especially true in the case of
citric acid conditioning in furcational defects.2z.28
There are many products that have been or can be
 used for this step. Classically it has been performed with
Figure 17.3 Hand scaling of the exposed root surface with a
citric acid7A This product has shown to consistently
Gracey curette.
achieve the biomodification goals listed above.14.24.9
However, the operator must be careful not to allow this
 product to contact the gingival tissues, as if can have a
Root conditioning (biomodification
necrotizing effect.30
of the root surface)
Recently an EDTA solution has been promoted as the
The goals of root conditioning are to enhance the
best product,'3 but most studies still support citric acid as
cleaning effects of root planing, speed healing, and
the correct choice.29,31.32
improve the chances of gaining new attachment. There
 Tetracycline has also been touted as a good choice for
are several major benefits associated with root condi-
 root conditioning, as it does remove the smear layer and
tioning.? The first is the removal of any remaining
 expose dentinal tubules.334 It is superior to the other med-
diseased tissue, bacterial infection, and endotoxins from 
 icants in its class (doxycycline, minocycline).34.35 However,
the root surface.* Second, root conditioning products
 it has not been shown to consistently detoxify the root
remove the smear layer from the root surface and expose
 surface and is not as effective as citric acid or EDTA.32.36
Treatment of the Exposed Root Surface   251
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.5 (a) Osteoplasty of the bony ledge with a coarse diamond bur on a water-cooled, high-speed hand-piece. (b) Resultant bony
edges that are smooth and tapered coronally.
Figure 17.7 Thorough rinsing of the etch.
Figure 17.6 Application of the citric acid etchant to the tooth.
A thin layer is placed, avoiding the soft tissues.
 allowed to sit in contact with the root surface for the pre-
Based on the above, this author recommends citric
scribed time. The ideal time appears to be 4 minutes for
acid biomodification of the root surface during
EDTA,'3 2-3 minutes for tetracycline,”′ and 2-5 minutes
 periodontal flap procedures. This is especially true when
for citric acid. After the prescribed time, it is thoroughly
 performing guided tissue regeneration for furcational
rinsed from the root surface (Figure 17.7).
defects.
In the future, laser irradiation may prove to be a
 Root conditioning technique: Following the manu-
superior means of root conditioning. This may be
facturer's recommendations, the selected product is
expected because laser therapy reliably removes the
carefully placed on the scaled and planed root surface
 smear layer, opens the dentinal tubules, and exposes col-
with an applicator or cotton pledgets (Figure 17.6). It is 
lagen in a similar manner to citric acid. However, laser
important to avoid contact with the healthy periodontal
therapy does not affect the shape of (ie., it does not
tissues, especially if utilizing citric acid. The product is
widen) the tubules.173s One in vitro study showed that
252
2 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
CO, laser irradiation for 1 second provided superior
14. Chandra RV, Jagetia GC, Bhat KM. The attachment of V79 and
attachment to either EDTA, citric acid, or H,O_ 3 Further
human periodontal ligament fibroblasts on periodontally involved
root surfaces following treatment with EDTA, citric acid, or tetra-
studies are needed to evaluate the clinical application of
cycline HCL: An SEM in vitro study. J Contemp Dent Pract.
this technology.
7(1):44-59, 2006.
15. Zaman KU, Sugaya T, Hongo O, Kato H. A study of attached
and oriented human periodontal ligament cells to periodontally
Box 17.1 Key points
diseased cementum and dentin after demineralizing with neutral
and low pH etching solution. J Periodontol. 71(7):1094-1099,
●Meticulous scaling and root planing is the most important
2000.
part of any periodontal surgical procedure.
16. Polson AM, Frederick GT, Ladenheim S, Hanes PJ. The produc-
Scaling is best performed using a combination of
tion of a root surface smear layer by instrumentation and its
mechanical and hand instrumentation.
removal by citric acid. J Periodontol. 55(8):443-446, 1984.
17. Ito K, Nishikata J, Murai S. Effects of Nd:YAG laser radiation
Smoothing and shaping of the remaining alveolar bone
on removal of a root surface smear layer after root planing:
(osteoplasty) improves healing.
A scanning electron microscopic study. J Periodontol. 64(6):
● Root conditioning is an additional aid to maximize
547-552, 1993.
reattachment, especially in furcational defects.
18. Mariotti A. Efficacy of chemical root surface modifiers in the
treatrment of periodontal disease. A systematic review. Ann
Periodontol. 8(1):205-226, 2003.
Note
19. Sculean A, Berakdar M, Willershausen B, Arweiler NB, Becker J,
Schwarz E. Efect of EDTA root conditioning on the healing of
A. Citric-etch, Ellman International.
intrabony defects treated with an enamel matrix protein derivative.
J Periodontol. 77(7):1167-1172, 2006.
References
20. Parashis AO, Tsiklakis K, Tatakis DN. EDTA gel root condition-
ing: Lack of effect on clinical and radiographic outcomes of
1. Hill RW, Ramfjord SP, et al. Four types of periodontal treatment
intrabony defect treatrment with enamel matrix derivative.
compared over 2years. J Periodontol. 52:655-662, 1981.
J Periodontol. 77(1):103-110, 2006.
2. Shoukry M, Ali B, Naby MA, Soliman A. Repair of experimental
 21. Kersten BG, Chamberlain AD, Khorsandi S, Wikesj? UM, Selvig
plaque-induced periodontal disease in dogs. J Vet Dent. 24(3):
KA, Nilvéus RE. Healing of the intrabony periodontal lesion
152-165, 2007.
following root conditioning with citric acid and wound closure
3. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Periodontal therapy and
including an expanded PTFE membrane. J Periodontol.
surgery. In: Veterinary Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
63(11):876-882, 1992.
Saunders, 1998, pp. 167-213.
22. Kassab M, Cohen RE. The effect of root modification and bio-
4. Pattison AM, Pattison GL. Scaling and root planning. In:
modification on periodontal therapy. Compend Contin Educ
Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
Dent. 24(1):31-37, 2003.
pPp. 749-797.
 23. BlomlofL, Bergman E, Forsgardh A, Foss L, Larsson A, Sjoberg B,
5. Easley J. Methods of determining alveolar osseous form.
Uhlander L, Jonsson B, Blomlof J, Lindskog S. A clinical study of
I Periodontol. 38:112, 1967.
6. Sims TN, Ammons W. Resective osseous surgery. In: Carranzas
periodontal treatment. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 950-967.
20(6):560-565, 2000.
 7. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology In: Veterinary Dentistry,
 24. Register AA, Burdick FA. Accelerated reattachment with cemen-
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
togenesis to dentin, demineralized in situ. J Periodontol.
pp. 186-231.
47(9):497-505, 1975.
8. Carranza FA, Takei HH, Cochran DL. Reconstructive periodontal
 25. Register AA, Burdick FA. Accelerated reattachment with cemen-
surgery In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
togenesis to dentin, demineralized in situ. I. Optimum range.
Saunders, 2006, pp. 968-990.
J Periodontol. 646-655, 1975.
9. Daly CG. Anti-bacterial effect of citric acid treatment of peri-
26. Caffesse RG, Holden MJ, Kon S, Nasjleti CE. The effect of citric
odontally diseased root surfaces in vitro. J Clin Periodontol.
acid and fibronectin application on healing following surgical
9(5):386-392, 1982.
treatment of naturally occurring periodontal disease in beagle
10. Fine DH, Morris ML, Tabak L, Cole JD. Preliminary characteriza -
dogs. J Clin Periodontol. 12(7):578-590, 1985.
tion of material eluted from the roots of periodontally diseased
 27. Crigger M, Boyle G, Nilveus R, et al. The effect of topical citric
teeth. J Periodontal Res. 15(1):10-19, 1980.
acid application on the healing of experimental furcation defects
 11. Babay N. Comparative SEM study on the effect of root condition-
in dogs. I Periodontal Res. 13(6):538-549, 1978.
ing with EDTA or tetracycline Hcl on periodontally involved root
 28. Nilvéus R, Bogle G, Crigger M, Egelberg I, Selvig KA. The effect of
surfaces. Indian J Dent Res. 11(2):53-57, 2000.
12. Garrett JS, Crigger M, Egelberg I. Effects of citric acid on diseased
furcation defects in dogs. II. Healing after repeated surgery.
root surfaces. J Periodontal Res. 13(2):155-163, 1978.
J Periodontal Res. 15(5):544-550, 1980.
13. Gamal AY, Mailhot JM. The effects of EDTA gel conditioning
 29. Ruggeri A Jr, Prati C, Mazzoni A, Nucci C, Di Lenarda R,
exposure time on periodontitis-affected human root surfaces:
Mazzotti G, Breschi L. Effects of citric acid and EDTA condition-
Surface topography and PDL celladhesion. Int Acad Periodontol.
ing on exposed root dentin: An immunohistochemical analysis of
5(1):11-22, 2003.
Treatment of the Exposed Root Surface  253
30. Blomlof JP, Blomlof LB, Lindskog SE. Smear removal and collagen
human teeth: A comparative scanning electron microscope study.
exposure after non-surgical root planing followed by etching with
J Periodontol. 68(8):739-745, 1997.
an EDTA gel preparation. J Periodontol. 67(9):841-845, 1996.
36. Chandra RV, Jagetia GC, Bhat KM. The attachment of V79 and
31. Pant V, Dixit J, Agrawal AK, Seth PK, Pant AB. Behavior of human
root surfaces following treatment with EDTA, citric acid, or
surfaces: An in vitro study. J Periodontal Res. 39(6):373-379, 2004.
tetracycline HCL: An SEM in vitro study. J Contemp Dent Pract.
32. Balos K, Bal B, Eren K. The effects of various agents on root
7(1):44-59, 2006.
surfaces (a scanning electron microscopy study). Newsl Int Acad
37. Ishi EP, Dantas AA, Batista LH, Onofre MA, Sampaio JE. Smear
Periodontol. 1(2):13-16, 1991.
layer removal and collagen fiber exposure using tetracycline
33. Lafferty TA, Gher ME, Gray JL. Comparative SEM study on the
hydrochloride
conditioning. J Contemp Dent Pract. 9(5):
effect of acid etching with tetracycline HCl or citric acid on
25-33,2008.
instrumented periodontally-involved human root surfaces.
 38. Misra V, Mehrotra KK, Dixit J, Maitra SC. Effect ofa carbon diox-
J Periodontol. 64(8):689-693, 1993.
ide laser on periodontally involved root surfaces. J Periodontol.
34. Shetty B, Dinesh A, Seshan H. Comparative effects of tetracyclines
70(9):1046-1052, 1999.
and citric acid on dentin root surface of periodontally involved
 39. Pant V, Dixit J, Agrawal AK, Seth PK, Pant AB. Behavior of human
human teeth: A scanning electron microscope study. J Indian Soc
p  is  u sin  ied
Periodontol. 12(1):8-15, 2008.
root surfaces: An in vitro study. J Periodontal Res. 39(6):
 35. Madison JG 3rd, Hokett SD. The effects of different tetracyclines
373-379, 2004.
 on the dentin root surface of instrumented, periodontally involved
18
Osseous surgery and guided
tissue regeneration
Brook A. Niemiec and Robert Furman
Introduction
lingual/palatal and interdental will be (Figure 18.1a).
Conversely, the mesial teeth (canines and incisors) will
Osseous surgeries are the procedures by which the alve-
have more defined scalloping (Figure 18.1 b).
olar bone is managed following periodontal flap
Ideal osseous form is as described above, where the
creation. In other words, these are procedures that
bone is of a similar height across the arcade and the
remove, reshape, or repair defects in the alveolar bone
interdental bone is consistently higher than the facial/
caused by periodontal disease. Gingival tissues respond
lingual surfaces with gentle transitions between the two
best to bone with proper architecture, and thus recre-
(Figure 18.1 c).
ating this form allows for optimized pocket
Positive osseous form is similar to the ideal form, where
management.' Furthermore, irregular bone architecture
the interdental bone is coronal to the radicular bone. In
may result in periodontal pocket recurrence.? Osseous
this type, however, the overall height may not be equal
surgery can be broken down into two basic types,
and the transitions not ideally smooth (Figure 18.1 d).
regenerative and resective. Resective (subtractive) sur-
Negative osseous form is where the interdental bone is
gery is the selective removal of alveolar bone to recreate
apical when compared to the facial or palatal-lingual
normal architecture.' Regenerative (additive) osseous
bone (Figure 18.1e).
Flat osseous form is where the height is similar across
 reate the periodontal tissues and regain attachment.
the arcade (Figure 18.1 f).
This type of procedure should be used whenever pos-
sible. Resective surgery should be used sparingly, as
maintenance of alveolar bone is ideal. This chapter will
Patterns of bone loss
cover both types of osseous surgery, including the indi-
Alveolar bone loss*- is broken down into two broad cat-
cations and contraindications, rationale,
, necessary
egories, horizontal and vertical (or angular). Horizontal
equipment and materials, techniques, and follow-up. In
bone loss is diagnosed when the loss of bone is at approx-
addition, normal bone architecture and periodontal
defects will be discussed as a means of determining
imately the same level across the arcade (or a section of
it) (Figure 18.2a). Vertical (angular) bone loss is where
proper therapy.
the loss of bone in one area and the surrounding bone is
more coronal (Figure 18.2b). In reality however, these
Alveolar bone architecture
two types rarely occur separately; bone loss is typically a
Across species lines (dog, cat, and human) for healthy
combination of these two patterns in varying degrees
alveolar bone, the interproximal areas should be more
(Figure 18.2c).
coronal in relation to the facial/lingual/palatal surfaces.
Alveolar bone loss is further defined in regards to
In addition, the tooth form affects the interdental form
the number of bony walls surrounding the defect.
in that the more tapered the tooth, the more pyramidal
True horizontal bone loss is known as a zero-walled
the interdental space will be. Finally, the more distal the
 pocket, where all the bone is at the same height. A one
tooth, the more flat the transition between the buccal or
(1) walled pocket exists where there is no interdental
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
254
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration 255
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 18.1 Alveolar bone architecture. (a) Distal teeth (premolars): Flat transition between buccal or lingual/palatal and interdental
areas (blue arrows). (b) Mesial teeth (incisors): More defined scalloping (blue arrows). (c) Ideal osseous form: Bone is of a similar
height across the arcade and the interdental bone is consistently higher than the facial/lingual surfaces with gentle transitions.
(d) Positive osseous form: Interdental bone is coronal to the radicular bone, but overall height may not be equal and the transitions
not smooth. (e) Negative osseous form: The interdental bone is apical when compared to the facial or palatal-lingual bone (red
arrows). (f) Flat osseous form.
256
6 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
E
(c)
Figure 18.2 Patterns of bone loss. (a) Horizontaf bone loss: The
bone height is approximately the same across the arcade.
(b) Vertical (angular) bone loss: The alveolar bone height across
most of the arcade is the same (yellow arrows); however, the bone
at the mesial aspect of the first molar (red arrows) is more apical.
(c) The more typical presentation of both types of bone loss in
combination within the same arcade on the mandibular right of a
dog. The bone in the area of the third and fourth premolars has
receded but is at the same level (yellow arrows), which is horizontal
bone loss. In contrast, there is a significant area of vertical bone loss
on the mesial aspect of the first molar (red arrow).
bone between two teeth and one of the facial/lingual-
palatal bone plates is also lost. Two (2) walled pockets
- a ui sip ,  ee  so
dental space, where the facial/lingual-palatal walls are
present, but the interproximal area is more apical. This
is the most common infrabony pocket in veterinary?
and human' patients. These pockets can also exist
where there is interproximal bone, but nothing inter-
dental, and one of the facial/lingual-palatal walls is also
 missing. Three (3) walled pockets are seen where there
is bone interdentally and both the palatal-lingual and
facial walls are present. In addition, this type of pocket
can exist on the radicular surface of the teeth, with no
interproximal involvement. In veterinary patients,
3-walled pockets are most commonly diagnosed on the
Figure 18.3 Intraoral picture of the left maxillary canine (204) in
palatine surface of the maxillary canines (Figure 18.3).
a dog with a deep 3-walled pocket on the palatal aspect.
phic patients (i.e., Dachshunds and Basset Hounds) and
 impact the periodontium and are therefore not truly
is the precursor of oronasal fistulas.? Four (4) walled
 periodontal lesions, rather are generally the result of
pockets are defects in the bone not directly associated
trauma or foreign bodies. (See chapter 9 for a further
with a root surface. In this way, they do not directly
discussion of patterns of bone loss.)
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  257
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 18.4 Periodontal probing. The tooth to be treated must be evaluated circumferentially to determine the attachment levels around 
the entire tooth. Intraoral dental pictures of the periodontal probe in action: (a) Right maxillary canine (104) in a dog with a 9 mm
periodontal pocket on the mesio-palatal aspect. Note how healthy the gingiva appears. (b) Left maxillary fourth premolar (208) in a dog
with a 6 mm periodontal pocket and 5 mm of gingival recession on the mesio-buccal aspect. This equals 11 mm of attachment loss
(c) Right maxillary fourth premolar (108) in a cat with a 10+ mm periodontal pocket on the palatal aspect. This has resulted in an
oroantral fistula. (d) Left maxillary canine (204) in a cat with a 5 mm periodontal pocket on the buccal aspect.
Periodontal probing (Figure 18.4) is the cornerstone
Preoperative diagnostics
of periodontal diagnostics.fo1 It is utilized to determine
It is critically important to determine if a patient is a candi-
 pocket depth, the location of the apical extent of the
date for osseous surgery (and if so, what type) prior to com-
pocket in relation to the mucogingival junction (MGJ),
 mencing the periodontal flap procedure. This is important
as well as the presence and degree of furcation exposure
because the type of osseous surgery (if any) will determine
(Figure 18.5). In addition, it can give a preliminary idea
the proper flap design. This is challenging because the flap
 of the number of remaining walls.
must be created "blind” meaning that the type of osseous
Sounding is performed by utilizing the periodontal
surgery must be determined before the bone can be directly
 probe not in the sulcus/pocket, but on the surrounding
examined. The recommended types of flaps for the differ-
tissues ( Figure 18.6). By pressing on the tissues, the oper-
ent surgeries will be delineated below, and detailed instruc-
ator can get a sense as to the extent and configuration of
 tions for their performance listed in chapter 16.
the intrabony component of the pocket and furcational
There are three main diagnostic methods for evalu-
defects.21z This can be critical information for the sur-
ating the status of the alveolar bone prior to creating the
geon.
initial incision. These methods are periodontal probing,
 Dental radiographs should be made of all areas prior to
 ooen leuap pue (upunos no) suqond dealusuen
surgery. Radiographs are a critical piece ofthe diagnostic
258  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d]
Figure 18.5 Furcational involvement. (a) Class Ill furcation involvement on the mandibular right first molar (409) in a dog. Note that
there is no recession (and in fact there is enlargement) in the area. This issue would not have been found without the use of a periodontal
probe. (b) Class Il furcational involvement on the buccal aspect of the left maxillary fourth premolar (208) of a cat. (c) Class Ill furcation
involvement on the right maxillary fourth premolar (108) in a dog. Note there is no recession and minimal inflammation in the area. This
issue would not have been found without the use of a periodontal probe. (d) Class Il furcational involvement on the buccal aspect of the
right mandibular third and fourth premolars and first molar (407, 408, 409) of a dog.
puzzle but should not be relied on as the sole diagnostic
 roots, they cannot be relied upon to accurately evaluate
tool. Properly made radiographs can help determine the
 the facial or lingual/palatal bone or furcational loss bet-
ween mesial roots (e.g., MB and MP roots of the maxil-
vertical (angular) bone loss (Figure 18.7), as well as root
 lary P4) (Figures 18.9 through 18.14).
 length and morphology. Additionally, they can elucidate
 In summary, all three of these diagnostic modalities
root or other pathology that must be evaluated and/or 
 have certain strengths and weaknesses. Therefore, the
treated as part of the periodontal surgery (Figure 18.8).
 practitioner is encouraged to learn the subtleties of each
Finally, radiographs can be used to monitor the success or
one and employ all of them to perform treatment
failure of the therapy. It is important to note, however,
planning. Finally, cone beam CT may provide superior
 that dental radiographs cannot provide an accurate image
imaging of this complicated space in the future.
of the pocket, as they are a two-dimensional image of a
 three-dimensional area. In addition, they do not diag-
Treatment planning and case selection
nosis periodontitis, nor document the number of remain-
ing bony walls or the extent of bony deficits. Finally, due
Treatment planning should encompass solutions for all
to the significant radiodensity and summation of the
 active periodontal disease sites as well as correction of
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  259
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Figure 18.7 Intraoral dental radiographs of the mandibular left
in two different canine patients. The physical exam (probing) of 
(C)
these two would be very similar; however, treatment would be
different. (a) Deep periodontal pocket with significant vertical
alveolar bone loss on the distal aspect of the first molar (309)
(red arrow). However, the second molar is essentially normal
(blue arrow). This is an excellent area for GTR. (b) The amount of
bone loss is similar in the area between 309 and 310 (red arrow).
However, the second molar is significantly involved and has a
class ll perio-endo lesion (blue arrows). This tooth must be
extracted. (See chapter 6 for a discussion of perio-endo lesions.)
As previously stated, it is ideal to perform standard
periodontal therapy, including closed root planing,
Di ae  o ns rd  in ndn
main reasons for this. First, standard periodontal
therapy may be sufficient to return pockets to healthy
sulcal depth, thus negating the need for invasive surgery
Figure 18.6 (a-c) Sounding the maxillary right of a dog.
(Figure 18.15). In addition, it will decrease the inflam-
mation, resulting in healthier tissue for surgery (i.e.,
bony deficits that may negatively affect the healing
minimized hemmorhage and improved visualization).
process or future plaque control.' In addition, the
 Finally, without a client commitment to regular homec-
 procedure should allow for treatment of any other prob-
are, periodontal surgery is often doomed to failure, and
lems in the area, such as root caries.
therefore more definitive therapy (i.e., extraction) is
260
0  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.8 Intraoral dental radiographs of canine patient with significant periodontal disease as well as other conditions. Periodontal
surgery, while indicated for the periodontal aspect, would be contraindicated due to the other pathology. Extraction is the only realistic
option for these teeth. Obtaining this information priorto initiating surgery is critical. (a) Left mandibular second and third premolars (306,
307) in a dog with significant alveolar bone loss secondary to periodontal disease (yellow arrows) as well as tooth resorption (red
arrows). (b) Left mandibular second premolar (307) in a dog with alveolar bone loss secondary to periodontal disease (yellow arrow) as
(oe ani aeds uononua sahiel an ag panuaiaa se Aea-uou sh u pansai sey su (moe pai ane noo jeisaw e se a
Figure 18.9 Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary fourth
premolar (208) of a dog with significant focaf alveolar bone loss
Figure 18.10 Corresponding dental radiograph that does not
and secondary furcation level ll exposure.
reveal any bone loss in the area. This is due to the superimposi-
tion of the mesio-buccal and mesio-palatine roots. The summation
of these roots makes the furcation area exceedingly difficult to
typically recommended. However, this approach is
evaluate with dental radiographs.
controversial in veterinary patents due to the need for a
second anesthesia.
depth reduction.1415 However, this does sacrifice alveolar
The decision regarding what type of osseous surgery
 bone and is only indicated/recommended in shallow
(sd q ai q pp si (e j) d o
 pockets (2-3 mm). In contrast, deep pockets that require
Factors included in this determination are the amount/
degree of bone loss and number of walls remaining.
 able amount of remaining bone. Therefore, regenerative
 Regenerative techniques are the ideal form of therapy
techniques should be utilized wherever possible (see
 and should always be attempted if a decent prognosis is
below), or the tooth should be extracted.
present and the patient is a good candidate for future
anesthesia for reevaluation.13 Finally, patients with hypo-
 Prognosis for therapy
thyroidism or diabetes (especially if poorly controlled)
 are less than ideal candidates for periodontal surgery.
 Three- and 4-walled pockets have a good to excellent
The combination of resective surgery and an apically
repositioned flap is the most reliable method of pocket
be performed if at all feasible. Two-walled pockets
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  261
Figure 18.13 Intraoral dental picture of the left maxillary fourth
 premolar (208) of a cat with significant foca/ alveolar bone loss.
Figure 18.11 Intraoral dental picture of the right maxillary canine
(104) of a dog with significant foca/ alveolar bone loss on the pal-
atal aspect.
(a)
Figure 18.14 Corresponding dental radiograph that does not reveal
any bone loss in the area. The area of bone loss is not seen on this
view due to its small size and the zygomatic arch interference.
have a guarded to good prognosis for regenerative
(b)
 surgery, depending on presentation. “Crater” defects,
which have both outer walls of bone with the inter-
proximal bone missing, have a fairly good prognosis
for regenerative surgery, and this should be attempted
 prior to considering resective techniques. Two-walled
defects with one of the facial/lingual plates missing
have a slightly worse prognosis, and resective tech-
niques may be indicated depending on pocket depth.
Regenerative therapy can be attempted on these
2-walled teeth, as long as the client is informed of the
prognosis. One-walled pockets have a very poor prog-
nosis for regenerative surgery, and therefore resective
 osseous surgery or extraction should be considered.
Finally, zero-walled pockets do not require osseous
Fgure 18.12 Corresponding dental radiographs of (a) the root and
surgery, other than possibly mild smoothing to
(b) the cervical area that do not reveal any bone loss in the area. This
achieve a proper architecture. (See chapter 9 for a
is due to the large root that overshadows the narrow area of loss.
complete discussion of walls.)
262
2  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
XOS
aeid jeauah pauie-llm e woy ydenbopen leuap jeoenui aaleiadoaid (e) Adeaui aneaasuon ol asuodsay st'al annb
Note the significant alveolar bone loss (red arrows). The patient was treated with closed root planing and perioceutic and referred
for periodontal surgery. (b) Recheck at a referral facility 6 weeks later. Note the significant amount of bone regeneration without
advanced therapy.
Resective osseous surgery
instruments should include a good selection of carbide
and diamond burs (see chapters 22 and 24 for details).
Resective osseous surgery is best employed in areas of
1- to 2-walled pockets with mild bone loss (2-3 mm) and
Technique
sufficient root length.' Patients with severe bone loss or
 The first step in resective osseous surgery is the proper
3- to 4-walled pockets should not be treated in this
creation of an apical repositioning flap (see chapter 16).
manner. Rather, teeth with 3- and 4-walled pockets
Following the flap creation and sofft tissue removal,
 should be treated with regenerative techniques, and
numerous presentations may be encountered such as
those with severe bone loss (> 50%) should be extracted.
 ledges, craters, vertical defects, troughs, or combinations
The goal of resective surgery is to create a steady and
 of these. The clinician must be prepared to handle any of
regular bone profile so that the soff tissues can predict-
 these presentations correctly and potentially have his or
ably attach to the underlying bone in proper dimensions.
her presurgical opinion changed, regardless of the
The quality of the periodontal soft tissues that reattach
 amount of preoperative examination.
 following surgery depends on factors such as the bony
The following sequential steps are recommended for
architecture surrounding the tooth and the condition of
resective osseous surgery. It should be noted that not all
the root surface, as well as the health of the periodontal
-o aq inq 'ase aaa u iessau aie sdais asai jo
tissues. Ensuring the optimum condition of all these
 ing the order listed below, the clinician can speed the
areas will allow for the best result. This being said, resec-
 procedure and avoid excessive bone removal. The first
tive osseous surgery is an exceedingly precise technique.
two steps are totally osteoplastic, inasmuch as they do
 NOT remove supporting bone. In contrast, ostectomy
Instrumentation
procedures (steps 3 and 4) remove alveolar bone that
directly supports the tooth.
There are numerous options of instruments for this
 procedure. They can be broken down into two broad cat-
 Perform vertical grooving (Figure 18.16).
egories, rotary and hand. Some clinicians use only hand
This is done to reduce the interproximal alveolar bone
instruments, whereas some use a combination of both.
while providing relative prominence to the radicular
Rotary instruments are suited for osteoplastic proce-
areas. It is performed as the first step because it defines
dures. However, hand instruments are preferred for the
the general thickness of the bone as well as creates the
delicate ostectomies. It is recommended that the surgeon
shape of the alveolar housing. This step should be
have a good selection of both hand and rotary instru-
 performed only where there is a very thick area of bone
mentation. Regardless of the instrument chosen, extreme
(ie., areas with thin labial or buccal plates of bone
care is required to avoid root damage or excessive bone
   s   a p os
removal, as these are irreversible. Hand instruments
include rongeurs, interproximal files, and chisels. Rotary
carbide or diamond burs
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  263
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.16 (a) Intraoperative dental picture of a patient with mild alveolar bone loss. A periodontal flap has been created for
visualization. Note the jagged areas of bone (blue arrows), which will hinder healing and not allow for optimum dental health.
(b) Vertical grooving
 performed with hand instruments such as files,
curettes, and chisels.
 Flatten the interproximal bone.
This is the first step in which supporting bone is
tions where there is an incongruity of the interproxi-
mal bone on a facio-linguo aspect. This is most
 common in area of 1-walled interproximal pockets
(hemiseptal). In this situation, it is performed to
avoid increased pocket depths on the side where the
bone is most apical.
In addition, it is possible for this step to be used
where there is a 1-walled pocket over a 3-walled
 pocket, in order to improve bony architecture. It is
critical to note that this should only be performed in
Figure 18.17 Radicular blending.
 shallow defects, as significant discrepancies would
entail removal of a significant amount of bone, thus
excessively decreasing bony support. In these situa-
2.
 Radicular blending (Figure 18.17).
tions, less than ideal bony architecture is an accept-
This step is designed to create a gradual progression of
able alternative.
the bony architecture from over the roots to the inter-
4.  Gradualize the marginal bone.
dental areas. The goal is a smooth, gradual surface for
This step is also an ostectomy procedure, and there-
superior flap adaptation. Again, this is only indicated
fore should be performed precisely to ensure the
for very thick labial plates of bone.
minimal amount of bone sacrifice. This small
The two steps listed above make up the vast majority
amount of bone reduction is necessary to provide a
of the osseous resective surgery procedure. In fact,
healthy,  smooth  surface for  gingival  attachment.
thick osseous ledges, bony exostoses (Figure 18.18),
 Even small bony discrepancies on the gingival line
class I and II furcations, and shallow craters can all
angles (widow's peaks) will cause the gingival tissue
be treated with these steps alone. The steps listed
to remain at higher levels than the bone can support
below are true ostectomy procedures and thus
in the interdental area. This results in incomplete
remove tooth-supporting bone. In other words, the
 pocket reduction. The removal of these small bony
instruments will come very close to the underlying
 protuberances should be performed along with
roots. Damage to the root is a significant issue, and
 gradualization and blending of the radicular bone
therefore it is recommended that these steps be
surface (Figure 18.19).
264  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 18.18 Treatment of a bony exostosis. (a) When the
periodontal flap was raised, a bony exostosis was revealed near
the gingival margin and furcational area of the right maxillary
third premolar (blue arrow). This protuberance may interfere with
buaoway (g) jouon anbejd anny pue bueay 'uoisodde dey
the exostosis with a water-cooled coarse diamond bur on a
high-speed air-driven hand-piece. (c) Postoperative picture show-
ing the smoothed area of bone. This will improve the patient's
periodontal health.
Specific situations for osseous remodelling
Correction of 1-walled interproximal defects (hemisep-
tal) requires that all bone be reduced to the level of the
most apical defect. If this is next to an edentulous area or
a wide diastema, the bone in that area should be gradu-
ally lowered to the height of the defect.
Bony exostoses or ledges of bone (see Figure 18.18) are
 am ans oass  e oi od paa
is ideal to perform a degree of vertical grooving at the
same time. In the absence of these ledges, the resection
begins with the reduction of the interdental walls and the
1-walled component of angular defects, as well as moats
 and grooving into areas of early involvement.14
If the defect is a 2-walled crater and resection is elected
over regenerative techniques, the surgical result may
sacrifice the lingual, buccal, or both walls. The amount of
bone removed should be the minimum to allow for:
Hgure 18.19 Postoperative picture of the patient in
Figures 18.16 and 18.17 after flattening the interproximal bone
Blending of the contours of the adjacent teeth.
and gradualizing the marginal bone. Note the fine margins and
2.
Creating a satisfactory osseous form.
smooth transitions, which will optimize healing and long-term
While preventing iatrogenic involvement of the
3
periodontal health.
furcations.
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  265
Ramping the bone to the palatal/lingual aspect via
ligament cells (and possibly pluripotenet stem cells) have
selective reduction to avoid the furcations has been rec-
the ability to regenerate the periodontal aftachment
ommended by several authors.17.18
apparatus.27zs Gingival soft tisues recolonize faster than
 Following the osseous surgery, the flap is replaced and
these periodontal structures, resulting in an attachment
sutured. Depending on the postoperative bone height, this
consisting oflong junctional epithelium. While this does
can be either done at the original level or apically replaced.
temporarily resolve the infection, it is generally not a
lasting solution." Therefore it is necessary to retard the
Regenerative periodontal surgery
downward growth of the gingival tissues and to allow the
slower periodontaligament/alveolar bone to regrow.3031
Creating new attachment via regeneration of the
This procedure is called “guided tissue regeneration"
periodontal tissues is the ideal outcome of periodontal
because we are selecting the tissue that repopulates the
therapy, as it results in the reduction of the pocket as well
site." Guided tissue regeneration (GTR) has been shown
as the recreation of normal periodontal attachment (alve-
olar bone, gingival connective tissue, cellular and acel-
to achieve greater attachment gains for infrabony pockets
lular cementum, and a functionally oriented PDL)19-21
when compared to straight open flap debridement.32-35
However, the only strong evidence of effectiveness is
Thus, the infection is treated and the pocket reduced
limited to infrabony and class II furcational defects.29.35
without sacrificing attachment (as in resective techniques
above). However, this is severely hampered by two critical
Furthermore, most histopathologic studies show that
current regenerative materials and methods result in
factors.? First, periodontal regeneration requires
the
repair of the defect as opposed to true regeneration of the
formation of at least three unique tissues. Second, the
 periodontal apparatus.35 This results in reattachment via
periodontium possesses a very limited endogenous
ankylosis rather than periodontal ligament. Whether
regenerative ability. Consequently, true regenerative suc-
this is clinically important in our patients is debateable,
cess is not consistent nor reliable with current techniques
but the more we can bring the tissues to their original
and materials.20.21.23
form the better (see below).
Healing may or may not occur with any of the tech-
GTR is performed by placing a barrier over the bony
niques listed in this chapter. In fact, it is known that use
defect to allow for the alveolar bone and periodontal
of bone replacements or synthetic fillers will never
ligament to repopulate the defect rather than gingival tis-
achieve true periodontal regeneration." Rather, it
sues.11.19 While there have been significant advances and
appears that the bone regrowth and attachment gain
research in the area of bone augmentation/grafting mate-
occurs via repair as opposed to true regeneration.?4 There
rials, in most cases, the barrier is the key therapeutic
  s    s
      
ment in this area that is continually improving results.
pockets, where grafting does not necessarily increase
 This has resulted in a much better prognosis, depending
 attachment gains.36.37 However, in 2-walled defects and
on the presentation (see below).
furcational defects, the addition of a bone augmentation
If healing does occur, it may take the form of long
substance was shown to result in superior gains.3 Finally,
junctional epithelium (which can occur even in the
it appears that regeneration is more likely to occur with
 presence of new bone) or ankylosis, which results in root
acute loss such as foreign bodies, gingival trauma, or
resorption. If the procedure proves ineffective, it could
abscesses.3.39
lead to recurrence of the pocket or gingival recession.
A combination of any or all of the above could occur;
Barrier membranes
therefore clinical and radiographic follow-up is man-
first generation membranes (non-resorbable)
dated in all cases of periodontal reconstruction.
Periodontal regeneration is exceedingly difficult in
The initial studies on GTR were performed with
the presence of periodontal pathogens.25.26 Therefore,
cellulose or Teflon membranes that showed regenera-
homecare is a critical aspect of periodontal surgery.
tion of not only alveolar bone but also cementum and
periodontal ligament.4-45 Currently, the product of
Homecare improves the prognosis for regeneration and
is required for maintaining the regenerated bone. If there
choice for non-resorbable membranes is expanded
is no commitment to homecare, periodontal surgery is of
polytetrafluoroethylene (E-PTFE).A This product has
dubious value, and therefore clients should be informed
also been shown to produce gains in attachment levels,
of this prior to pursuing therapy.
but bone augmentation has not been consistently
achieved.46.47
Periodontal regeneration
Non-resorbable membranes have to be removed fol-
 Periodontal regenerative surgery is designed to recon-
lowing initial healing (3-6 weeks), which presents even
struct the periodontal attachment (periodontal ligament,
 more of a problem in veterinary patients, as a second anes-
cementum, and alveolar bone). Only periodontal 
thesia is almost invariably required. Therefore resorbable
266  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
membranes were developed. No statistically significant
difference with respect to attachment gain has been dem-
onstrated between the two types of membranes,22 and
thus the resorbable membranes are recommended.2z3
Second generation membranes (resorbable)
There are numerous options for bioresorbable mem-
branes currently available. Studies on the early products
that are no longer commercially available concluded that
this type of membrane can be very effective in periodontal
regeneration.224.225
The majority of bioresorbable membranes are prepack-
aged sheets that are cut to size for the defect. The
combination of polyglycol acid, polylactic acid, and tri-
Figure 18.20 Prehardened and shaped Doxirobe membrane
 methylene carbonate remains substantially intact for
ready for placement.
16-24weeks. A bovine Achilles tendon collagenF that
resorbs in 4-18weeks has also been proven effective.
A bilayer porcine derived collagen,P which has been shown
(above) and comes combined with doxycycline (see
to be effective in regeneration of infrabony defects, is the
an s iy paade jou sil (otsi an) (i ide
 and some argue that it does not last long enough to pro-
easiest to use and generally the product of choice_9226.27
 Recently we have started looking at these membranes
 not only as a barrier to the downgrowth of gingival tis-
nary dentists (including this author) have utilized the
sues but also as a delivery medium for substances that
product for years with consistent clinical results (i.e.,
 may improve attachment gains.2zs Similar to perioceu-
new bone formation and pocket depth reduction).
tics29 (see chapter 12), impregnating antibiotics (e.g, tet-
Bone grafting materials
racyclines) and anti-inflammatories (e.g-, flurbiprofen)
into the membrane appears to further enhance the effects
There has been significant interest in utilizing bone sub-
of GTR.230.231 Additionally, adding a bone promotive
stitute products to increase the level of attachment gains
material (e.g., hydroxyapatite) may improve attachment
with GTR. The ideal goal ofa bone grafting material for
 gain. Demineralized laminar bone sheetse have been
 periodontal disease is to regenerate the periodontium by
tested and shown to be safe, resorbable, and as effective
reformation of the PDL and regrowth of lost bone in an
as standard first generation barriers at least in some
effort to maintain tooth support. An ideal graft material
e pnpod paae e mou si a  ze'ss
is also expected to increase healing in fracture and
combines the positive effects of the hydroxyapatite
extraction sites. Numerous studies have been performed
against the bone, a middle layer of polylactic acid (PLA),
with the various products listed below that have reported
with a surface coating of metronidazole, which may
 significant improvement in clinical parameters, including
combine the best of both of the above.4
crestal bone height, clinical attachment level, and
The expense and challenge of customizing preformed
 decreased probing depth over open flap debridement.55-65
 membranes has resulted in the creation of flowable, cus-
 In addition, bone replacement grafts appeared to have a
tomizable membranes. A polylactic acid gelF that is com-
 positive effect on the treatment of class II and Ill furca-
mercially available and approved as a barrier membrane has
 tion exposure.667 This gain is even more significant
shown excellent results in most studies.4-52 Furthermore,
when combined with a barrier membrane.68.69
antibiotics and anti-inflammatories (as above) can be mixed
 s   rs ss 
into the product to take advantage of their additive prop-
ally achieve better improvements than synthetic, non-
erties. However, it should be noted that this product was
found to be inferior to collagen membranes in some
research.2z Moreover, it has created foreign body reactions
 Furthermore, to date, in long-term studies GTR has been
(occasionally significant) and may not be resorbed for more
 enhanced significantly by the combination of bone graft
than 1year53.s4 Therefore, the positive atributes of this
 and barrier membranes.7
 product must be viewed in light of the above research.
 In order to determine which bone augmentation
Finally, the resorbable base in the veterinary-labelled
 substance to choose, one must first understand how new
perioceutic is very similar to the polylactic acid gel
 bone formation is achieved. There are three main categories
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  267
of augmentation effects: osteogenesis, osteoinduction,
species as the recipient. Samples are harvested from
and osteoconduction.192z2 Osteogenesis refers to viable
cadavers and then further processed in order to be stored
cells within the graft that lead to the synthesis of new
and available when required.
bone. Osteoinduction is the process by which sur-
The main advantages of allografts are that they are
rounding stromal or progenitor cells are converted
 readily available and no additional patient morbidity is
into osteoblasts due to the release of growth factors
involved with their use. The disadvantage is that allo-
and other mediators to produce native bone. This is a
grafts are not osteogenic because they do not contain
process of accelerated bone production (compared to
living cells; however, being comprised of natural bone
normal bone remodelling) and a shortened healing
with collagens and proteins, allografts inherently contain
period.22 Osteoconduction is the formation of a scaf-
sd sd
fold that allows bone to grow into and around the
While all allografts are osteoconductive, some allo-
affected site.7273 The importance of osteoinduction
grafts also have osteoinductive properties depending on
cannot be overstated, as it is a major contributor to the
their method of preparation.9723.75.6 It is traditionally
production of new bone. Many of the products listed
held that mineralized allografts are osteoconductive
blow (especially xenografts and mineralized allografts)
only, and that demineralized allografts are both osteoin-
are only osteoconductive and therefore do not recreate
ductive and osteoconductive .19,7.71,73.75
new bone.
Allografts are prepared by processing and freezing or
There are three main types of bone-based grafting
freeze-drying fresh bone obtained from cadaver donors.
 material (autografts, allografts, and xenografts) as well as
The freezing processleads to the loss of the majority of
non-animal-based bone substitutes. The following is an
cells due to lysis or removal, which results in the loss of
overview of the various options currently available.
the graff's osteogenic properties and removes immuno-
 genic concerns.
Autografts
 Allografts are most commonly prepared by decalci-
fication (demineralization). This preserves the col-
Autografts are bone material taken from the same
lagen and the acid-stable bone morphologic proteins
individual. These grafts are generally harvested from
(growth factors),7 with collagen, proteins, and growth
elsewhere in the patient's mouth such as healing extrac-
factors extracted. This is known as demineralized
 tion sites, bone removed from osteoplasty or ostectomy,
freeze-dried bone allograft (DFDBA).7s.7 Both miner-
or edentulous areas such as the diastema distal to the
alized and demineralized allograft products are effec-
canines."9 The bone is obtained with a large round cutting
tive due to their high osteoconductive effects, and
bur that makes a coarse powder. It is important to ensure
freeze-dried products also have the advantage of a long
that the bone is not excessively heated during the burr-
shelf life.72.75.77
 ing, as high temperatures can inactivate osteoinductive
Bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) are exposed
proteins. Also, it is important not to use any type of
within the underlying collagen during the demineral-
suction during this procedure. The bone powder is col-
ization process, thus providing immediate access to the
lected and typically mixed with either the patient's blood
BMPs when they are implanted.s This is an advantage
or saline (in a dappen dish) and then placed into the
over mineralized grafts (including autografts that are
bony defect where desired.19
mineralized) because these require resorption of min-
Autografts have the best clinical outcome and are the
erals to expose the BMPs. When implanted in to a
gold standard that all other bone grafting materials are
vascular site, the BMPs recruit osteoblasts and this pro-
compared to.74 This is because autografts have all three
vides the beneficial effects for regeneration (see
properties involved in new bone formation: osteogenesis,
below).7 Demineralized bone allografts have been
osteoconduction, and osteoinduction. The limitations of
 hd o is al  n 
autografts are twofold. First, they are only available in
consistently create new attachment, which has been
small quantities and are therefore not adequate for
pd s rernaa rps aqu
repairing large deficits, and second, the harvesting of
(DFDBA) currently appears to be the best choice for
these grafts leads to morbidity in the patient.4
guided tissue regeneration.35 Freeze-dried bone allografts
are currently commercially available specifically for
Allografts
veterinary use" (Figure 18.21).
Allografts are currently the most commonly used bone
One disadvantage of these products is the inability
 graft material. In humans, bone allografts have a nearly
to see them radiographically in the postoperative
40-year history of successful use in periodontal therapy.7l
setting (due to the lack of mineralization), and there-
This is bone material obtained from donors of the same
fore confirmation of adequate filling of the defect is
 268   Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Figure 18.21 Osseoallograft bone particulate.
Figure 18.22 Consil, ceramic bone augmentation
not possible. For this reason, some authors mix this
ically, and it was found that these products support repair
with a more radiodense product; however, this may
 as opposed to true regeneration.35
have the risk of reducing the concentration of BMPs
However, other reports show these products in a more
in the site.
 positive light, with results of calcium phosphate ceramic
(CER) being comparable to allografts.35.86-39 This was
Xenografts
active agents such as growth factors.9-92 Moreover, one
Xenografts are a bone grafting material commonly used
study has shown that combining factor-based and ceramic-
 in humans. Xenografts are bone or bone components
based materials has similar results to allograft materials.93
obtained from a different species than the patient. Bovine
The addition of Colloss E (an equine bone protein extract)
is the species most commonly used for these grafts in
to beta-tricalcium phosphate (B-TCP) resulted in no
human dentistry. The advantages of xenografts are that
fibrous tissue formation, which provided a much stronger
-dau a e aae n si auq auo
repair compared to the ceramic-only group.* Furthermore,
sive. Just like allografts, xenografts can be mineralized or
demineralized and thus are osteoconductive, and because
this same study revealed results comparable to allograft.
Finally, calcium sulphate has shown positive results.94.95
so many homologies in bone morphologic proteins exist
Synthetic biomaterials have also shown promise for
between species, they may also have some osteoinductive
GTR purposes.% One interesting product in this class is
activity.19sz In some cases, they have been shown to
 B-TCP, which has been shown to have excellent ability
support periodontal regeneration.83.34
to regenerate bone and aid in the proliferation of dental
follicle progenitor cells.? Furthermore, several implant
Non-animal products
studies have shown this product to be comparable to
Ceramic-based materials have been used for many years
autogenous bone grafts.9.99
as a bone grafting substitute (Figure 18.22). Calcium
phosphate, calcium sulfate, and bioactive glass are sev-
Response to treatment
eral options included in this category. All of these mate-
rials are osteoconductive only. The main advantages of
Currently, our main objective in regards to periodontal
ceramic-based bone graffting materials are that they are
surgery is the regeneration of alveolar bone. This has
plentiful, inexpensive, and do not cause additional mor-
 focused on a combination of plaque control and barrier
bidity to the patient. Ceramic-based materials work by
  n (n aq t) s
forming a scaffold that the patient's own cells move into.
bone. While this has shown promise in the repair of alve-
Histologically, there is a greater ratio offibrous connective
olar bone, and on occasion other periodontal structures
tissue to bone regrowth compared to allograft when
(periodontal ligament and cementum), it is not a reliable
ceramic-based are used alone, making for a weaker
 method of regeneration of these tissues to their predis-
repair.70.7 In addition, one study reported inferior results
ease condition."4 However, as mentioned above, it
with bioactive glass than OFD alone.*5 This was even
 appears that DFDBA currently offers the best option for
 more profound when the results were evaluated histolog-
 regrowing the attachment apparatus. Future therapies
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  269
will use hormones, enzymes, and genes to repair the
to be combined with other materials in order to obtain
 periodontal defects to normal architecture.100
the best results and are not currently available in the
The recent development of the field of tissue engi-
veterinary field. Other factor-based materials that are
neering has brought new options for the future of
new and currently undergoing studies include growth
periodontal therapy. Tissue engineering is defined as a
and differentiation factor (GDF) and LIM mineraliza-
multidisciplinary field involving biology, medicine, and
tion protein (LMP).76
engineering that works to restore, maintain, or enhance
 Enamel matrix derivative (EMD) is a purified acidic
tissue and organ function.'o1 while exciting on a whole
extract from porcine enamel matrix.' It contains enamel
body level, this is an intense area of research that is show-
matrix proteins that play a key role in the development of
ing some good results in the treatment of periodontitis.
tooth-supporting tissues. 2 It has been extensively studied
Periodontal tissue regeneration depends on several
basic components: blood supply, scaffolding, and the
 It is claimed that it provides periodontal regeneration by
appropriate cells and signals.s5 There are numerous cells
a biological approach; that is, creating a matrix on the
that make up the periodontal system as well as undiffer-
root surfaces that promotes cementum, PDL, and alve-
entiated ones that have the potential of generating and
olar bone regeneration, thus mimicking the events
maintaining
 themineralized
and
unmineralized
periodontal tissues.oz Stimulatory as well as selective
have a capacity for stimulating periodontal regeneration
methods have been tested in an attempt to regrow lost
via positive effects on root surfaces; that is, inhibition of
periodontal tissues.3.103
gingival epithelium downgrowth and also stimulation
of connective tissue proliferation and attachment to
Graft additives
There is significant research into novel additives for
Furthermore, EMD appears to be strongly angiogenic
 guided tissue regeneration. A myriad of modalities have
and possesses the ability to modulate the growth of
been shown to improve performance of standard GTR
periodontal
 pathogens. 120.121
An acellular
type
of
 cementum regeneration and new alveolar bone formation
- nss, p q aan si p asd
by an accelerated osteoconductive mechanism are also
neering"105
 achieved with application of enamel matrix proteins.1z
 Numerous growth factors and other bioactive mate-
These positive attributes appear to be due to the fact that
rials have been studied for their additive properties to
EMD contains multiple growth factors that may mimic
regenerative materials. These growth factors are nor-
 the conditions during healing.21
mally produced by healthy cells. However, in areas that
In most clinical studies, the addition of EMD has
are not designed to regenerate (i.e., the periodontium),
improved clinical results that can be maintained over a
exogenous growth factors may be beneficial.o6.107
longer period.123-126 In fact, it is the only commercially
Therefore, one of the primary strategies of regenerative
available product that has the ability to create true regen-
periodontal tissue engineering is the addition of these
factors as well as other materials to provide a superior
enous bone, there appeared to be a mild increase in bone
regeneration.12 However, other studies found that its
 n d e ss   s 
 addition did not improve GTR success.3129 Additionally,
periodontal regeneration in the near future.211o This
at least one study revealed that EMD alone was effective
process of modifying an injured tissue to self-regenerate
 at bone regeneration'3 and decreasing clinical attach-
is called endogenous regenerative technology (ERT).22
ment loss at a level equal to GTR131132 However, most
Various products are discussed below in more detail.
studies show that EMD alone is not as effective as GTR,
Note, however, that this is a quickly expanding area of
especially in bone formation.3.19.131
dentistry and new information is consistently available.
Most of these studies are on the human side, and
The reader is encouraged to keep up with the literature.
extrapolating to veterinary patients may not hold true.
Bone morphogenic proteins show the greatest poten-
Regardless, the use of EMDs may be important now and
tial for graft additives. The huge advantage to BMPs is
will almost certainly be in the future. However, prior to
that they are osteoinductive and have an excellent fusion
widespread clinical use, there are numerous challenges
rate without the use of autogenous bone.945 They appear
associated with the use of EMDs, including short half-life,
to have a significantly positive effect in bone regenera-
need for high concentrations, and the fact that they are
tion.97.o.1 Furthermore, it appears that they combine
unstable.2z133 Therefore, an effective delivery medium
       e 
 must be developed prior to commercial release. Currently
above).112 The disadvantages of BMPs are that they have
used products for delivery include PGA, PLA, PLGA,
270  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
B-TCP, as well as natural polymers such as dextran, gel-
be incorporated into the material either during or after
atin, and collagen.134-13 
fabrication.1so,1s pLGA (polylactic-co-glycolic acid) scaf-
Factors that have been studied and show promise
folds have been widely studied as a means of delivering
include recombinant human growth and differentiation
a    s r
Additionally, purified natural biomaterials such as col-
 recombinant human bone morphogenetic proteins 2, 7, and
lagen, gelatin,85 fibrin, dextrans,13 and alginate are
12 ;141-147 and fibroblast growth factors
s 148-151 IGF-1,52,153
 attractive due to their compatibility and biodegrad-
TGF-1,54.155 and FGF-2.is6 One product that has been
ability.? Current belief holds that there is no ideal
extensively studied is platelet-derived growth  factor
 delivery medium, and a composite of several materials
(PDGF), which was shown in several studies to improve
    sas as   a
would be environmentally sensitive.21.18
An additional means to achieve the continued presence
 in numerous clinical applications, including furcational
 of high levels of growth factors in the defect is gene
defects.165 The most effctive of these products appears
therapy.1621s9 A study with BMP-7 gene transfer showed a
to be PDGF-BB, BMP 2 and 7, and IGF-1.21
good ability
y  to regenerate periodontal tissues.190.191
In addition, platelet rich plasma (PRP) has shown
Moreover, viral transfer of PDGF revealed significant
positive effects for tissue regeneration in some
 improvement in periodontal wound healing models.163
studies.16-16s The allure of this product is that it contains
Stem cells may provide a future means to improve
multiple growth factors that may mimic the natural
 periodontal regeneration.1293 Studies performed in rats
and dogs with bone marrow stem and stromal cells have
tant factor in its effectiveness, as no single factor can
 shown a positive effect in new bone formation in experi-
mimic the natural healing process133 In addition,it is
easily obtained by simply centrifuging the patient's own
implant model showed that both bone marrow and
blood zu170 It has been used in oral surgery to improve
  o ns  r
attachment gain.% While more research is clearly
study reported that PRP when combined with bovine
 necessary before using this methodology in a patient,
porous bone mineral (BPBM) gave the same level of
this appears to be on the horizon.
aftachment gain whether or not a barrier was used
 Finally, it appears that we may actually be able to grow
(GTR).173 However, both of the above studies were in
periodontal tissues in other animals and even other
combination with BPBM, and an additional study found
 species that can then be transplanted to periodontal
that the addition of PRP to BPBM and GTR did not have
 patients.197.19 A recent study regrew human oral mucosa
 an additive effect.174 Thus, more research is needed prior 
equivalent in rats.1" Moreover, cloned cemetoblasts have
to recommending this product on a widespread basis.
been created, and when transplanted into PLGA carriers
Angiogenisis (production of new blood vessels) is also
led toa significantlevel ofperiodontal regeneration.20.20
an important part of periodontal tissue repair, since the
 Finally, BMP-7 gene transduced skin fibroblasts were
periodontium is a highly vascularized tissue.*5 The blood
shown to promote tissue engineering of periodontal
supply is critical to periodontal regeneration, as it trans-
structures.190
ports cells, nutrients, and defensins to the site, as well as
 Several studies have looked at systemic medications as
 provides nutrition to the newly engineered cell.45.175
 a way to improve attachment gains with GTR. To date,
Basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2) has been shown
 none have been shown to increase attachment gains, but 
a seadde i mo eae osoe a ol
the studies are minimal at this point. Neither systemic
 antibiotic nor anti-inflammatory therapy have yet been
High concentrations of these factors are typically
shown to improve atachment gains.202.203
required for periodontal regeneration.17 It appears that
 one important factor in the effectiveness of all these
Techniques for GTR
products is related to their release rates as well as the
ability to keep them in contact with the area for a long
There are several alternatives for the technique of
GTR;z1119.24 this section will discuss several of them. The
three main differences are
cial concern because of their short half-lives.$5 Therefore,
the development of an effective delivery vehicle is also an
 Infrabony pocket vs. furcational defect.
important factor in their use. The most promising vehicle
2
Whether a bone augmentation product/graft is to
for the sustained release of the products in the repairing
be used.
defect is the scaffolding.* The products listed above can
3.
Preformed versus custom (liquid) barrier membrane.
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  271
After a suitable pocket has been diagnosed (see above) and
Step 4: (Optional) Place bone augmentation. The chosen
the treatment discussed, pockets are ready to be treated. The
 product should be mixed according to package directions
clinician should decide prior to making the first incision what
and placed in the defect. The defect should be completely
type of surgery will be performed. Below is a step-by-step
to slightly overfilled (Figures 18.25, 18.32, 18.37).
description of the three most common GTR procedures: pal-
Step 5: Place the barrier. For prefabricated membranes,
atal aspect of the maxillary canine (Figures 18.23-18.29),
the material should be cut to fit the defect and sutured
distal aspect of the mandibular first molar (Figures 18.30-
in place (Figures 18.26, 18.33). Custom flowable prod-
18.34), and class I1 furcational defect of a maxillary fourth
ucts can be created on a glass slab, cut to size, and
premolar (Figures 18.35-18.39).
sutured into place (Figures 18.27, 18.38). However,
most veterinary dentists prefer to make them in the
Step 1: Provide regional anaesthesia (see chapter 21).
defect (Figure 18.28). Note that the barrier should be
a  e d d e a  d
 overcovered by the gingiva by at least 2 mm.2z3
planned surgery (Figures 18.23, 18.30, 18.35) (see 
 Step 6: Close the flap (see chapter 16 for a complete
chapter 16).
discussion on suture and suture patterns)
Step 3: Clean and treat the exposed root surface (see
(Figures 18.29, 18.34, 18.39).
chapter 17) (Figures 18.24, 18.31, 18.36).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 18.23 Creating a conservative (envelope) periocdontal flap for pocket access (see chapter 16). Performing horizontal releasing
incision (a) distal and (b) mesial to the target tooth. (c) Carefully elevating a full thickness palatine flap with a periosteal elevator. (d) Flap
raised and held with a stay suture. (This is the least traumatic way to handle periodontal flaps during surgery.) Note there is adequate
visualization for cleaning and grafting with a small surgical site. This minimizes surgical time and trauma as well as decreasing post-
operative pain and risk of dehiscence.
272
2Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
C
[d]
Figure 18.24 Cleaning and debriding the pocket (see chapter 17). (a) With a fine, subgingival periodontal tip on an ultrasonic scaler.
(b) With a curette. (c) Application of citric acid biomodification. (d) Thorough rinsing of the citric acid.
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.25 Placement of the bone augmentation. (a) Fully filled. (b) Slightly overfilled.
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  273
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 18.26 Preparation and placement of a solid barrier mem-
brane. (a) Softening of the ossiflex membrane. (b) Temporary
placement and measuring the membrane. (c) Cutting and shaping 
the membrane to properly cover the defect. (d-e) Placement of the
shaped membrane.
274  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 18.27 Preparation of a custom (viscous) barrier membrane prior to placement. (a) Product is placed in a thin layer on a glass slab
and thoroughly wetted to harden. (b) Product is cut to the approximate size necessary for placement. It is important to overestimate the
size needed to allow for further trimming. (c) Trial fitting, shaping, and placement. (d) Membrane sutured in place.
Dental radiology is another tool to determine the
Determination of new attachment
alveolar bone height. However, this also requires pre-
As stated above, periodontal reconstruction has sev-
cise placement of the tube head and film/sensor to
eral possible outcomes. If regeneration fails, simple
 achieve accurate comparison films.2o Even with stan-
periodontal probing will elucidate it. However, more  dardized methods,21 radiographs are not as accurate
than simple probing is necessary for the determina-
 as clinical measurements.2zi In fact, radiographs
tion of the type of new attachment'9 as the level of
have been shown to consistently underestimate the
inflammation will significantly affect the probing
level of alveolar bone.213 This is likely due to the fact
depth.o5 These diagnostic modalities include bone
that there is a minimum level of mineralization that
pue Xua-an [eiains onoien (supunos) suqod
 must be present to be radiographically evident. The
histopathology.206
      
 Bone probing under general anesthesia is a very effec-
 periodontal assessment is via subtraction methods,
tive way to determine the level of bone regrowth. In fact,
 but this is neither commonly available nor easy to
it has been shown to be as accurate as surgical re-entry
perform.214.215
 The use of radiographs is especially challenging in
however, the pre-and postmeasurements must be done at
 veterinary patients, as the bisecting angle technique is
 the same point and with the probe held at the same angle.
 required for the vast majority of images.216217 Not only
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  275
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 18.28 Placement of a custom (viscous) barrier membrane
in place and then hardening. (a) Extruding a thin layer of the mem-
brane onto the graft/defect site to fully cover the area. (b)
Thoroughly hardening the product with a gentfe stream of water.
(c) Hardened product in place. Due to the interdigitation with the
graft as well as local soft and hard tissues, sutures are rarely
necessary.
is exact duplication of bisecting angles more challeng-
ing (as compared to the parallel technique), the bisect-
ing angle technique will overestimate bone loss.218
Histopathology is the only way to determine exactly
what tissues have repopulated the area, but it is not useful
for clinical success. It is, however, the gold standard
for research trials.
Based on the above, the best method for evaluation
of alveolar bone loss as well as response to treatment
is a combination of transgingival (bone) probing
(sounding) and radiography, keeping in mind the fact
that radiographs will always underestimate the level of
alveolar bone.
Periodontal splinting
Periodontal splinting7219.22 is designed to provide tem-
Figure 18.29 Closure of the flap. Note that this conservative flap
 porary stability of significantly diseased and mobile
can be closed with two simple interrupted sutures.
teeth during the healing period. This is because
276  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.30 Creating an envelope flap for pocket access (see chapter 16). (a) Performing horizontal releasing incision. (b) Carefully
elevating a full thickness mucogingival flap with a periosteal elevator. Note the significant granulation tissue in the pocket.
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.31 Cleaning the defect (see chapter 17). (a) Granulation tissue has been removed with a curette. This allows excellent 
visualization of the affected area for proper cdeaning and treatment. (b) Thorough root planing of the root with a curette. (Ultrasonic
Scaling [Inot pictured] previously performed.) **Note: Following scaling. the roots should be treated with citric acid etch (biomodification)
(not pictured). See Figure 18.24
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  277
Figure 18.32 Placement of the bone augmentation.
Figure 18.34 Closure. Note this envelope flap required only one
suture for proper closure.
Figure 18.35 Horizontal (envelope)   flap  created  (as  in
Figure 18.23 above). Flap raised and held with a stay suture. (This
is the least traumatic way to handle periodontal flaps during sur-
gery.) Note there is adequate visualization for cleaning and
grafting with a small surgical site. This minimizes surgical time
and trauma as well as decreasing postoperative pain and risk of 
Figure 18.33 Placement of the barrier membrane. Note that
dehiscence.
sutures should be placed (not pictured).
mobility will decrease the effectiveness of guided tissue
to stabilize slightly mobile incisors that are not signifi-
regeneration. It does not directly lead to any long-term
cantly infected. However, it should be noted that stabi-
stabilization.
lizing the mandibular incisors across the symphysis is
It is best utilized on teeth with significant angular
not recommended, especially if it is expected to be in
bone loss that may respond to GTR. It may also be used
place for a significant period of time.
278
3 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
[b]
C
(d)
Figure 18.36 Cleaning and debriding the defect (see chapter 17). (a) With a fine, subgingival periodontal tip on an ultrasonic scaler.
(b) With a curette. (c) Application of citric acid biomodification. (d) Thorough rinsing of the citric acid.
Figure 18.38 Barrier membrane in place. Note that the mem-
Figure 18.37 Placement of the bone augmentation.
brane was not softened prior to placement.
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  279
teeth, teeth with less than 20% bone remaining, and non-
compliant clients.
Techniques
 There are numerous options for periodontal splinting
For temporary (2-4months) splints, acrylic alone or
dental composite should be used. A more aesthetic splint
may result from the use of a glass fiber splint.K For a
more permanent splint, consider adding in wire “rebar"
Finally, making shallow enamel grooves will improve
retention. This procedure is very similar to acrylic splints
utilized for fracture repair.21
Figure 18.39 Closure. Note that this conservative envelope flap
Acrylic or composite-only splint
required only two sutures for proper dosure.
(Figures 18.40-18.47)
Step 1: Thoroughly clean and polish the teeth with a
fluoride-free pumice (Figure 18.40).
Step 2: Etch the teeth. If the splint is to be aesthetic, only
the palatal/lingual aspect is treated and it should be
the entire surface. However, if aesthetics is not a con-
cern, spot etching the entire tooth is performed
(Figure 18.41).
Step 3: Rinse and dry the dentition (Figure 18.42).
Step 4: Apply the bonding agent (Figure 18.43) and then
the acrylic or composite (Figure 18.44). (There are
several products.M available, and the choice depends
on the practitioner.) Attempt to keep the acrylic off
the gingiva to allow for homecare.
Step 5: After curing, the splint is shaped and smoothed
with a fine diamond bur or polishing discs
(Figure 18.45). If the splint encroaches on the gingiva,
this is a good time to create space.
Step 6: The occlusion is checked.
Figure 18.40 Preoperative picture from the rostral aspect
showing the gingival recession. The teeth to be involved in the
  e  si sss   i 
splint have been scaled and polished.
unfilled resin is placed on the splint (Figures 18.46
and 18.47).
 In some instances periodontal splinting is utilized for
Figure-8 wiring technique
long-term maintenance of a tooth (particularly show
This will provide significant strength but cannot be very
dogs). This is not a recommended technique for several
aesthetic.
reasons, including:
Step 1: Thoroughly clean and polish the teeth with a
Itis very difficult to maintain the splint and associated
fluoride-free pumice.
teeth, as the splint interferes with homecare.
Step 2: Use a number 1/2 or 1 bur to create a shallow
 It keeps diseased teeth in the oral cavity, which
defect around the teeth (Figure 18.48a).
allows for continued infection.
Step 3: Place a fine wire around the teeth in a figure-8
 It has the potential to damage the anchor teeth.
 pattern (Figure 18.48b).
3.
Step 4: Clip and trim the end of the wire.
Furthermore, periodontal splinting should not be
Steps 2-7 as above (except that the acrylic is on the facial
 used in cases of perio-endo involvement of non-strategic
surface as well).
280
 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
Figure 18.43 Placement of the bonding agent.
(b)
(a)
Figure 18.41 Application of the acid etch. If a cosmetic splint is
planned (as in this case), only the palatal and interproximal sur-
faces should be etched. (a) If a circumferential splint is planned,
[b]
the etch should be applied over all surfaces. (b) If unplanned sur-
faces are etched, placement of a bonded sealant is recommended 
on the involved areas.
Figure 18.44 Placement and shaping of the dental composite. (a)
Placement of the dental composite. (b) Shaping of the composite
prior to curing with a "beaver tail." Coating the instrument with
unfilled resin (bonding adhesive) will help prevent the composite
Figure 18.42 Thoroughly rinsing and drying the etch.
sticking to the instrument during this step.
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  281
Lingual wire technique
This is very similar to the above technique; however,
only the lingual aspects are grooved (Figure 18.49a) and
a wire placed in the defect (Figure 18.49b). This allows 
for significant strength while maintaining aesthetics.
Removal: After the healing period has occurred
  n    s
acrylic is carefully scored and removed with extraction
forceps. If necessary, a wire cutter can be used on the
wires. After the acrylic (± wire) is removed, any created
defects are filled with dental composite. The teeth are
 scaled and polished. Finally, an unfilled resin sealant is 
placed.
Figure 18.45 Shaping the cured composite (light curing the
composite not shown) with a fine diamond bur on a water-cooled.
 air-driven, high-speed hand-piece.
(a)
Figure 18.46 Intraoral views of the splint.
(b)
Figure 18.48 Adding a figure-8 wire to the periodontal splint.
(a) Grooves have been placed circumferentially around the crowns
Figure 18.47 Extraoral (front) view of the splint. The splint is barely
on the teeth with a half-round bur. (b) Fine gauge wire placed
visible (compare to preoperative picture [Figure 18.40 above]).
figure-8 around the teeth.
282
 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
(a)
(b)
Figure 18.49 Adding a lingual/palatal bar/wire to the splint. (a) A groove is created on the lingual or palatal aspect of the teeth to be
included in the splint with a number 1 round bur. (b) A wire is formed and placed in the groove.
References
 Box 18.1 Key points
1. Sims TN, Ammons W. Resective osseous surgery. In: Carranzas
 Osseous surgery is very commonly indicated.
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 950-967.
● In the correct presentations (i.e., 3-walled pockets),.
2. Easley JR. Methods of determining alveolar osseous form. J Peri-
guided tissue regeneration is very effective in regaining
odontol. 38(2):112-118, 1967.
3. Niemiec, BA. Veterinary dental radiology. In: Small Animal
lost attachment.
 Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Nie-
● Resective osseous surgery should be considered to reduce
miec BA ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 63-86.
pocket depth in cases where regenerative techniques have
4. Niemiec BA. Dental radiographic interpretation. J Vet Dent.
a poor prognosis and sufficient bone remains.
22(1):53-59, 2005.
 Second generation membranes are strongly recommended
5. Lyon KF Visser CJ, Okuda A, Anthony JMG. Feline stoma-
in veterinary patients.
titissyndrome, periodontal disease, and feline odontoclastic
 Bone augmentation is a rapidly changing field; the reader
resorptive lesions. In: An Atlas of Veterinary Dental Radiology
is encouraged to continually review the literature.
(DH Deforge, BH Colmery eds.). Ames: Iowa State University
●A relatively healthy patient and motivated owner are keys
Press, 2000,p. 159-170.
to success.
6. Mulligan TM, Aller MS, Williams CE. Interpretation of
Follow-up is critical to ensure long-term maintenance.
 periodontal disease. In: Atlas of Canine and Feline Dental Radi-
 '     
Pp. 104-123.
7. Holmstrom SE, Frost PF, Eisner ER. Periodontal therapy and
surgery. In: Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small
Notes
Animal Practitioner. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004,
pp. 233-290.
A. GORE-TEX regenerative material, Gore-Tex.
8. Niemiec BA. Pathologies of the oral mucosa. In: Small Animal
B. OsseoQuest, Gore.
 Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Nie-
C. Bio Mend, Calcitech.
miec BA ed.). London: Manson, 2010, p. 183-198.
D. Bioguide, OsteoHealth.
9. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Exodontics. In: Veterinary
E. Ossflex, Veterinary Transplant Services.
Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998,
Atrisorb, Block Drug.
pp. 215-254.
F
10. Klokkevold PR, Takei HH, Carranza FA. General principles of
G. Doxirobe, Pfizer Animal Health.
 periodontal surgery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology.
 H. Osteoallograft Periomix, Veterinary Transplant Services.
St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 887-901.
1.0
Cerrasorb, Curasan.
11. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
J. Emdogain, Straumann AG.
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
Pp. 186-231.
K Ribbond.
12. Measley BL, Beybayer M, Butzin CA, et al. Use of furcal bone
L. Maxitemp.
sounding to improve the accuracy of furcation diagnosis. I Peri-
M. Jet Acrylic.
odontol. 65:649, 1994.
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  283
13. Carranza FA, Takei HH. Phase II periodontal therapy. In: Car-
35. Reynolds MA, Aichelmann-Reidy ME, Branch-Mays GL, Gunsol-
ranzas Clinical Periodontology St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
ley JC. The efficacy of bone replacement grafts in the treatment of
pp. 881-886.
periodontal osseous defects. A systematic review. Ann Periodon-
14. Kaldahl WB, Kalkwarf KL, Patil KD, Dyer JK, Bates RE Jr. Evalu-
tol. 8(1):227-265, 2003.
ation of four modalities of periodontal therapy. Mean probing
36. Sculean A, Nikolidakis D, Schwarz E Regeneration of periodontal
depth, probing attachment level and recession changes. J Peri-
tissues: Combinations of barrier membranes and grafting mate-
odontol. 59(12):783-793, 1988.
rials—biological foundation and preclinical  evidence:
H
15. Kaldahl WB, Kalkwarf KL, Patil KD, Molvar MP, Dyer JK.
systematic review. J Clin Periodontol. 35(8 Suppl):106-116, 2008.
Long-term evaluation of periodontal therapy: I. Response to 4
37. Stavropoulos A, Karring T. Guided tissue regeneration combined
therapeutic modalities. J Periodontol. 67(2):93-102, 1996.
with a deproteinized bovine bone mineral (Bio-Oss) in the
16. Froum SJ, Weinberg MA, Rosenberg E, Tarnow D. A comparative
treatrment of intrabony periodontal defects: 6-year results from a
study utilizing open flap debridement with and without enamel
randomized-controlled  
clinical trial. J Clin Periodontol.
matrix derivative in the trea trment of periodontal intrabony defects:
37(2):200-210, 2010.
A 12-month re-entry study. J Periodontol. 72(1):25-34, 2001.
38. Nabers JM, Meador HL, Nabers CL, et al. Chronology, an impor-
17. Tibbetts L, Ochsenbein C, Loughlin D. The lingual approach to
tant factor in the repair of osseous defects. Periodontics 2:304,
osseous surgery. J Periodontol. 20:61, 1976.
1964.
18. Ochsenbein C, Bohannan HM. The palatal approach to osseous
 39. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
surgery. I1. Clinical application. J Periodontol. 35:54, 1964.
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
19. Carranza FA, Takei HH, Cochran DL. Reconstructive periodontal
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
surgery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saun-
40. Caton J, Wagener C, Polson A, et al. Guided tissue regeneration in
ders, 2006, pp. 968-990.
interproximal defects in the monkey. Int J Periodontics Restor-
20. Renvert S, Persson GR. Supportive periodontal therapy. Peri-
ative Dent. 12(4):266-277, 1992.
odontol 2000 36:179-195, 2004.
41. Claffey N, Hahn R, Egelberg J. Effect of placement of occlusive
 21. Chen FM, Shelton RM, Jin Y, Chapple IL. Localized delivery of
membranes on root resorption and bone regeneration during
growth factors for periodontal tissue regeneration: Role, strat-
healing of circumferential periodontal defects in dogs. J Clin Peri-
egies, and perspectives. Med Res Rev. 29(3):472-513, 2009.
odontol. 16(6):371-379, 1989.
22. Chen FM, Zhang J, Zhang M, An Y, Chen F, Wu ZE A review on
42. Minabe M. A critical review of the biologic rationale for guided
 endogenous regenerative technology in periodontal regenerative
tissue regeneration J Periodontol. 62(3):171-179, 1991.
medicine. Biomaterials 31(31):7892-7927, 2010.
43. Stahl s, Froum S. Histologic healing responses in human vertical
23. Needlerman I, Tucker R, Giedrys-Leeper E, Worthington H.
lesions following the use of osseous allografts and barrier mem-
Guided tissue regeneration for periodontal intrabony defects—a
branes. J Clin Periodontol. 18(2):149-152, 1991.
Cochrane Systematic Review. Periodontol 2000 37:106-123, 2005.
44. Stahl SS, Froum S, Tarnow D. Human histologic responses to
24. Grzesik WJ, Narayanan AS. Cementum and periodontal wound
guided tissue regenerative techniques in intrabony lesions. Case
healing and regeneration. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med. 13(6):474-484,
reports on 9 sites. Clin Periodontol. 17(3):191-198, 1990.
2002.
45. Taba M Jr, Jin Q, Sugai IV, Giannobile WV. Current concepts in
25. Slots J, MacDonald ES, Nowzari H, Infectious aspects of
periodontalbioengineering. Orthod Craniofac Res. 8(4):292-302,
2005.
46. Pontoriero R, Lindhe J, Nyman S, et al. Guided tissue regeneration
      sd 
in degree II furcation-involved mandibular molars. A clinical
21(9):1025-1032, 2003.
study. J Clin Periodontol. 15(4):247-254, 1988.
27. Gottlow J, Nyman S, Lindhe J, Karring T, Wennstrom J. New
47. Lekovic V, Kenney EB, Kovacevic K, Carranza FA Jr. Evaluation of
attachment formation in the human periodontium by guided
guided tissue regeneration in Class I furcation defects. A clinical
tissue regeneration. J Clin Periodontol. (6):604-616, 1986.
re-entry study. J Periodontol. 60(12):694-698, 1989.
 28. Nyman S, Gottlow J, Karring T, Lindhe J. The regenerative poten-
48. Bottino MC, Thomas V, Janowski GM. A novel spatially designed
 tial of the periodontal ligament. An experimental study in the
and functionally graded electrospun membrane for periodontal
monkey. I Clin Periodontol. 9(3):257-265, 1982.
regeneration Acta Biomater. 2010 Aug. 27.[Epub ahead of print.]
29. Villar CC, Cochran DL. Regeneration of periodontal tissues:
49. Zybutz MD, Laurell L, Rapoport DA, Persson GR. Treatment of
Guided tissue regeneration. Dent Clin North Am. 54:73-92, 2010.
intrabony defects with resorbable materials, non-resorbable mate-
30. Melcher AH. On the repair potential of periodontal tissues. I Peri-
rials and flap debridement. J Clin Periodontol. 27(3):169-178,
odontol. 47:256-260, 1976.
2000.
31. Aukhil I, Patterson E, Suggs C. Guided tissue regeneration. An
experimental procedure in beagle dogs. J Periodontol. 57:7727-
bioabsorbable barriers with non-resorbable barriers in guided
7734, 1986.
tissue regeneration in the treatment of human intrabony defects. J
32. Needleman IG, Worthington HV, Giedrys-Leeper E, Tucker RJ.
Periodontol. 69(6):632-641, 1998.
Guided tissue regeneration for periodontal infra-bony defects.
 51. Hou LT, Yan JI, Tsai AY, Lao CS, Lin SJ, Liu CM. Polymer-assisted
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 19(2), 2006.
regeneration therapy with Atrisorb barriers in human periodontal
33. Donos N, Sculean A, Glavind L, Reich E, Karring T. Wound
intrabony defects. J Clin Periodontol. 31(1):68-74, 2004.
healing of degree Ill furcation involvements following guided
52. Sakallioglu U, Yavuz U, Litfioglu M, Keskiner I, Acikgoz G. Clinical
tissue regeneration and/or Emdogain. A histologic study. J Clin
outcomes of guided tissue regeneration with Atrisorb membrane in
Periodontol. 30(12):1061-1068, 2003.
the treatment of intrabony defects: A 3-year follow-up study. Int J
34. Murphy KG, Gunsolley JC. Guided tissue regeneration for the
Periodontics Restorative Dent. 27(1):79-88, 2007.
treatment of periodontal intrabony and furcation defects. A
53. Polimeni G, Koo KT, Pringle GA, Agelan A, Safadi FF, Wikesjo
systematic review. Ann Periodontol. 8(1):266-302, 2003.
 UM. Histopathological observations of a polylactic acid-based
284   Periodontal Surgical Techniques
device intended for guided bone/tissue regeneration. Clin Implant
70. Hall EE, Meffert RM, Hermann JS, Mellonig JT, Cochran DL.
Dent Relat Res. 10(2):99-105, 2008.
Comparison of bioactive glass to dermineralized freeze-dried bone
54. Tatakis DN, Trombelli L. Adverse effects associated with a bioab-
allograft in the treatment of intrabony defects around irmplants in
sorbable guided tissue regeneration device in the treatment of
the canine mandible. J Periodontol. 70:526-535, 1999.
human gingival recession defects. A clinicopathologic case report.
71. Mellonig IT. Bone allografts in periodontal therapy. Clinical
J Periodontol. 70(5):542-547, 1999.
Orthopaedics Related Res. 324:116-125, 1996.
55. Froum SJ, Ortiz M, Witkin RT, Thaler R, Scopp IW, Stahl SS.
 72. Bauer TW. An overview of the histology of skeletal substitute
Osseous autografts. IIl. Comparison of osseous coagulum-bone
materials. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 131:217-224, 2007.
blend implants with open curetage. J Periodontol. 47(5):287-294,
73. Greenwald AS, Boden SD, Goldberg VM, Khan Y, Laurencin CT,
1976.
Rosier RN. Bone-graft substitutes: Facts, fictions, and applica-
56. Meadows CL, Gher ME, Quintero G, Lafferty TA. A comparison
tions. J Bone Joint Surg. 83-A(Supp 2), 2001.
of polylactic acid granules and decalcified freeze-dried bone allo
 74. Reynolds MA, Aichelmann-Reidy ME, Branch-Mays GL. Regen-
graft in human periodontal osseous defects. J Periodontol.
eration of periodontal tissue: Bone replacement grafts. Dent Clin
64(2):103-109, 1993.
North Am. 54:55-71, 2010.
57. Masters LB, Mellonig IT, Brunsvold MA, Nummikoski PV. A
75. Mellonig IT. Freeze-dried bone allografts in periodontal
clinical evaluation of demineralized freeze-dried bone allograft in
reconstructive surgery Rec Periodont. 35(3):505-521, 1991.
combination with tetracycline in the treatment of periodontal
76.
Grauer JN, Beiner IM, Kwon K, Vaccaro AR. Bone graft alterna-
osseous defects. J Periodontol. 67(8):770-781, 1996.
tives for spinal fusion. Biodrugs 17(6), 2003.
58. Yukna RA, Harrison BG, Caudill RF, Evans GH, Mayer ET, Miller
77. Brandoff JF, Silber JS, Vaccaro AR. Contemporary alternatives
S. Evaluation of durapatite ceramic as an alloplastic implant in
to synthetic bone grafts for spine surgery. Am J Orthop.37(8):410-
 periodontal osseous defects. II. Twelve month reentry results.
414, 2008.
J Periodontol. 56(9):540-547, 1985.
78. Shigeyama Y, DErrico JA, Stone R, Somerman MJ. Commercial-
59. Yukna RA, Callan DP, Krauser IT, et al. Multi-center clinical eval-
ly-prepared allograft material has biological activity in vitro.
uation of combination anorganic bovine-derived hydroxyapatite
JPeriodontol. 66(6):478-487, 1995.
 matrix (ABM)/cellbinding peptide (P-15) as a bone replacement 
 79. Bowers GM, ChadroffB, Carnevale R, et al. Histologic evaluation 
graft material in human periodontal osseous defects. 6-month
 of new attachment apparatus formation in humans. Part IIl.
results. J Periodontol. 69(6):655-663, 1998.
J Periodontol. 60(12):683-693, 1989.
60. Meffert RM, Thomas JR, Hamilton KM, Brownstein CN. Hydrox-
 80. Bowers GM, ChadroffB, Carnevale R, et al. Histologic evaluation
ylapatite as an alloplastic graft in the 
 treatment of human
of new atachment apparatus formation in humans. Part II J Peri-
periodontal osseous defects. J Periodontol. 56(2):63-73, 1985.
odontol. 60(12):675-682, 1989.
61. Kim CK, Choi EJ, Cho KS, Chai JK, Wikesjo UM. Periodontal
 81. Bowers G, Felton F, Middleton C, et al. Histologic comparison of
repair in intrabony defects treated with a calcium carbonate
regeneration in human intrabony defects when osteogenin is
implant and guided tissue regeneration. J Periodontol.
combined with demineralized freeze-dried bone allograft and
67(12):1301-1306, 1996.
with purified bovine collagen. J Periodontol. 62(11):690-702,
 62. Yukna RA. Clinical evaluation of coralline calcium carbonate as a
1991.
 82. Sampath T, Reddi H. Homology of bone inductive-proteins from
defects. J Periodontol. 65(2):177-185, 1994.
human, monkey, bovine, and rat extracellular matrix. Proc. Natl.
63. Rosenberg ES, Fox GK, Cohen C. Bioactive glass granules for
Acad. Sci. USA 80:6591, 1983.
regeneration of human periodontal defects. J Esthet Dent.
 83. Nevins ML, Camelo M, Lynch SE, et al. Evaluation of periodontal
12(5):248-257, 2000.
regeneration following grafting intrabony defects with Bio-Oss
64. Yukna RA. HTR polymer grafts in human periodontal osseous
collagen: A human histologic report. Int J Periodontics Restor-
defects. I. 6-month clinical results. J Periodontol. 61(10):633-642,
ative Dent. 23(1):9-17, 2003.
1990.
 84. Camelo M, Nevins ML, Schenk RK, et al. Clinical, radiographic,
65. Brown GD, Mealey BL, Nummikoski PV, Bifano SL, Waldrop TC.
and histologic evaluation of human periodontal defects treated
[ad jo uu i ud un dex
with Bio-Oss and Bio-Gide. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent.
osseous defects in humans. J Periodontol. 69(2):146-157, 1998.
18(4):321-331, 1998.
66. Pepelassi EM, Bissada NF, Greenwell H, Farah CE Doxycycline-
 85. Ong MM, Eber RM, Korsnes Ml, et al. Evaluation of a bioactive
glass alloplast in treating periodontal intrabony defects. J Peri-
in advanced periodontal furcation defects. J Periodontol.
odontol. 69(12):1346-1354, 1998.
62(2):106-115, 1991.
86. Barnett JD, Mellonig IT, Gray JL, Towle HJ. Comparison of
67. Kenney EB, Lekovic V, Elbaz JI, et al. The use of a porous hydrox-
freeze -dried bone allograft and porous hydroxylapatite in human 
ylapatite implant in periodontal defects. II. Treatment of class II
periodontal defects. J Periodontol. 60(5):231-237, 1989.
furcation lesions in lower molars. J Periodontol. 59(2):67-72, 1988.
87. Bowen JA, Mellonig IT, Gray JL, Towle HT. Comparison of
68. Garrett S, Gantes B, Zimmerman G, Egelberg J. Treatment of
decalcified freeze-dried bone allograft and porous particulate
mandibular class Ill periodontal furcation defects. Coronally
hydroxyapatite in human periodontal osseous defects. J Periodon-
positioned flaps with and without expanded polytetrafluoroethyl-
tol. 60(12):647-654, 1989.
ene membranes. J Periodontol. 65(6):592-597, 1994.
 88. Oreamuno S, Lekovic V, Kenney EB. Comparative clinical study
69. Calongne KB, Aichelmann-Reidy ME, Yukna RA, Mayer ET.
of porous hydroxyapatite and decalcified freeze-dried bone in
Clinical comparison of microporous biocompatible composite of
human periodontal defects. J Periodontol. 61(7):399-404, 1990.
PMMA, PHEMA and calcium hydroxide grafts and expanded
 89. Richardson CR, Mellonig IT, Brunsvold MA, McDonnell HT, Co-
 polytetrafluoroethylene barrier membranes in human mandibu-
chran DL. Clinical evaluation of Bio-Oss: A bovine-derived xeno-
lar molar Class II furcations. A case series. J Periodontol.
graft for the treatment of periodontal osseous defects in humans.
72(10):1451-1459, 2001.
JClin Periodontol. 26(7):421-428, 1999.
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  285
90. Valimaki VV, Aro HT. Molecular basis for action of bioactive
108. Varkey M, Gittens SA, Uludag H. Growth factor delivery for bone
glasses as bone graft substitute. Scand J Surg. 95(2):95-102, 2006.
tissue repair: An update. Expert Opin Drug Deliv. 1:19-36, 2004.
91. Thomas MV, Puleo DA, Al-Sabbagh M. Bioactive glass three
109. Kaigler D, Cirelli JA, Giannobile WV. Growth factor delivery for
decades on. J Long Term Eff Med Implants. 15(6):585-597, 2005.
oral and periodontal tissue engineering. Expert Opin Drug Deliv.
92. Sculean A, Windisch P, Keglevich T, Gera I. Clinical and histo
3:647-662,2006.
logic evaluation of an enamel matrix protein derivative combined
110. Cochran DL, Wozney IM. Biological mediators for periodontal
with a bioactive glass for the treatment of intrabony periodontal
regeneration. Periodontol 2000 19:40-58, 1999.
defects in humans. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent.
111. Hakki SS, Foster BL, Nagatomo KJ, et al. Bone morphogenetic
25(2):139-147, 2005.
protein-7 enhances cementoblast function, in vitro. I Periodontol.
 93. Baas J, Elmengard B, Bechtold J, Chen X, Soballe K. Ceramic
2010 Aug. 3. [Epub ahead of print.]
bone graft substitute with equine bone protein extract is
112. Zhu M, Zeng Y, Sun T, Peng Q. [Experimental study of the effect
comparable to allograft in terrms of implant fixation. Acta
of new bone formation on new type artificial bone composed of
Orthopaedica. 79(6):841-850, 2008.
 bioactive ceramics.] Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za
94. Orsini M, Orsini G, Benlloch D, Aranda J, Sanz M. Long-term
Zhi. 19(3):174-177, 2005.
clinical results on the use of bone-replacement grafts in the
113. Lyngstadaas SP, Lundberg E, Ekdahl H, Andersson C, Gestrelius
treatment of intrabony periodontal defects. Comparison of the
S. Autocrine growth factors in human periodontal ligament
use of autogenous bone graft plus calcium sulfate toautogenous
cells cultured on enamel matrix derivative. I Clin Periodontol.
bone graft covered witha bioabsorbable membrane. J Periodontol.
28:181-188, 2001.
79(9):1630-1637, 2008.
114. Esposito M, Coulthard P, Thomsen P, Worthington HV. Enamel
95. Sukumar S, Drizhal I, Paulusova V, Bukac J. Surgical treatment of
matrixderivative forperiodontaltissue regenerationin treatment
periodontal intrabony defects with calcium sulphate
in
of intrabony defects: A Cochrane Systematic Review. J Dent
combination with beta-tricalciumphosphate: Clinical observa-
Educ. 68:834-844, 2004.
tions two years post-surgery. Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove)
115. Sakallioglu U, Acikgoz G, Ayas B, Kirtilolu T, Sakallioglu E.
54(1):13-20, 2011.
Healing of periodontal defects treated with enamel matrix pro-
96. Choi JY, Jung UW, Lee IS, Kim CS, Lee YK, Choi SH. Resolution 
teins and root surface conditioning—an experimental study in
of surgically created three-wall intrabony defects in implants
dogs. Biomaterials 25(10):1831-1840, 2004.
using three different biormaterials: An in vivo study. Clin Oral
116. HammarstromL. Enamel matrix, cementum development and
Implants Res. 2010 Sep. 10.
regeneration. J Clin Periodontol. 24:658-668, 1997.
97. Xu LL, Liu HC, Wang DS, ELL, Xu L, Jin ZL, Duan YZ. Effects of
117. Spahr A, Hammarstrom L. Response of dental follicular cells to
BMP-2 and dexamethasone on osteogenic differentiation of rat
the exposure of denuded enamel matrix in rat molars. Eur J Oral
dental follicle progenitor cellseededon three-dimensional beta-
Sci. 107:360-367, 1999.
TCP. Biomed Mater. 4(6):065010, 2009.
118. Sculean A, Schwarz F, Becker J, Brecx M. The application of an
98. Zijderveld SA, Zerbo IR, van den Bergh JP, Schulten EA, ten
i  () a d x 
Bruggenkate CM. Maxillary sinus floor augmentation using a beta
 periodontal therapy: A review. Med Princ Pract. 16:167-80, 2007.
tricalcium phosphate (Cerasorb) alone compared to autogenous
119. Sculean A, Windisch P, Dori F, Keglevich T, Molnér B, Gera I.
bone grafts. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 20(3):432-440, 2005.
99. Szabo G, Huys L, Coulthard P, Maiorana C, Garagiola U,
Iterature. Fogorv Sz. 100:220-232, 2007.
BarabasJ, Németh Z, HrabakK, Suba Z. A prospective multi-
120. Yuan K, Chen CL, Lin MT. Enamel matrix derivative exhibits
center randormized clinical trial of autogenous bone versus beta-
angiogenic effect in vitro and in a murine model. J Clin
tricalcium phosphate graft alone for bilateral sinus elevation:
Periodontol.30:732-738,2003
Histologic and histomorphometric evaluation. Int J Oral
121. Sculean A, Auschill TM, Donos N, Brecx M, Arweiler NB. Effect
Maxillofac Implants 20(3):371-381, 2005.
of an enamel matrix protein derivative (Emdogain) on ex vivo
100. Giannobile WV. Periodontal tissue engineering by growth
dental plaque vitality. J Clin Periodontol. 28:1074-1078, 2001.
factors. Bone 19(1 Suppl):23S-37S, 1996.
122. Rathe F, Junker R, Chesnutt BM, Jansen JA. The effect of enamel
101. Sipe ID, Kelley CA, McNichol LA. Reparative medicine: Growing
matrix derivative (Emdogain) on bone formation: A systematic
tissue and organs. Ann NY Acad Sci. 961, 2002.
review. Tissue Eng Part B Rev. 15:215-224, 2009.
102. Aukhil I. The potential contributions of cell and molecular
123. Giannobile WV, Somerman MJ. Growth and amelogenin-like
 biology to periodontal tissue regeneration. Curr Opin Dent.
factors in periodontal wound healing. A systematic review. Ann
2:91-96, 1992.
Periodontol. 8(1):193-204, 2003.
103. Urist MR. Bone: Formation by autoinduction. Science 150:893-
124. Heden G, Wennstrom JL. Five-year follow-up of regenerative
899, 1965.
periodontal therapy with enamel matrix derivative at sites with
104. Elangovan S, Srinivasan S, Ayilavarapu S. Novel regenerative
angular bone defects. J Periodontol. 77:295-301, 2006.
125. Sculean A, Donos N, Miliauskaite A, Arweiler N, Brecx M.
Biol Ther. 9(4):399-410, 2009.
Treatment of intrabony defects with enamel matrix proteins or
105. Chen FM,Jjin YPeriodontal tissue engineeringandregeneration:
bioresorbable membranes: A four-year followup split-mouth
current approaches and expanding opportunities. Tissue Eng
study. J Periodontol. 72:1695-1701, 2001.
Part B Rev. 16(2):219-55, 2010.
126. Saito A, Nanbu Y, Nagahata T, Yamada S. Treatment of intrabony
106. Vasita R, Katti DS. Growth factor-delivery systems for tissue
periodontal defects with enamel matrix derivative in private
engineering: A materials perspective. Expert Rev Med Devices
 practice: A long-term retrospective study. Bull Tokyo Dent Coll
3:29-47,2006.
49:89-96, 2008.
107. Hughes FJ, Turner W, Belibasakis G, Martuscelli G. Effects of
       i    
growth factors and cytokines on osteoblast differentiation.
 protein: True periodontal regeneration. Quintessence Int 29:621--
Periodontol 2000 41:48-72, 2006.
30, 1998.
286   Periodontal Surgical Techniques
128. Cochran DL, Jones A, Heijl L, Mellonig IT, Schoolfield J, King
143. Ripamonti U, Heliotis M, Rueger DC, Sampath TK. Induction of
GN. Periodontal regeneration with a combination of enamel
d so  r  sn
matrix proteins and autogenous bone grafting. I Periodontol.
(hop-1/bmp-7) in the baboon (Papio ursinus). Arch Oral Biol.
74(9):1269-1281, 2003.
41(1):121-126, 1996.
129. Sculean A, Donos N, Brecx M, Reich E, Karring T. Treatment of
144. Ripamonti U, Renton L. Bone morphogenetic proteins and the
intrabony defects with guided tissue regeneration andenamel-
induction of periodontal tissue regeneration. Periodontol 2000
matrix-proteins. An experimental study in monkeys. J Clin
41:73-87, 2006.
Periodontol. 27(7):466-472, 2000.
145. Blumenthal NM, Koh-Kunst G, Alves ME, et al. Effect of surgical
130. Cochran DL, King GN, Schoolfield J, Velasquez-Plata D, Mellonig
implantation of recombinant human bone morphogenetic pro-
JT, Jones A. The effect of enamel matrix proteins on periodontal
tein-2 in a bioabsorbable collagen sponge or calcium phosphate
regeneration as
 determined  by
histological
analyses.
putty carrier in intrabony periodontal defects in the baboon.
J Periodontol. 74(7):1043-1055, 2003.
I Periodontol. 73(12):1494-1506, 2002.
131. Windisch P, Sculean A, Klein F, Toth V, Gera I, Reich E, Eickholz
146. Sorensen RG, Wikesjo UM, Kinoshita A, Wozney JM. Periodontal
P. Comparison of clinical, radiographic, and histometric mea-
repair in dogs: Evaluation of a bioresorbable calcium phosphate
cement (Ceredex) as a carrier for rhBMP-2. J Clin Periodontol.
or enamel matrix proteins in human periodontal defects.
31(9):796-804, 2004.
J Periodontol. 73(4):409-417, 2002.
147. Sorensen RG, Polimeni G, Kinoshita A, Wozney JM, Wikesjo
132. Sculean A, Donos N, Blaes A, Lauermann M, Reich E, Brecx M.
UM. Effect of recombinant human bone morphogenetic pro-
Comparison of enamel matrix proteins and bioabsorbable mem-
tein-12 (rhBMP-12) on regeneration of periodontal attachment
branes in the treatmentof intrabony periodontal defects. A split-
following tooth replantation in dogs. J Clin Periodontol.
mouth study. J Periodontol. 70(3):255-262, 1999.
31(8):654-661, 2004.
133. Chen FM, Zhang M, Wu ZF. Toward delivery of multiple growth
148. Shimabukuro Y, Terashima H, Takedachi M, Maeda K, et al.
factors in tissue engineering. Biomaterials 31:6279-6308, 2010.
Fibroblast growth factor-2 stimulates directed migration of
134. Takahashi D, Odajima T, Morita M, Kawanami M, Kato H.
periodontal ligament cells via PI3K/AKT signaling and CD44/
Formation and resolution of ankylosis under application of
Hyaluronan interaction. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Sep 20.
recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2)
149. Lee J, Stavropoulos A, Susin C, Wikesjo UM. Periodontal regen-
to class II furcation defects in cats. J Periodontal Res. 40:299-
eration: Focus on growth and differentiation factors. Dent Clin
305, 2005.
North Am. 54:93-111, 2010.
135. Cooke JW, Sarment DP, Whitesman LA, Miller SE, Jin Q, Lynch
150. Rossa C Jr, Marcantonio E Jr, Cirelli JA, et al. Regeneration of
SE, et al. Effect of rhPDGF-BB delivery on mediators of
class III furcation defects with basic fibroblast growth factor
periodontal wound repair. Tissue Eng. 12:1441-1450, 2006.
(b-FGF) associated with GTR. A descriptive and histometric
136. Chen FM, Wu ZF, Sun HH, Wu H, Xin SN, Wang QT, et al.
study in dogs. J Periodontol. 71(5):775-784, 2000.
 Release of bioactive BMP from dextran-derived microspheres: A
151. Takayama S, Murakami S, Shimabukuro Y, Kitamura M, Okada
novel delivery concept. Int J Pharm. 307:23-32, 2006.
H. Periodontal regeneration by FGF-2 (bFGF) in primate models.
137. Saito A, Saito E, Handa R, Honrma Y, Kawanami M. Influence of
J Dent Res. 80(12):2075-2079, 2001.
residual bone on recombinant human bone morphogenetic pro-
152. Giannobile WV, Hernandez RA, Finkelman RD, Ryan S, Kiritsy
CP, DAndrea M, et al. Comparative effects of platelet-derived
odontitis in dogs. J Periodontol. 80:961-968, 2009.
growth factor-BB and insulin-like growth factor-I, individually
138. Hosokawa R, Kikuzaki K, Kimoto T, Matsuura T, Chiba D,
and in combination, on periodontal regeneration in Macaca fas-
Wadamoto M, et al. Controlled local application of basic fibro-
cicularis.J Periodontal Res. 31:301-312, 1996.
blast growth factor (FGF-2) accelerates the healing of GBR. An
153. Chen FM, Zhao YM, Wu H, et al. Enhancement of periodontal
experimental study in beagle dogs. Clin Oral Implants Res.
tissue regeneration by locally controlled delivery of insulin-like
11:345-353, 2000.
growth factor-I from dextran-co-gelatin microspheres. J Control
139. Gruber RM, Ludwig A, Merten HA, Pippig S, Kramer FJ,
Release 114(2):209-222, 2006.
 Schliephake H. Sinus floor augmentation with recombinant
 154. Saygin NE, Tokiyasu Y, Giannobile WV, Sormerman MJ. Growth
human growth and differentiation factor-5 (rhGDF-5): A pilot
 e sse ia  s  
 study in the Goettingen miniature pig comparing autogenous
cementoblasts. J Periodontol. 71:1591-1600, 2000.
bone and rhGDF-5. Clin Oral Implants Res. 20(2):175-182,
 155. Mohammed S, Pack AR, Kardos TB. The effect of transforming
2009.
growth factor beta one (TGF-beta 1) on wound healing, with or
140. Lee JS, Wikesjo UM, Jung UW, Choi SH, Pippig S, Siedler M, Kim
without barrier membranes, in a class II furcation defect in sheep.
CK. Periodontal wound healing/regeneration following implan-
J Periodontal Res. 33(6):335-344, 1998.
tation of recombinant human growth/differentiation factor-5 in a
156. Murakami S, Takayama S, Ikezawa K, Shimabukuro Y,
 beta-tricalcium phosphate carrier into one-wall intrabony defects
Kitamura M, Nozaki T, et al. Regeneration of periodontal tis-
in dogs. J Clin Periodontol. 37(4):382-389, 2010.
sues by basic fibroblast growth factor. J Periodontal Res.
141. Wikesjo UM, Sorensen RG, Kinoshita A, Jian Li X, Wozney IM.
34:425-430, 1999.
Periodontal repair in dogs: effect of recombinant human bone
157. Graham S, Leonidou A, Lester M, Heliotis M, Mantalaris A,
morphogeneticprotein-12 (rhBMP-12) on regeneration of alve-
Tsiridis E. Investigating the role of PDGF as a potential drug
olar bone and periodontal attachment. J Clin Periodontol.
therapy in bone formation and fracture healing. Expert Opin
31(8):662-670, 2004.
Investig Drugs 18(11):1633-1654, 2009.
142. Chen YL, Chen PK, Jeng LB, Huang CS, Yang LC, Chung HY,
158. Lee YM, Park YJ, Lee SJ, Ku Y, Han SB, Klokkevold PR, Chung
 Chang SC. Periodontal regeneration using ex vivo autologous
CP. The bone regenerative effect of platelet-derived growth fac-
stem cells engineered to express the BMP-2 gene: An alternative
tor-BB delivered with a chitosan/tricalcium phosphate sponge
to alveolaplasty. Gene Ther. 15(22):1469-1477, 2008.
carrier. I Periodontol. 71(3):418-424, 2000.
Osseous Surgery and Guided Tissue Regeneration  287
159. Park YJ, Lee YM, Park SN, Sheen SY, Chung CP, Lee SJ. Platelet
177. Fang I, Zhu YY, Smiley E, Bonadio J, Rouleau JP, Goldstein SA, et
derived growth factor releasing chitosan sponge for periodontal
al. Stimulation of new bone formation by direct transfer of
osteogenic plasmid genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:5753-
160. Park YJ, Ku Y, Chung CP, Lee SJ. Controlled release of platelet-
5758, 1996.
derived growth factor from porous poly(L-lactide) membranes
         9
for guided tissue regeneration. J Control Release 51(2-3):201-
ua n re  ses rd e
211, 1998.
Clin Orthop. 391(Suppl):S251-270, 2001.
161. Nevins M, Giannobile WV, McGuire MK, Kao RT, et al. Platelet-
179. King GN. The importance of drug delivery to optimize the effects
derived growth factor stimulates bone fill and rate of attachment
of bone morphogenetic proteins during periodontal regenera-
level gain: Results of a large multicenter randomized controlled
tion. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2(2):131-142, 2001.
trial. J Periodontol. 76(12):2205-2215, 2005.
180. Whang K, Tsai DC, Nam EK, Aitken M, Sprague SM, Patel PK, et
162. Anusaksathien O, Webb SA, Jin QM, Giannobile WV. Platelet
al. Ectopic bone formation via rhBMP-2 delivery from porous
derived growth factor gene delivery stimulates ex vivo gingival
bioabsorbable polymer scaffolds. J Biomed Mater Res. 42:491-
repair. Tissue Eng. 9:745-756, 2003.
499, 1998.
163. Jin Q, Anusaksathien O, Webb SA, Printz MA, Giannobile WV.
181. Fournier N, Doillon CJ. Biological molecule-impregnated
 Engineering of tooth-supporting structures by delivery of PDGF
polyester: An in vivo angiogenesis study. Biomaterials 17:1659-
gene therapy vectors. Mol Ther. 9:519-526, 2004.
1665, 1996.
164.Anusaksathien O, Jin Q, Zhao M, Somerman MJ, Giannobile
182. Wei G, Pettway GJ, McCauley LK, Ma PX. The release profiles
WV. Effect of sustained gene delivery of platelet-derived growth
--o-d u uu pieed o Aa pue
factor or its antagonist (PDGF-1308) on tissue-engineered
colic acid) microspheres. Biomaterials 25:345-352, 2004.
cementum. J Periodontol. 75:429-440, 2004.
183. Murphy WL, Peters MC, Kohn DH, Mooney DJ. Sustained
165. Nevins M, Camelo M, Nevins ML, Schenk RK, Lynch SE.
release of vascular endothelial growth factor from mineralized
Periodontal regeneration in humans using recombinant human
poly(lactide-co-glycolide) scaffolds for tissue engineering.
platelet-derived growth factor-BB (rhPDGF-BB) and allogenic
Biomaterials 21:2521-2527, 2000.
bone. J Periodontol. 74(9):1282-1292, 2003.
184. Wallace DG, Rosenblatt J, Collagen gel systems for sustained
166. Camargo PM, Lekovic V, Weinlaender M, Vasilic N, Madzarevic
delivery and tissue engineering. Adv Drug Deliv Rev.
M, Kenney EB. Platelet-rich plasma and bovine porous bone
55(12):1631-1649, 2003.
mineral combined with guided tissue regeneration in the
185. Chen FM, Zhao YM, Sun HH, et al. Novel glycidyl methacrylated
treatment of intrabony defects in humans. J Periodontal Res.
dextran (Dex-GMA)/gelatin hydrogel scaffolds containing
37(4):300-306, 2002.
microspheres loaded with bone morphogenetic proteins: formu-
167. Anitua E, Sanchez M, Orive G, Andia I. The potential impact of
lation and characteristics. J Control Release 118(1):65-77, 2007.
the preparation rich in growth factors (PRGF) in different med-
186. Sohier J, Vlugt TJ, Cabrol N, et al. Dual release of proteins from
ical fields. Biomaterials 28:4551-4560, 2007.
168. Anitua E, Sanchez M, Nurden AT, Nurden P, Orive G, Andia I.
187. Lin CC, Metters AT. Bifunctional monolithic affinity hydrogels
New insights into and novel applications for platelet-rich fibrin
for dual-protein delivery. Biomacromolecules 9(3):789-795, 2008.
therapies. Trends Biotechnol. 24:22734, 2006.
188. Andreadis ST, Geer DJ. Biomimetic approaches to protein and
169. Anitua E, SanchezM, Orive G, Andia I. Delivering growth factors
gene delivery for tissue regeneration. Trends Biotechnol.
for therapeutics. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 29:37-41, 2008.
24(7):331-337, 2006.
170. Knighton DR, Ciresi K, Fiegel VD, Schumerth S, Butler E, Cerra
189. Luginbuehl V, Meinel L, Merkle HP, Gander B. Localized delivery
F. Stimulation of repair in chronic, non healing, cutaneous ulcers
of growth factors for bone repair. Eur J Pharm Biopharm.
using platelet-derived wound healing formula. Surg Gynecol
58(2):197-208, 2004.
Obstet. 170:56-60, 1990.
190. Jin QM, Anusaksathien O, Webb SA, Rutherford RB, Giannobile
171. Mehta S, Watson JT. Platelet rich concentrate: Basic science and
WV.Gene therapy ofbone morphogenetic protein for periodontal
current clinical applications. J Orthop Trauma 22:432-438, 2008.
tissue engineering. I Periodontol. 74:202-213, 2003.
172. Foster TE, Puskas BL, Mandelbaum BR, Gerhardt MB, Rodeo
191. Kofron MD, Laurencin CT. Bone tissue engineering by gene
SA. Platelet-rich plasma: From basic science to clinical applica-
delivery. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 58(4):555-576, 2006.
tions. Am J Sports Med. 37:2259-2272, 2009.
192. Shi S, Bartold PM, Miura M. The efficacy of mesenchymal stem
173. Lekovic V, Camargo PM, Weinlaender M, Vasilic N, Kenney EB.
cellsto regenerate andrepair dental structures. OrthodCraniofac
Comparison of platelet-rich plasma, bovine porous bone min-
Res. 8(3):191-199, 2005.
eral, and guided tissue regeneration versus platelet-rich plasma
193. Duan X, Tu Q, Zhang J, Ye J, et al. Application of induced plurip
and bovine porous bone mineral in the treatment of intrabony
 ( i snssl d u so ( s o
defects: A reentry study. J Periodontol. 73(2):198-205, 2002.
Physiol. 2010 Jul 23. [Epub ahead of print.]
174. Camargo PM, Lekovic V, Weinlaender M. A surgical reentry
194. Kawaguchi H, Hirachi A, Hasegawa N, et al. Enhancement of 
study on the influence of platelet-rich plasma in enhancing the
periodontal tissue regeneration by transplantation of bone
regenerative effects of bovine porous bone mineral and guided
marrow mesenchymal stem cells. J Periodontol. 75(9):1281-
tissue regeneration in the treatment of intrabony defects in
1287,2004.
humans. J Periodontol. 80(6):915-923, 2009.
195. Yang Y, Rossi FM, Putnins EE. Periodontal regeneration using
175. McKay MS, Olson E, Hesla MA, Panyutich A, Ganz T, Perkins S
engineered bone marrow
 mesenchymal
stromal  cells.
et al. Immunomagnetic recovery of human neutrophil defensins
Biomaterials 2010 Sep 8. [Epub ahead of print.]
from the human gingival crevice. Oral Microbiol Immunol.
196. Kim SH, Kim KH, Seo BM. Alveolar bone regeneration by trans-
14:190-193.
plantation of periodontal ligament stem cells and bone marrow
176. Folkman J, Klagsbrun M. Angiogenic factors. Science 235:442-
stem cells in a canine peri-implant defect model: A pilot study.
447, 1987.
J Periodontol. 80(11):1815-1823, 2009.
288  Periodontal Surgical Techniques
197. Flores MG, Hasegawa M, Yamato M, et al. Cermentum-
 216. Niemiec BA, Gilbert T, Sabatino D. Equipment and basic geom-
periodontal ligament complex regeneration using the cell sheet
etry of dental radiography. J Vet Dent. 21(1):48-52, 2004.
technique. J Periodontal Res. 43(3):364-371, 2008.
 217. DuPont G, DeBowes LJ. Atlas of Dental Radiography in Dogs
198. Flores MG, Yashiro R, Washio K, et al. Periodontal ligament cell
and Cats. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009, p. 232.
sheet promotes periodontal regeneration in athymic rats. J Clin
218. Gorrel C. Small Animal Dentistry. Philadelphia: Saunders-
Periodontol. 35(12):1066-1072, 2008
Elsevier, 2008, pp. 22-68.
199. Izumi K, Feinberg SE, Iida A, Yoshizawa M. Intraoral grafting of
219. DuPont G. Tooth splinting for severely mobile mandibular
Ad    l d oa xa 
incisor teeth in a dog. I Vet Dent. 12(3):93-95,1995.
report. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 32(2):188-197, 2003.
220. Spear FM, Cooney JP. Restorative interrelationships. In:
200. Somerman MJ, Ouyang HJ, Berry JE, Saygin NE, Strayhorn CL,
Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006,
D'Errico JA, et al. Evolution of periodontal regeneration: From
Pp. 1050-1071.
the roots' point of view. J Periodontal Res. 34:420-424, 1999.
221. Niemiec BA. Intraoral acrylic splint application. J Vet Dent.
201. Zhao M, Jin Q Berry JE, Nociti FH Jr, Giannobile WV, Somerman
20(2):123-126, 2003.
MJ. Cementoblast delivery for periodontal tissue engineering.
222. McGinnis M, Larsen P, Miloro M, Beck FM. Comparison of
J Periodontol. 75:154-161, 2004.
resorbable and nonresorbable guided bone regeneration mate-
202. Sculean A, Blaes A, Arweiler N, Reich E, Donos N, Brecx M.
rials: A preliminary study. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants
The effect of postsurgical antibiotics on the healing of intrabony
13(1):30-35, 1998.
defectsfollowing treatment with
1 enamel matrix proteins.
223. Rankow HJ, Krasner PR. Endodontic applications of guided
J Periodontol. 72(2):190-195, 2001.
tissue regeneration in endodontic surgery. 22(1):34-43,1996.
203. Sculean A, Berakdar M, Donos N, Auschill TM, Arweiler NB.
224. Tonetti MS, Cortellini P, Suvan JE, et al. Generalizability of
The effect of postsurgical administration of a selective cyclo-
the added benefits of guided tissue regeneration in the
oxygenase-2 inhibitor on the healing of intrabony defects follow-
treatrment of deep intrabony defects. Evaluation in a multi-
ing treatment with enamelmatrix proteins. Clin Oral Investig.
center randomized controlled clinical trial. J Periodontol.
7(2):108-112, 2003.
69(11):1183-1192, 1998.
204. Beckman BW. Treatment of an infrabony pocket in an American
225. Cortellini P, Pini Prato G, Tonetti MS. Periodontal regeneration
Eskimo dog. I Vet Dent. 21(3):159-163, 2004.
of human intrabony defects with bioresorbable membranes. A
205. Fowlr C, Garrett S, Crigger M,t al. Histologic probe positin n
controlled clinical trial. J Periodontol. 67(3):217-223, 1996.
226. Camargo PM, Lekovic V, Weinlaender M, et al. A controlled re-
J Clin Periodontol. 9:373, 1982.
entry study on the effectiveness of bovine porous bone mineral
206. Caton JC. Overview of clinical trials on periodontal regeneration.
used in combination with a collagen membrane of porcineorigin
Ann Periodontol. 2:215, 1987.
in the treatment of intrabony defects in humans. J Clin
207. Greensberg I, Laster L, Listgarten MA. Transgingival probing as a
Periodontol. 27(12):889-896, 2000.
potential estimation of alveolar bone level. J Periodontol. 47:514,
227. Wu SY, Chen YT, Chen CW, et al. Comparison of clinical out-
1976.
 comes following guided tissue regeneration treatment with a
208. Ursel MJ. Relationships between alveolar bone levels measured at
polylactic acid barrier or a collagen membrane. Int J Periodontics
surgery, estimated by transgingival probing and clinical attach-
Restorative Dent. 30(2):173-179, 2010.
ment level measurements. J Clin Periodontol. 16:81, 1989.
 228. Owen GR, Jackson JK, Chehroudi B, Brunette DM, Burt HM. An
209. Patur B, Glickman I. Clinicaland roentgenographic evaluation of
in vitro study of plasticized poly(lactic-co -glycolic acid) films as
the post-treatment healing of infraboney pockets. J Periodontol.
possible guided tissue regeneration membranes: Material prop-
33:164, 1962.
erties and drug release kinetics. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2010
 210. Tsugawa AJ, Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Gorrel C. Diagnostic value of
Sep 7. [Epub ahead of print.]
the use of lateral and occlusal radiographic views in comparison with
-d id anoa-ue pot df sana a sh '677
periodontal probing for the assessment of periodontal attachrment of
cological agents.
.A systematic review. Ann Periodontol.
the canine teeth in dogs. Am J Vet Res. 64(3):255-261, 2003.
8(1):79-98, 2003.
211. Land MP, Hill RW. Radiographs in periodontics. J Clin
230. Park YJ, Lee YM, Park SN, et al. Enhanced guided bone
Periodontol. 4:16, 1976.
regeneration by controlled tetracycline release from poly(L-
212. Theilade J. An evaluation of the reliability of radiographs in the
lactide) barrier membranes. J Biomed Mater Res. 51(3):391-397,
measurement of bone loss in periodontal disease. J Periodontol.
2000.
31:143, 1960.
231. Chung CP, Kim DK, Park YJ, Nam KH, Lee SJ. Biological effects
213. Tonetti M, Pini Prato GP, Williams R, et al. Periodontal regener-
of drug -loaded biodegradable membranes for guided boneregen-
ation of human infrabony defects. II1l. Diagnostic strategies to
eration. J Periodontal Res. 32(1 Pt 2):172-175, 1997.
detect bone gain. I Periodontol. 64:269, 1993.
232. Scott TA, Towle HJ, Assad DA, Nicoll BK. Comparison of bioab-
214. Eikholz P, Hausmann E. Evidence for healing of class II and III
sorbable laminar bone membrane and non-resorbable ePTFE
furcations after GTR therapy: Digital subtraction and clinical
membrane in mandibular furcations. J Periodontol. 68(7):
measurements. I Periodontol. 68:636, 1997.
679-686, 1997.
215. Wenzel A, Warrer K, Karring T. Digital subtraction radiography
233. Fugazzotto PA. The use of demineralized laminar bone sheets in
in assessing bone changes in periodontal defects following
guided bone regeneration procedures: report of three cases. Int J
guided tissue regeneration. J Clin Periodontol. 19:208, 1992.
Oral Maxillofac Implants 11(2):239-244, 1996.
19
Furcation involvement and treatment
Paul Theuns
Introduction
FO:
No furcation involvement (see Figure 5.22).
F1:
Soft tissue lesion extending to the furcation level
The furcation is the anatomical area of multirooted teeth
with minimal osseous destruction, 1-3 mm, or less
where the roots divide. Advanced periodontitis in
than halfway under the crown in any direction of a
multirooted teeth is inevitably connected to furcation
multirooted tooth with attachment loss (see
involvement. The presence of furcation involvement
Figure 5.23).
can lead to extensive problems with regard to plaque
F2:
Soft tissue lesion combined with bone loss that per-
retention, rapid progression of attachment loss, food
mits a probe to enter the furcation from one aspect,
retention, and erosive or carious lesions. Furcations are
but not to pass completely through the furcation,
some of the most difficult areas to treat due to the
 more than 3 mm, or greater than halfway under the
retention of plaque and microorganisms, and therefore
crown of a multirooted tooth with attachment loss 
regular quality homecare may not even keep the furca-
(see Figure 5.24).
tion free of plaque .2.3
F3:
Lesions with extensive osseous destruction that
Etiology
permit through and through passage of the probe,
with or without soft tissue obscuring the commu-
The primary cause of the development of furcation
nication (see Figure 5.25).
 defects is bacterial plaque, as described elsewhere in this
Some dentists (human and veterinary) recognize a
book. Both the prevalence and severity of furcation
fourth stage (F4) where the probe passes all the way
involvement increase with age.4 Furcational bone loss can
through to the other side of the furcation without soft
occur secondary to periodontal or pulpal disease.5 While
tissue obscuring the communication (i.e. visible through
furcation exposure occurs late in the disease course in
and through pathway).9
of “reserve? crown, it occurs much earlier small animal
 patients (see Figure 5.21).6
Local anatomic factors
With regard to treatment, clinicians must consider local
Diagnosis and classification
anatomical factors which may affect the results of
Diagnosis is best achieved by thorough clinical examina-
therapy. Radiographs are mandatory for treatment
tion. The extent of furcation defect is best determined
planning.
by careful probing with a curved probe. Once a furcation
The root trunk length (the distance between the
involvement is diagnosed, radiographs can help in deter-
cementoenamel junction and the entrance of the
mining the extent of the lesion.
furcation) varies considerably between different individ-
The most common indices used in veterinary dentistry
uals and different teeth. The shorter the root trunk, the
 are based upon furcation exposure as described by Hamp
more accessible the teeth are for maintenance care/
et al. (1975). The following is a classification of furcation
procedures. Long root trunks carry a worse prognosis, as
exposure:173
they hinder homecare efforts. In small animal patients,
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
289
290
 Periodontal Surgical Techniques
 essentially all teeth have short root trunks (vs. long root
trunks in human teeth) (see chapter 5).
The root length also has a direct influence on the
success of treatment. Longer roots are more likely to have
 sufficient attachment levels remaining in order to effec-
tively treat the root.0.11
 Another important factor in determining prognosis is
the degree of divergence of the roots. There is usually a
larger degree of divergence of tooth roots in small animal
patients as compared to human teeth, which facilitates
treatment because there is more access to reach and treat
the infected furcation area.12
Treatment
The treatment of periodontitis with furcation involve-
Figure 19.1 Horizontal "envelope" flap created over the right
 ment requires thorough cleaning and debridement of
maxillary fourth premolar (108) in a dog. This gives excellent
the furcation area. After the initial cleaning/scaling is
visibility of the class ll furcation exposure and will allow for
effective cleaning and therapy.
 performed, a thorough examination of the tooth and fur-
cation is necessary to establish a treatment plan. A thor-
ough evaluation includes: visual inspection, periodontal
of the furcation morphology and the depth of the
probing of the defect, sounding (see chapter 16) and
involvement (Figure 19.1) (see chapter 16 for a complete
dental radiographs.13 With periodontal pockets greater
 discussion of periodontal flaps).
than 4-mm, direct visualization is required for adequate
Proper visibility allows the surgeon to determine if the
dleaning. This visualization is best achieved via periodontal
furcation should be treated with guided tissue regenera-
flaps (see chapter 16). In cases with no periodontal
tion. Conservative odontoplasty could also beconsidered,
pockets, the clinician must determine if all infected areas
in order to widen the furcation entrance, making it more
can be reached by tooth brushing.14 Areas that cannot be
accessible for plaque control (see chapter 18).16 It is
accessed need to be cleaned under general anesthesia at a
 important too note however, that corrective odonto-
suggested interval of approximately 6 months, but more
  apd ap a e si is
frequent cleanings may be necessary.'5 If the client cannot
 minimal amounts of bone.
perform sufficient, quality homecare for the teeth (see
The citric acid technique has been extensively investi-
chapter 13) and/or is reluctant to comply with the required
gated in dogs, showing encouraging results for the
schedule of professional care, the prognosis is poor and in
treatment of furcation lesions (see chapter 17).zs This
these cases extraction would be the treatment of choice.
technique involves raising a mucoperiosteal flap and
thoroughly instrumenting the root surface to remove
Class I defects
calculus and underlying cementum (Figure 19.2). Next,
citric acid (pH = 1) is applied with cotton pledgets and
Early (F1) lesions can be treated conservatively. Scaling
left on for 2-5 minutes (Figure 19.3).'9 After that time,
and closed root planning should be effective, if followed
by strict oral hygiene. After the cleaning process, home-
the surface is irrigated with water (Figure 19.4). If
further treatment (such as guided tissue regeneration) is
care is critically essential (ideally on a daily basis), in
deemed necessary, it is performed at this time
order to prevent progression of the disease.
(Figure 19.5). Guided tissue regeneration (GTR) with
Class Il and Ill defects
barriers and bone replacement grafts (see chapter 18)
 has been found to significantly improve attachment gain
 There are several options when treating teeth with
 in class II and I11 furcations.20-23 Attachment gains were
advanced furcational disease including: periodontal
even more significant when combined with a barrier
 surgery and GTR, hemisection, root resection with
 membrane (Figure 19.6).24.zs The final step in this tech-
partial extraction, and extraction.
nique is closure of the surgical flap (Figure 19.7).26
Although F2 and 3 defects are treated in a similar
Periodontal flap surgery +/- guided tissue
fashion, F3 lesions carry a worse prognosis. Regenerative
regeneration (GTR)
 methods such as GTR or hemisection may be considered
In most cases, the treatment of choice for these lesions
for these cases. However, if the owner isn't able to perform
(F2 and 3) involves flap surgery to provide direct vision
 daily oral hygiene, extraction is the treatment of choice.
Furcation Involvement and Treatment 291
(a)
(b)
Figure 19.2 Instrumenting (scaling) the exposed root surface via ultrasonic (a) and hand (b) methods. Note the ultrasonic tip is a small)
subgingival variety.
Figure 19.3 Application of the citric acid etchant to the cean and
Figure 19.5 Placement of the bone augmentation product to fill
smooth root surfaces. Note that every attempt is made to avoid
the defect.
the soft tissues
Figure 19.4 Thorough rinsing of the etch
Figure 19.6 Placement of the preshaped barier membrane.
292   Periodontal Surgical Techniques
Hemisection
Hemisection (Figure 19.8) is the splitting of a multirooted
tooth into separate portions. This procedure achieves
complete removal of the furcation, allowing the area to be
more effectively cleaned and managed. After the splitting
procedure, the individual roots are leff in place.
        
treatment, but is preferably performed afferward. This
 procedure is rarely performed in veterinary dentistry since
typically at least one of the roots has significant disease.
Tooth resection with partial extraction
When one root of a multi-rooted tooth is significantly
Figure 19.7 Postoperative picture demonstrating flap closure.
diseased, removal of that root while maintaining the
healthy/healthier root/s may be desirable?" ( Figure 19.9).
 The surgeon can elect to remove the whole section of the
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
Figure 19.8 (a and b) Preoperative images of a class Ill furcation exposure on the left mandibular first molar (309) of a dog that had not
oeiny aun yonou aqod au buesuowan anpid jeiuap jeoeul (e) sidsane uoeauaba snonaand jeas on panuodsal
(b) Intraoral dental radiograph confirming the complete bone loss in the furcation (red arrow). (c and d) Postoperative dental radiograph
of the tooth sectioning and restoration (red arrows) and standard endodontic treatment with adequate obturation (blue arrows).
Furcation Involvement and Treatment 293
(e)
(f)
E
(g)
Figure 19.8 (cont'd) (e) 9-month recheck radiograph of the
endodontic therapy revealing continued apical seal and lack
of periapical rarefaction (blue arrows), indicating successful
endodontic treatment. (f) 9-month recheck radiograph of the
furcational area revealing some improvement in bone height (red
arrow). This is an excellent result for thisrarely done but commonly
indicated procedure. (g) 9-month recheck picture of the furcational
area revealing the excellent healing and lack of inflammation
(blue arrow). This is an excellent result for this rarely done but
commonly indicated procedure.
tooth (tooth resection) or leave the crown and remove
 presentation. First, much of the crown is maintained
only the root (root resection). In these cases, meticulous
for mastication. Secondly, because the distal root is
clinical and radiographic diagnosis is necessary to deter-
generally significantly diseased, its extraction is
mine which root/s to extract. The goal of this procedure
relatively atraumatic and is therefore this treatment
is to extract the diseased root, thus eliminating the furca-
is less invasive than complete extraction. Similarly,
tion, while maintaining the strongest and most acces-
another advantage of root/tooth resection vs. full
sible part of the tooth.2 The remaining root(s) must then
extraction of the mandibular first molar is the decreased
be treated endodontically.
risk of iatrogenic mandibular fracture. With minimal
Regarding the maxillary fourth premolar (108, 208),
bone apical to the roots in this area, which has been
it is generally advised to salvage the distal root while
further weakened by the periodontal disease, the
extracting the mesial roots. This is because the furca-
increased force needed to extract the mesial root could
tional area between the mesial roots is the hardest to
result in a pathologic fracture. The option of retaining
clean. This is a generalization, and is dependent on the
the mesial root via endodontic therapy would avoid
clinical and radiographic findings. The most common
this potential concern.
indication for root resection in veterinary dentistry is
After root resection or hemisection is performed,
more advanced techniques for the treatment
of
dogs.27 There is often significant disease associated
 periodontal disease are often necessary.2 For example,
with the distal root, while the mesial root is spared.
the placement of artificial bone followed by guided tissue
There are several advantages to root resection in this
 regeneration with a membrane can be effective.
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
(e)
 (e) selow is seinguw al e jo ydeoien geuan jeoeui aaleadoaid (e) uoexa geied pue boas yool h'ah ane
a small breed dog. Notice the significant vertical alveolar bone loss on both sides of the distal root (red arrows), and early bone loss in
the distal aspect of the furcation. However, note that the mesial root has normal alveolar bone height. (b) Postoperative dental radio-
graph of the same tooth following resection and extraction of the distal root (yellow arrow) with standard endodontic therapy performed
on the mesial root (blue arrows). (c) Recheck dental radiograph of the same patient. Note the alveolus is healed (purple arrow) and there
is minimal to no alveolar bone loss to the mesial root (red arrow). In addition, there is continued adequate fill of the endodontic system 
(blue arrows) and lack of periapical rarefaction (yellow arrow), indicating successful endodontic therapy. These findings confirm a suc-
premolar (208) of a dog with a deep periodontal pocket on the distal aspect. (e) Postoperative picture where the distal root has been 
sectioned and extracted and the mesial roots treated with root canal therapy.
Furcation Involvement and Treatment 295
Prognosis
12. Carranza A, Takei H, Cochran D. Reconstructive periodontal
surgery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
 The prognosis is generally poor for maintaining a tooth
Saunders, 2006, p. 994.
with class II or Ill furcation exposure, but treatment can
13. Measley BL, Beybayer M, Butzin Ca, et al. Use of furcal bone
be effective.
sounding to improve the accuracy of furcation diagnosis.
 If the problems of access for professional cleaning
J Periodontol. 65:649, 1994.
14. Harvey CE, Emily P. Periodontal disease. In: Small Animal
(SRP) and homecare can be resolved, the prognosis is no
Dentistry. St. Louis: Mosby, 1993, pp. 102-103.
worse than that of a single rooted tooth with the same
15. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
level of attachment loss.30
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
pp. 217-231.
16. Wolf HF Rateitschak E, Rateitschak KH, Hassell, TM. In: Color
Box 19.1 Key points
Atlas of Dental Medicine: Periodontology. 3rd ed. Stuttgart:
Thieme, 2005, p. 385.
17. Crigger M, Boyle G, Nilveus R, et al. The effect of topical citric
● The furcation area is one of the most difficult areas to
acid application on the healing of experimental furcation defects
treat.
in dogs. J Periodontal Res. 13(6):538-549, 1978.
 Class Il and Il furcation involvement requires advanced
18. Nilvéus R, Bogle G, Crigger M, Egelberg I, Selvig KA. The effect of
 treatment procedures.
topical citric acid application on the healing of experimental
·  Post-operative oral hygiene is mandatory for successful
furcation defects in dogs. Il. Healing after repeated surgery.
 treatment of periodontal disease with furcation
J Periodontal Res. 15(5):544-550, 1980.
involvement.
19. Carranza FA, Takei HH, Cochran DL. Reconstructive periodontal
 With good oral hygiene, the prognosis for therapy of
surgery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
Saunders, 2006, pp. 968-990.
furcationally diseased teeth can be similar to single rooted
20. Gantes B, Martin M, Garrett S, Egelberg J. Treatrment of
teeth with the same level of attachment loss.
●Tooth resection is a viable alternative (especially in
periodontal furcation defects. (Il). Bone regeneration in mandib-
ular class II defects. J Clin Periodontol. 15(4):232-239, 1988.
carnassial teeth) if one or more roots retain sufficient 
21. Pepelassi EM, Bissada NF, Greenwell H, Farah CF. Doxycycline-
attachment.
in advanced periodontal furcation defects. J Periodontol.
62(2):106-115, 1991.
References
22. Gantes BG, Synowski BN, Garrett S, Egelberg JH. Treatment of
 periodontal furcation defects. Mandibular class IIl defects.
1. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
J Periodontol. 62(6):361-365, 1991.
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
23. Kenney EB, Lekovic V, Elbaz JJ, et al. The use of a porous
Pp. 204-205.
hydroxylapatite implant in periodontal defects. I1. Treatment of
 2. Masters DH, Hoskins SW. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology.
class II furcation lesions in lower molars. J Periodontol. 59(2):
St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 134-169.
67-72, 1988.
 3. Wolf HF, Rateitschak E, Rateitschak KH, Hassell, TM. In: Color
24. Garrett S, Gantes B, Zimmerman G, Egelberg J. Treatment of 
Atlas of Dental Medicine: Periodontology. 3rd ed. Stuttgart:
mandibular class Ill periodontal furcation defects. Coronally
Thieme, 2005, pp. 172-173.
positioned flaps with and without expanded polytetrafluoro-
4. Kalkwarf K, Kaldahl W, Patil K, et al. Evaluation of furcation
ethylene membranes. J Periodontol. 65(6):592-597, 1994.
region reponse to periodontal therapy. In: Carranza's Clinical
25. Calongne KB, Aichelmann-Reidy ME, Yukna RA, Mayer ET.
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 134-169.
Clinical comparison of microporous biocompatible composite of
5. Berman LH, Hartwell GR. Diagnosis. In: Cohen's Pathways of the
PMMA, PHEMA and calcium hydroxide grafts and expanded
Pulp. 9th ed. St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier, 2006, p. 16.
 polytetrafluoroethylene barrier membranes in human mandibu-
6. Page RC, Schroeder HE. Spontaneous chronic periodontitis in
lar molar Class II furcations. A case series. J Periodontol.
72(10):1451-1459, 2001.
60-73, 1981.
26. Carranza A, Takei H, Cochran D. Reconstructive periodontal sur-
7. Recommendations from the AVDC Nomenclature Committee
gery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders,
adopted by the AVDC Board.
2006, p. 974.
 8. Wolf HF, Rateitschak E, Rateitschak KH, Hassell, TM. In: Color
27. Niemiec BA. Treatment of mandibular first molar teeth with
Atlas of Dental Medicine: Periodontology. 3rd ed. Stutgart:
endodontic-periodontal lesions in a dog. J Vet Dent. 18(1):21-25,
Thieme, 2005, p. 383.
2001.
9. Huffman LJ. Oral examination. In: Small Animal Dental, Oral and
28. Ammons W, Harrington, GW. Furcation involvement and
Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA ed.).
treatment. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
London: Manson, 2010, pp. 39-61.
Saunders, 2006, p. 996.
10. Ammons W, Harrington GW.
Furcation involvement and
29. Ammons W, Harrington,
GW. Furcation involvement and
      
treatment. In: Carranza's Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
Saunders, 2006, pp. 994.
Saunders, 2006, p. 997.
11. Gher ME, Vernino, AR. Root morphology: Clinical significance
30. Ammons W, Harrington, GW. Furcation involvement and
in pathogenis and treatrment of periodontal disease. J Am Dent
treatment. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis:
Assoc. 101:627, 1980.
Saunders, 2006,pp. 999-1004.
SECTION 5
Related topics
20
Host modulation therapies
Introduction
 their use questionable.? However, an increasing number
of products are nutraceuticals, with minimal to no side
As stated earlier in this text, periodontal disease is
effects.
 initiated by plaque bacteria. The bacteria and their
byproducts create the inflammatory changes. These
Drug therapies
inflammatory changes may result in osteoclastic bone
loss via an unknown pathway in susceptible individuals.
Anti-inflammatories
What is known is that the patient, and not the bacteria
Host-mediated immune responses to microorganisms
directly, controls the osteoclasts that create the alveolar
lead to the destruction of periodontal tissues.34 There is
bone loss.
substantial evidence that the products of arachidonic
 It is increasingly clear that when the host-mediated
acid (AA) metabolism may be pivotal in triggering
response to the bioflm is lef unchecked, tissue and
and perpetuating the inflammatory changes seen in
bone of the periodontium are destroyed. If the acute
periodontitis.56
inflammatory response is resolved quickly, tissue injury
High concentrations of the AA-derived products such
is prevented. However, inadequate resolution and failure
as leukotrieneB4 (LTB4), prostaglandinE2 (PGE2), and
to return tissue to homeostasis results in neutrophil-
inflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-alpha
mediated destruction and chronic inflammation. (See
and interleukin-1b and -6) are particularly destructive.17
chapters 2, 4, and 5 for a complete discussion of the
Manipulation of the immune response to suppress
 pathogenesis of periodontal diseases.)
  si   
There are numerous preparations that have shown
studied as a treatment for controlling such inflammatory
 promise in decreasing the amount of osteoclastic bone
responses in periodontal disease.&* Several host response-
resorption in cases of chronic periodontitis. Many drug
 modulating approaches have been described. However,
therapies have been shown to have good efficacy in slow.
the control of inflammation with available pharmaceu-
 ing the progression of periodontal disease. However,
tical agents is still a challenge because of the side effects
many of them have significant side effects that make
associated with their chronic use.
NSAIDS
 Box 20.1 Key cdlinical point
Since periodontal inflammation and subsequent bone
loss is known to be an inflammatory process, anti-
Classic periodontal therapy has concentrated on plaque
inflammatories are an obvious choice. Numerous NSAIDs
control, which is still the comerstone. However, current
(Cox-1 and 2) have been tested against periodontal dis-
research is looking at methods to control the inflammation
and subsequent bone loss by treating the patient. This is
ease and alveolar bone loss. For the most part, they are
called "host modulation" and is currently the most popular
successful when administered either locally or systemi-
 form of "novel" periodontal therapy.
cally.' Products that showed favorable results include
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
299
300  Related Topics
ketoprofen,17 and ibuprofen.1# It appears that these prod-
 term, with numerous studies now supporting long-term
ucts are most effective in the short term, however, and
administration of low-dose doxycycline.37-43 In addition,
 may not be effective for long-term therapy.10.19
it was found that spiramycin reaches high concentrations
in saliva and also helps control periodontal infections,
Bisphosphonates
particularly in felines.4 It should be noted that many of
Another way to decrease the amount of alveolar bone
 the anti-infective agents that were tested showed positive
loss is to directly inhibit the osteoclasts. The bisphospho-
 results, opening the door for other treatments.45.46
nates are one class of antiresorptive medications that are
designed to decrease the amount of alveolar bone loss
Statins
such as that from periodontitis.
In addition to medications that are considered to have an
One study looked at the use of locally applied mono-
obvious beneficial method of action, there are some
sodium olpadronate (OPD).2 The treated group exhib-
 drugs that appear to promote periodontal health as a side
ited a marked inhibition of bone loss; that is,
 effect. One of these is the cholesterol-lowering drug
 interradicular bone volume was significantly greater
simvastatin, which is known to have anabolic effects on
than that observed in the non-treated group. The study
bone metabolism. A recent study in rats showed that
further reported, “Osteoclasts in the OPD treated group
when applied topically, this drug caused a 46% reversal
were detached from the bone surface, were round in
rate ofalveolar bone loss.4 An additional study confirmed
shape, and exhibited a loss of polarity and lack of ruffled
that this product showed protective features against
borders?" Similar findings were noted when clodronate
 periodontitis-induced bone loss.4 Likewise, atorvastatin
was topically administered to rats with periodontitis.21.2z
 has shown positive effects on alveolar bone height and
 Furthermore, it appears that these products are effec-
tooth mobility.49
    c pe  a
showed a statistically significant reduction in alveolar
Inflammatory mediators
bone loss when risedronate was administered systemi-
As stated above, the resolution of inflammation (and
cally.4 An additional study, however, showed that while
return to homeostasis) will prevent osteoclastic bone
there is a short-term benefit with its use, long-term
resorption. Control though classic anti-inflammatory
administration may lead to bone loss.25
 pathways has been shown effective, but with significant
side effects. Neutrophils are present mainly in inflamed
Parathyroid hormone
or injured tissues and their effective elimination is a
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) functions as a major medi-
 prerequisite for complete resolution of an inflammatory
ator of bone remodeling and as an essential regulator of
response.5° Resolution of inflammation is an active,
calcium homeostasis. In addition to its well-established
 agonist-mediated, well-orchestrated return of tissue
catabolic effects, it is now recognized that intermittent
homeostasis.5′ Lipoxins, resolvins, and protectins are a
PTH administration has anabolic effects (promotion of
new family of bioactive products of fatty acids such as
bone formation).26.27 Intermittent administration of PTH
 arachadonic acid.s2.53 Resolvins are products of omega-3
also has a protective factor against periodontal bone
 fatty acid transformation circuits initiated by cyclo-
loss.28.29 Finally, it has the ability to stimulate the prolifer-
 Oxygenase-2 to form novel small molecules.52 These
ation of PDL fibroblasts.3 The combination of these effects 
 products act locally to stop leukocyte recruitment and
has shown positive effects in the repair of periodontally
 promote resolution of inflammation.54
lost bone.31
These products have a significant anti-inflammatory
effect in general, as well as in relation to certain dis-
Antimicrobials
eases.5-1 Results indicate that neutrophils from peri-
Another group of medications with significant promise
 odontally diseased tissues respond to RvE1 .6263 Consistent
both locally and systemically are antimicrobials, in
with these potent actions, topical application of RvEl in
 particular the tetracycline class and especially doxycy-
rabbit  periodontitis  conferred  dramatic  protection
cline. These are typically used below the antimicrobial
 against inflammation-induced tissue and bone loss
dose for their anti-inflammatory properties. In addition,
associated with periodontitis.6 An additional study
 they appear to block cytokines, which inhibits the com-
showed that topical application of RvE1 had dramatic
munication among inflammatory cells in periodontitis.
effects in the regeneration of periodontal tissues
The local administration ofthe tetracycline class of drugs
(including bone) that was destroyed by periodontal dis-
is currently favored and well supported in multiple
 ease.4 These products represent a powerful future option
studies.32-36 In fact, the administration of tetracyclines 
for the control of periodontal inflammation and
appears to be successful both postoperatively and long
 secondary alveolar bone loss.
Host Modulation Therapies  301
Neutraceuticals
throughout the body, and when administered at high
doses can aid in the recovery of periodontally lost alve-
Fatty acids
olar bone.77738
Fatty acids have been proposed to reduce chronic inflam-
mation in individuals with arthritis." Recent studies
Coenzyme Q10
with dietary v-3 fatty acid use in rats resulted in reduced
gingival inflammation.66 The topical application of
with  periodontal(
disease.79so Conversely, there are
omega-3 (v-3) polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) was
successful in the treatment of inflammatory diseases,
 reports that supplementation (systemic or topical) may
such as experimental periodontitis in animal models.68.69
have a beneficial effect on periodontal health.s1-s3 While
this appears promising, more controlled clinical studies
It was also shown that eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) or
 docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) can inhibit the production
are necessary before promoting this as a therapy since
of PGE2 to an extent similar to indomethacin.7 These
most reviews do not favor its use at this time.84
same products have been proven to decrease periodontal
inflammation.7
Folic acid
Pilot clinical and animal studies with v-3 and v-6
Studies have demonstrated that folic acid is effective
PUFA supplementation also showed beneficial results on
in preserving gum tissue and reducing the risk of
 periodontal inflammation and bone loss, indicating an
gingivitis and periodontitis. Topical therapy (mouth-
anti-inflammatory role for these fatty acids without any
wash) appears to be the most effective method of supple-
evidence of side effects.727 However, the clinical studies
mentation,6.s7 but there is evidence that systemic
with dietary supplements did not show significant influ-
supplementation also has a protective effect.
ences on inflammation, likely due to the lack of sufficient
concentration of v-3 PUFA locally. Conversely, because
Nutrition
of the high epithelial penetration of fatty acids, topical
 Finally, it appears that proper nutrition, including
 application may be favorable for the treatment of local
vitamin supplementation, is an important aspect of
 oral inflammatory diseases, including periodontitis.62
 periodontal care. Studies have found multivitamin
A limited number of human clinical studies with die-
supplementation to provide beneficial effects for
tary fatty acids also showed improvement in some
periodontal patients,* and vitamin E supplementation to
clinical parameters, especially gingival and bleeding
have positive effects on gingival healing.9192 In contrast,
indices. However, the results were not as profound as
malnutrition has been shown to have a negative effect on
those in the animal studies. A recent pilot study with v-6
periodontal health." Therefore, proper nutrition is
and v-3 fatty acids in the treatment of periodontal dis-
essential for proper periodontal health, especially in the
ease showed beneficial effects of dietary v-6 fatty acid
postoperative phase.
(borage oil) on gingival inflammation and probing
depth.72
Conclusion
A particular fatty acid called 1-Tetradecanol complex
(1-TDC) is an esterified MUFA mixture of cetylmyris-
Host modulation therapy is likely the future of
toleate, cetylmyristate, cetyl palmitoleate, cetyl laureate,
periodontal therapy. It is also important to note that
cetyl palmitate, and cetyl oleate. In two in vivo studies on
nutraceuticals, vitamins, and proper nutrition all play a
New Zealand Rabbits,7475 1-TDC stopped the progres-
 sion of periodontal disease and resulted in a significant
reduction in macroscopic periodontal inflammation,
Box 20.2 Key points
attachment, and bone loss (10.1% $+/-$ 1.8%). In
addition, histologic assessment demonstrated that
 Host modulation is the act of decreasing periodontal
1-TDC inhibited inflammatory cell infiltration and oste-
inflammation and bone loss via regulation of the patient's
oclastic activity. Finally, it has been reported to inhibit
immune system.
the growth of Actinomyces viscosus and Staphylococcus
Local and systemic acministration of various medications
qureus, as well as inhibit thromboxane A2 production.76
decreases periodontal loss.
●Supplementation with various vitamins, essential fatty
Milk basic protein
acids, and nutraceuticals appears to provide a safe and 
effective option for this methocd of therapy.
An additional neutricutical that has a positive effect on
Active resolution of inflammation via resolvins appears to
alveolar bone is milk basic protein (MBP). It has a
be a future thraputic option.
     
302
 Related Topics
   rd p s i a
of cyclooxygenase-2, in experimental periodontitis in rats.
ments, in combination with new local bone regenerating
J Periodontal Res. 40(3):208-211, 2005.
pue (uaiond oionoudou auoq se ns) spnpod
16. Bezerra MM, de Lima V, Alencar VB, Vieira IB, Brito GA, Ribeiro
RA, Rocha FA. Selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition prevents
alveolar bone loss in experimental periodontitis in rats.
this common problem.
JPeriodontol. 71(6):1009-1014, 2000.
17. Paquette DW, Fiorellini JP, Martuscelli G, et al. Enantiospecific
Notes
inhibition of ligature-induced periodontitis in beagles with top-
ical (S)-ketoprofen. J Clin Periodontol. 24(8):521-528, 1997.
A. Metacam, Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica, Inc.
18. Offenbacher S, Williams RC, Jeffcoat MK, et al. Effects of NSAIDs
B. EFAC, Elite Science, LLC.
on beagle crevicular cyclooxygenase metabolites and periodontal
bone loss. J Periodontal Res. 27(3):207-213, 1992.
References
19. Nassar CA, Nassar PO, Nassar PM, Spolidorio LC. Selective cyclo-
oxygenase-2 inhibition prevents bone resorption. Braz Oral Res.
 1. Van Dyke TE, Serhan CN. Resolution of inflarmmation: A new
19(1):36-40, 2005.
paradigm for the pathogenesis of periodontal diseases. J Dent Res.
20. Goya JA, Paez HA, Mandalunis PM. Effect of topical
82(2):82-90, 2003.
administration of monosodium olpadronate on experimental
 2. Van Dyke TE. The management of inflammation in periodontal
periodontitis in rats. J Periodontol. 77(1):1-6, 2006.
disease. J Periodontol. 79(8 Suppl):1601-1608, 2008.
 21. Mitsuta T, Horiuchi H, Shinoda H.Effects oftopicaladministration
3. Genco RJ. Host responses in periodontal diseases: Current
of clodronate on alveolar bone resorption in rats with experi-
concepts. J Periodontol. 63:338-355, 1992.
mental periodontitis. J Periodontol. 73(5):479-486, 2002.
4. Preshaw PM, Seymour RA, Heasman PA. Current concepts
 22. Alencar VB, Bezerra MM, Lima V, Abreu AL, Brito GA, Rocha
in periodontal pathogenesis. Dent Update. 31(10):570-572,
FA, Ribeiro RA. Disodium chlodronate prevents bone resorption
574-578, 2004.
in experimental periodontitis in rats. J Periodontol. 73(3):
 5. Kantarci A, Van Dyke TE. Lipoxin signaling in neutrophils and
251-256,2002.
their role in periodontal disease. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent
 23. El-Shinnawi UM, El-Tantawy SI. The effect of alendronate sodium
Fatty Acids. 73:289-299, 2005.
on alveolar bone loss in periodontitis (clinical trial). J Int Acad
 6. Salvi GE, Lang NP. Host response modulation in the management
Periodontol. 5:5-10, 2003.
of periodontal diseases. J Clin Periodontol. 32(Suppl. 6):108-129,
 24. Shoji K, Horiuchi H, Shinoda H. Inhibitory effects of a bisphos-
2005.
phonate (risedronate) on experimental periodontitis in rats.
 7. Lawrence T, Willoughby DA, Gilroy DW. Anti-inflammatory lipid
J Periodontal Res. 30(4):277-284, 1995.
mediators and insights into the resolution of inflammation. Nat
 25. Cetinkaya BO, Keles GC, Ayas B, Gurgor P. Effects of risedronate
Rev Immunol. 2:787-795, 2002.
on alveolar bone loss and angiogenesis: A stereologic study in rats.
8. Gilroy DW, Lawrence T, Perretti M, Rossi AG. Inflammatory
J Periodontol. 79(10):1950-1961, 2008.
resolution: New oportunities for drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug
26. Liu J, Cao Z, Li C. Intermittent PTH administration: A novel
Discov. 3:401-416, 2004.
therapy method for periodontitis-associated alveolar bone loss.
9. Barros SP, Arce RM, Galloway P, Lawter R, Offenbacher S.
Med Hypotheses 72(3):294-296, 2009.
Therapeutic effect of a topical CCR2 antagonist on induced
27. Miller SC, Hunziker J, Mecham M, Wronski TJ. Intermittent
alveolar bone loss in mice. J Periodontal Res. 2011 Jan. 18.
 parathyroid hormone administration stimulates bone formation
10. Queiroz-Junior CM, Pacheco CM, Maltos KL, Caliari MV, Duarte
in the mandibles of aged ovariectomized rats. J Dent Res. 76:
ID, Francischi JN. Role of systemic and local administration of
1471-1476, 1997.
28. Barros SP, Silva MA, Somerman MJ, Nociti FH Jr. Parathyroid
model of periodontal disease in rats. J Periodontal Res. 44(2):
hormone protects against periodontitis-associated bone loss.
153-160, 2009.
J Dent Res. 82(10):791-795, 2003.
11. Gurgel BC, Duarte PM, Nociti FH Jr, et al. Impact of an
 29. Marques MR, da Silva MA, Manzi FR, Cesar-Neto JB, Nociti FH
anti-inflammatory therapy and its withdrawal on the progression
 Jr, Barros SP. Effect of intermittent PTH administration in the
of experimental periodontitis in rats. J Periodontol. 75(12):
 periodontitis-associated bone loss in ovariectomized rats. Arch
1613-1618, 2004.
Oral Biol. 50(4):421-429, 2005.
12. Olveira TM, Sakai VT, Machado MA, et al. COX-2 inhibition
 30. Lossdorfer S, Gotz W, Jager A. PTH(le34) affects osteoprotegerin
decreases VEGF expression and alveolar bone loss during the
 production in human PDL cells in vitro. J Dent Res. 84:634-638,
progression of experimental periodontitis in rats. J Periodontol.
2005.
79(6):1062-1069, 2008.
31. Lossdorfer S, Ykildiz F Gotz W, Kheralla Y, Jager A. Anabolic
13. Buduneli N, Buduneli E, Cetin EO, Kirilmaz L, Kitikciler N.
effect of intermittent PTH(1-34) on the local microenvironment
Clinical findings and gingival crevicular fluid prostaglandin E2
during the late phase of periodontal repair in a rat model of tooth
and interleukin-1l-beta levels following initial periodontal
root resorption. Clin Oral Investig. 14:89-98, 2010.
treatment and short-term meloxicam administration. Expert
 32. Grenier D, Roy E, Mayrand D. Modulation of Porphyromonas
Opin Pharmacother. 11(11):1805-1812, 2010.
gingivalis proteinase activity by suboptimal doses of antimicrobial
14. Holzhausen M, Rossa Junior C, Marcantonio Junior E, et al. Efect
agents. J Periodontol. 74(9):1316-1319, 2003.
of selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition on the development of
33. Garrett S, Johnson L, Drisko CH, Adams DF, Bandt C,
ligature-induced periodontitis in rats. J Periodontol. 73(9):
 s        i
1030-1036, 2002.
Hanes P, Hawley CE, Kiger R, Killoy W, Mellonig IT, Polson A,
15. Holzhausen M, Spolidorio DM, Muscara MN, Hebling J,
Raab FJ, Ryder M, Stoller NH, Wang HL, Wolinsky LE, Evans
Spolidorio LC. Protective effects ofetoricoxib, a selective inhibitor
GH, Harrold CQ, Arnold RM, Southard GL, et al. Two
Host Modulation Therapies  303
multi-center studies evaluating locally delivered doxycycline
bone loss in ovariectomized rats. J Periodontol. 78(8):1561-1567,
hyclate, placebo control, oral hygiene, and scaling and root plan-
2007.
ing in the treatment of periodontitis. J Periodontol. 70(5):
49. Fajardo ME, Rocha ML, Sanchez-Marin FJ, Espinosa-Chavez EJ.
490-503, 1999.
Effect of atorvastatin on chronic periodontitis: A randomized
34. Drisko CH. The use of locally delivered doxycycline in the
pilot study. J Clin Periodontol. 37(11):1016-1022, 2010.
treatment of periodontitis. Clinical results. J Clin Periodontol.
            
25(11 Pt 2):947-952, 1998.
AD, Serhan CN. Apoptotic neutrophils and T cells sequester che-
 35. Machion L, Andia DC, Benatti BB, Carvalho MD, Nogueira-Filho
mokines during immune response resolution through modula-
GR, Casati MZ, Nociti FH Jr, Sallum EA. Locally delivered doxy-
tion of CCR5 expression. Nat Immunol. 7:1209-1216, 2006.
cycline as an adjunctive therapy to scaling and root planing in the
 51. Van Dyke TE. The management of inflammation in periodontal
treatment of smokers: A clinical study. J Periodontol. 75(3):
disease. J Periodontol. 79(8 Suppl):1601-168, 2008.
464-469, 2004.
 52. Serhan CN, Gotlinger K, Hong S, Arita M. Resolvins, docosatri-
36. Eickholz P, Kim TS, Birklin T, Schacher B, Renggli HH, Schaecken
enes, and neuroprotectins, novel omega-3 -derived mediators, and
MT, Holle R, Kibler A, Ratka-Kriger P. Non-surgical periodontal
their aspirin-triggered endogenous epimers: An overview of their
therapy with adjunctive topical doxycycline: A double-blind
protective roles in catabasis. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat.
randomized controlled multicenter study. J Clin Periodontol.
73:155-172, 2004.
29(2):108-117, 2002.
 53. Serhan CN. Lipoxin biosynthesis and its impact in inflammatory
37. Emingil G, Atilla G, Sorsa T, Savolainen P, Baylas H. Effectiveness
and vascular events. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1212(1):1-25, 1994.
ofadjunctive low-dose doxycycline therapyon clinical parameters
54. Hasturk H, Kantarci A, Ohira T, Arita M, Ebrahimi N, Chiang N,
and gingival crevicular fluid laminin-5 gamma2 chain levels in
          S
chronic periodontitis. J Periodontol. 75(10):1387-1396, 2004.
from local inflammation and osteoclast-mediated bone destruc-
38. Girkan A, Cinarcik S, Hiseyinov A. Adjunctive subantimicrobial
tion in periodontitis. FASEB J. 20(2):401-403, 2006.
dose doxycycline: Effect on clinical parameters and gingival cre-
55. Arita M, Yoshida M, Hong S, Tjonahen E, Glickman JN, Petasis
vicular fluid transforming growth factor-beta levels in severe,
NA, Blumberg RS, Serhan CN. Resolvin E1, an endogenous lipid
generalized chronic periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol. 32(3):
 mediator derived from omega-3 eicosapentaenoic acid, protects
244-253, 2005.
against 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis. Proc
39. Girkan A, Emingil G, Cinarcik S, Berdeli A. Post-treatment
Natl Acad Sci USA 102(21):7671-7676, 2005.
effects of subantimicrobial dose doxycycline on clinical parame-
56. Arita M, Bianchini F, Aliberti J, Sher A, Chiang N, Hong S, Yang
ters and gingival crevicular fluid transforming growth factor-
R, Petasis NA, Serhan CN. Stereochemical assignment, antin-
beta1 in severe, generalized chronic periodontitis. Int J Dent Hyg.
flammatory properties, and receptor for the omega-3 lipid
6(2):84-92, 2008.
mediator resolvin E1. J Exp Med. 201(5):713-722, 2005.
40. Preshaw PM, Hefti AF, Jepsen S, Etienne D, Walker C, Bradshaw
57. Arita M, Ohira T, Sun YP, Elangovan S, Chiang N, Serhan CN.
MH. Subantimicrobial dose doxycycline as adjunctive treatment
Resolvin E1 selectively interacts with leukotriene B4 receptor
for periodontitis. A review. J Clin Periodontol. 31(9):697-707,
BLT1 and ChemR23 to regulate inflammation. J Immunol.
2004.
178(6):3912-3917, 2007.
41. Lee HM, Ciancio SG, Tuter G, Ryan ME, Komaroff E, Golub M.
58. Arita M, Clish CB, Serhan CN. The contributions of aspirin and
Subantimicrobial dose doxycycline efficacy as a matrix metallo-
microbial oxygenase to the biosynthesis of anti-inflammatory
proteinase inhibitor in chronic periodontitis patients is enhanced
-esuniod g-eauo uo sionpd asuxo jaaon suloi
when combined with a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
rated fatty acids. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 338(1):
J Periodontol. 75:453-463, 2004.
149-157, 2005.
            7
 59. Serhan CN, Savil J. Resolution of inflammation: The beginning
TM, Giannobile WV. Systemic MMP inhibition for periodontal
 programs the end. Nat Immunol. 6:1191-1197, 2005.
wound repair: Results of a multi-centre randomized-controlled
60. Bannenberg GL, Chiang N, Ariel A, et al. Molecular circuits of
clinical trial. J Clin Periodontol. 36(2):149-156, 2009.
resolution: Formation and actions of resolvins and protectins.
43. Gapski R, Barr JL, Sarment DP, Layher MG, Socransky SS,
J Immunol. 174:4345-4355, 2005.
Giannobile WV. Effect of systemic matrix metalloproteinase inhi-
61. Schwab JM, Chiang N, Arita M, Serhan CN. Resolvin E1 and pro-
tectin D1 activate inflammation-resolution programmes. Nature
J Periodontol. 75(3):441-452, 2004.
447:869-874, 2007.
44. Gawor J. Antibacterial activity of the saliva after administration
62. Hasturk H, Kantarci A, Ohira T, Arita M, Ebrahimi N, Chiang N,
of Spiramycin and Metronidazole in dogs and cats. Magazyn
          
Weterynaryjny 8(41):188-192, 1999.
from local inflammation and osteoclast-mediated bone destruc-
 45. Hanes PJ, Purvis JP. Local anti-infective therapy: Pharmacological
tion in periodontitis. FASEB J. 20(2):401-403, 2006.
agents. A systematic review. Ann Periodontol. 8(1):79-98,2003.
63. Herrera BS, Ohira T, Gao L, Omori K, Yang R, Zhu M, Muscara
46. Stegemann MR, Passmore CA, Sherington J. Antimicrobial
MN, Serhan CN, Van Dyke TE, Gyurko R. An endogenous regu-
activity and spectrum of cefovecin, a new extended-spectrum
lator of inflammation, resolvin El, modulates osteoclast
cephalosporin, against pathogens collected from dogs and cats in
differentiation and bone resorption. Br J Pharmacol. 155(8):
Europe and North America. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
1214-1223, 2008.
50(7):2286-2292, 2006.
64. Hasturk H, Kantarci A, Goguet-Surmenian E, et al. Resolvin E1
47. Seto H, Ohba H, Tokunaga K, Hama H, Horibe M, Nagata T.
regulates inflammation at the cellular and tissue level and
Topical administration of simvastatin recovers alveolar bone loss
restores tissue homeostasis in vivo. J Immunol. 179(10):
in rats. J Periodontal Res. 43(3):261-267, 2008.
7021-7029, 2007.
48. Vaziri H, Naserhojati-Roodsari R, Tahsili-Fahadan N, et al.
65. Curtis CL, Hughes CE, Flannery CR, Little CB, Harwood JL,
 Effect of simvastatin administration on periodontitis-associated
Caterson B. n-3 fatty acids specifically modulate catabolic factors
304  Related Topics
involved in articular cartilage degradation. J Biol Chem. 275:
forrmation in rat experimental periodontitis. J Periodontal Res.
721-724, 2000.
42(1):85-89, 2007.
 66. Kesavalu L, Vasudevan B, Raghu B, et al. Omega-3 fatty acid effect
79. Litaru GP, Nakamura R, Ho L, Folkers K, KuzellWC. Deficiency
on alveolar bone loss in rats. J Dent Res. 85:648-652, 2006
of coenzyme Q10in gingival tissue from patients with periodontal
 67. Kesavalu L, Bakthavatchalu V, Rahman MM, et al. Omega-3 fatty
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 68(10):2332-2335, 1971.
acid regulates inflammatory cytokine/mediator messenger RNA
80. Nakamura R, Littarru GP, Folkers K, Wilkinson EG. Study of
expression in Porphyromonas gingivalis-induced experimental
- rd ym sd  eai ui s
periodontal disease. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 22:232-239, 2007.
ease and evidence for a deficiency of coenzyme Q10. Proc Natl
68. Vardar S, Buduneli E, Turkoglu O, et al. Therapeutic versus pro-
Acad Sci USA 71(4):1456-1460, 1974.
 phylactic plus therapeutic administration of omega-3 fatty acid on
81. Wilkinson EG, Arnold RM, Folkers K, Hansen I, Kishi H.
endotoxin-induced periodontitisin rats. J Periodontol. 75:
Bioenergetics in clinical medicine. I. Adjunctive treatment with
1640-1646, 2004.
 coenzyme Q in periodontal therapy. Res Commun Chem Pathol
69. Vardar S, Buduneli E, Baylas H, Berdeli AH, Buduneli N, Atilla G.
Pharmacol. 12(1):111-123, 1975.
 Individual and combined effects of selective cyclooxygenase-2
82. Hanioka T, Tanaka M, Ojima M, Shizukuishi S, Folkers K. Effect
inhibitor and omega-3 fatty acid on endotoxin-induced periodon-
of topical application of coenzyme Q10 on adult periodontitis.
titis in rats. J Periodontol. 76:99-106, 2005.
Mol Aspects Med. 15 Suppl:s241-248, 1994.
70. Nauroth JM, Liu YC, Van Elswyk M, Bell R, Hall EB, Chung G,
 83. Wilkinson EG, Arnold RM, Folkers K. Bioenergetics in clinical
Arterburn LM. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and docosapentae-
medicine. Vl. Adjunctive treatment of periodontal disease with
noic acid (DPAn-6) algal oils reduce inflammatory mediators in
coenzyme Q10. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol.
human peripheral mononuclear cells in vitro and paw edema in
14(4):715-719, 1976.
vivo. Lipids 45(5):375-384, 2010.
84. Watts TL. Coenzyme Q10 and periodontal treatment: Is there any
71. Naqvi AZ, Buettner C, Phillips RS, Davis RB, Mukamal KJ. n-3
beneficial effect? Br Dent J. 178(6):209-213, 1995.
fatty acids and periodontitis in US adults. J Am Diet Assoc.
 85. Stein GM, Lewis H. Oral changes in a folic acid deficient patient
110(11):1669-1675, 2010.
precipitated by anticonvulsant drug therapy. J Periodontol.
72. Rosenstein ED, Kushner LJ, Kramer N, Kazandjian G. Pilot study
44(10):645-650, 1973.
of dietary fatty acid supplementation in the treatment of adult
 86. Pack AR, Thomson ME. Effects of topical and systemic folic acid
periodontitis. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 68:
supplementation on gingivitis in pregnancy. I Clin Periodontol.
213-218,2003.
7(5):402-414, 1980.
73. Eberhard J, Heilmann F, Acil Y, Albers HK, Jepsen S. Local appli-
 87. Thomson ME, Pack AR. Effects of extended systemic and topical
cation of n-3 or n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids in the treatment of
folate supplementation on gingivitis of pregnancy. J Clin
human experimental gingivitis. J Clin Periodontol. 29:364-369,
Periodontol. 9(3):275-280, 1982.
2002.
 88. Vogel RI, Fink RA, Schneider LC, Frank O, Baker H. The effect of
74. Hasturk H, Goguet-Surmenian E, Blackwood A, Andry C,
folic acid on gingival health. J Periodontol. 47(11):667-668, 1976.
Kantarci A. 1-Tetradecanol complex: Therapeutic actions in
experimental periodontitis. J Periodontol. 80(7):1103-1113,2009.
Med Nat Iasi. 110(1):195-197, 2006.
 75. Hasturk H, Jones VL, Andry C, Kantarci A. 1-Tetradecanol com-
 90. Munoz CA, Kiger RD, Stephens JA, Kim J, Wilson AC. Effects of a
plex reduces progression of Porphyrormonas gingivalis-induced
nutritional supplement on periodontal status. Compend Contin 
experimental periodontitis in rabbits. J Periodontol. 78(5):
Educ Dent. 22(5):425-428, 2001.
924-932,2007.
 91. Parrish JH Jr, DeMarco TJ, Bissada NE Vitamin E and periodon-
76. http://www.imagenetix.net/articles/2006/003_06.php.
titis in the rat. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 44(2):210-218,
 77. Seto H, Nagata T. Prevention of osteoporosis by foods and dietary
1977.
supplements. Milk basic protein (MBP) induces alveolar bone
 92. Kim JE, Shklar G. The effect of vitamin E on the healing of gin-
formation in rat experirmental periodontitis. Clin Calcium
gival wounds in rats. I Periodontol. 54(5):305-308, 1983.
16(10):1639-1645, 2006.
93. Klokkevold PR, Mealey BL. Influence of systemic disorders and
78. Seto H, Toba Y, Takada Y, Kawakami H, Ohba H, Hama H,
 stress on the periodontium. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology.
 Horibe M, Nagata T. Milk basic protein increases alveolar bone
St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 228-310.
21
Patient management for periodontal therapy
Brett Beckman
Preoperative evaluation and assessment, intraoperative
interpretation  to make  efficient  diagnostic  and
 management and monitoring, and proper recovery of
therapeutic decisions. In addition, staff in charge of
veterinary patients undergoing surgical procedures have
 generating estimates must be efficient to minimize anes-
been described in detail in multiple veterinary textbooks
thetic time. Pet guardians must be educated regarding
and journals. However, surgical periodontal therapy
common treatment options prior to the procedure to
requires special demands upon patient physiology dur-
 minimize intraoperative phone time when estimates are
 ing the operative and postoperative period, necessitating
revised.
focus on particular aspects of patient care. Anesthetic
 The two parameters that most directly affect long-term
and analgesic management of the periodontal patient
morbidity and mortality in anesthetized patients are
must start in the preoperative period and continue
through the perioperative period to complete recovery
ters become more pronounced with extended anesthesia
 from the anesthetic episode, including a week following
time.4
the procedure.
Hypothermia
Patient safety concerns
Intraoperatively, hypothermia can become a clinical
issue. Small patients ( who are predisposed to periodontal
Anesthetic duration
 disease) have compromisingly large surface area to body
Dental procedures often unexpectedly extend to consid-
mass ratios that predispose them to accelerated heat dis-
erably long anesthetic episodes due to the discovery of
sipation under anesthesia. Decreased perfusion accom-
additional pathology Therefore, particular attention
panies lower blood pressures experienced with inhalant 
sup onansuead radod e on pied aq pnons 
anesthetics contributing to hypothermia.
workup to ensure maximum safety prior to initiation of
Furthermore, the oral cavity must remain open during
any periodontal procedure.
the majority of oral surgical procedures, resulting in a
Periodontal procedures require pre- and postopera-
    a   o 
tive radiographs. Technicians should be adept at radio-
radiation. The compressed air and water spray utilized to
 graphic positioning and technique prior to anesthesia to
cool high-speed dental burs and the water used for
maximize patient safety and to minimize time spent
mechanical scalers further compromises normothermia
obtaining radiographs. (Hands-on training will greatly
by convection loss. Cold IV fluids can also contribute to
facilitate this procedure.) Definitive determination of the
hypothermia by similar mechanisms.? Physiologically,
extent of periodontal pathology in a given patient
hypothermia results in lower anesthetic requirements'
requires periodontal probing, charting, and radiography.
predisposing to accidental anesthetic overdose. Recovery
Therefore, therapeutic recommendations and reasonable
is prolonged and thermoregulation may become
cost estimates can only be made during anesthesia. The
impaired, necessitating artificial rewarming.7α Immune
veterinarian must be well trained in recognition of
system compromise secondary to hypothermia may
veterinary  periodontal  pathology  and  radiographic
result in delayed healing or infection.?
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
305
306  Related Topics
full extent of disease. These radiographs as well as all dental
Box 21.1 Key clinical point
procedures (including but not limited to extractions and
 Prevention is the key to managing hypothermia. Patient
periodontal surgery) require manipulation in numerous
locations throughout the oral cavity. Consequently the
temperature maintenance should start upon admittance
Ambient temperature should be kept at a tolerable level for
patient is subject to numerous positioning changes
staff and patients. Fans should be directed away from
throughout a given procedure. Care should be taken when
patients and blankets and sweaters used to minimize
 positioning patients to avoid excessive neck manipulation
conduction and convection losses. Warm water blankets
that could result in endotracheal tube induction of
and warm air devicesa:8 can maintain patient body
vagal nerve stimulation and subsequent bradycardia.
 temperature preoperatively. Extension of prevention in
 Disengagement of the tube prior to positioning also pre-
 the operatory involves utilization of the above techniques
vents accidental tracheal tears that could result in fatal or
combined with fluid warming.
life-threatening dyspnea and emphysema.7.12
Another complication of oral surgery is emphysema
secondary to air from high-speed delivery systems or the
air/water spray device. Emphysema generally occurs
 Regional nerve blocks and continuous rate infusions
subcutaneously about the head and neck and usually
allow lower inhalant levels to minimize perfusion com-
resolves without treatment within 48 hours. Owners
promise. During recovery, warm fluids and warming
should be notified and a timely recheck scheduled to
devices should continue to be utilized until patient tem-
ensure resolution.
 perature has stabilized and is sustainable following
removal of external warming. One study suggests that
warming of the extremities in dogs is more effective peri-
Aspiration
operatively than warming the torso.10
 Periodontal therapy requires a large amount of water to
Patient temperature should also be closely monitored
be introduced into the oral cavity to cool both the
for hyperthermia both perioperatively and postopera-
mechanical  scalers and high-speed hand-pieces.  In
tively, especially if opiates are included in the analgesic/
addition, periodontal therapy may require removal of
anesthetic protocol. Cats are especially susceptible to
bone, tooth sectioning, and surgical tissue manipulation
opiate-induced hyperthermia particularly with hydro-
resulting in blood and debris accumulation in the oral
morphone. Intervention may include a mu opiate antag-
cavity. It is therefore paramount that the endotracheal
onist (nalbuphine, naloxone, or butorphanol) to reverse
 tube is secured and properly inflated prior to surgery to
hyperthermia should it become clinically significant.
 prevent extravasation into the patient's airway. Suction is
strongly recommended to decrease this ssue as well as to
Hypotension
improve surgical visualization.
Almost all anesthetic drugs have the ability to create
Equally important is a thorough examination of the
hypotension. Furthermore, the majority of patients in
 oral cavity postoperatively to ensure no debris is present
need of advanced periodontal care are older to geriatric.
 that might be aspirated upon extubation. If gauze is used
These patients commonly have other ailments that may
 to further protect the airway during surgery it is removed
predispose them to this malady. Systemic or specific
 and visual inspection of the epiglottis and surrounding
organ aliments may also preclude some intervention
tissue performed. If suction is not available, cotton-
tipped applicators may be used to retract mucous, blood
strategies for this complication (e.g-, a cardiac patient
 may not be able to tolerate a fluid bolus).
clots and debris from difficult-to-visualize areas adjacent
Low blood pressure is known to cause poor perfusion,
 to the epiglottis. Additional consideration for aspiration
which can have numerous deleterious metabolic effects,
should be given to patients that undergo extractions
especially if it is over a prolonged time. Therefore, blood
where nasal cavity hemorrhage occurs.
 pressure must be closely monitored during dental proce-
dures and hypotension quickly corrected. Finally, practi-
tioners are encouraged tohave several options, including
Pain considerations
dopamine and hetastarch, available for fragile patients.
Periodontal disease is generally a slowly progressive
chronic disease process. The human literature suggests
Patient manipulation
that it is painful only in a small number of affected
Veterinary patients with periodontal disease generally
 patients.'3 However, pain is reported consistently in areas
require full mouth radiography to adequately evaluate the
where root exposure has occurred due to cementum
Patient Management for Periodontal Therapy 307
destruction.'3 Some patients report dull, localized, and
radiating deep jaw pain due to periodontal disease.13
Box 21.2 Key clinical point
Food impaction can also cause varying degrees of
It is important to understand the pathophysiology of central
discomfort.13
pain sensitization in order to make decisions on the
therapeutic approach to our chronic oral pain cases. Pain
ered when assessing periodontal disease in veterinary
signals from the head and oral cavity are modulated within
 patients. Canine small breed predilection and select indi-
the nucleus caudalis of the brainstem, much like those from
viduals genetically prone to periodontal disease in the
the rest of the body are modulated within the dorsal horn 
absence of consistent oral hygiene often present with
of the spinal cord.18 In acute oral pain, excitatory 
profound soft tissue destruction and bone compromise.
neurotransmitters (most specifically glutamate) are released
Food and debris impaction are much more likely due to
pug pue asdeuas aul laua pue uonau sdeuasaid au woy
severity and size of the periodontal defects in these
to the AMPA receptors of the postsynaptic neuron.19
patients.  Cementum destruction resulting in root
Inhibitory neurotransmitters released into the synapse from 
pauieisns o leubis siul uadwep ot idwane siatuan jayb
exposure creates sensitivity. Clinically, it is common to
release of glutamate results in stimulation of NMDA
 npun uaaa suqod uodn juaaaou mef anpod
receptors and subsequent Substance P release that binds
to moderate anesthetic depths, indicating pain associ-
to neurokinin-1 (NK-1) receptors when acute pain is not 
ated with periodontal defects.
managed correctly.21 This represents the point of transition
 In humans, periodontal disease is more prevalent in
from acute to chronic pain and the initiation of central
compromised socioeconomic areas where oral hygiene is
sensitization. At this point less stimulation is needed
not routinely practiced.14-17 From the standpoint of oral
peripherally to initiate amplification of the pain signal
neglect, our patients resemble this human subset. A
(allodynia), less glutamate is required to perpetuate
 recent study revealed that 96% of the homeless people in
transmission, and more descending inhibitory
Hong Kong had periodontal disease. The dental prob-
 neurotransmitters are required to dampen pain perception.21
lems most frequently reported in this population were
bleeding gums or drifting teeth (62%), dental pain (52%),
and tooth trauma (38%).'6
Another study in New Jersey showed that 55.6% of the
local or unusual manifestations. Opiates and NSAIDs
homeless people studied had current orofacial pain and
should be considered for oral pain at the site of inflam-
two-thirds of the participants reported having dental-
 mation, and centrally acting agents utilized to minimize
related face pain during the past year.'5 Although direct
the perpetuation of excitatory neurotransmitters in the
assumptions of the source of pain (periodontal disease
nucleus caudalis.
vs. caries) cannot be made, neglect likely results in a
Agents whose mechanisms of action alter pain
higher prevalence of pain in our animal patients as well.
modulation offer a means of attenuating the excitatory
physiology responsible for this “"wind-up" component
Chronic pain
 of pain. Gabapentin, pregabalin, amantidine, ketamine,
Veterinary patients with severe local manifestations of
and lidocaine are common examples.  Additional
periodontal disease and those with unusual forms of
specific agents and protocols recommended by veteri-
periodontal disease have been discussed in detail in
nary anesthesiologists for pre- and postoperative pain
chapters 6 and 8, respectively. In many of these examples,
management can be found in current veterinary litera-
chronic pain is a hallmark of disease. Special preparation
 ture and anesthesia texts, and their discussion exceeds
should be strongly considered when approaching these
the intent of this chapter.
of inflammation but also the often-neglected central
Regional nerve blocks
 pain mechanisms is important when managing these
When correctly administered, regional nerve blocks pro-
patients. Initiating acute surgical pain to chronically dis-
vide not only elimination of pain perception in the
eased painful tissue heightens the pain response,creatinga
innervated tissue but also positive systemic effects.
-ndu peins o od sanssi deo jo apeoq ndo
The pathophysiology described above outlines the
lation eliminates cerebral perception, allowing anesthetic
importance of pre-, peri-, and postsurgical analgesic
planes similar to that used with non-painful procedures.
management of patients with chronic oral pain associ-
Consequently, a reduction in the percentage of inhalant
ated with periodontal disease. This is true whether it is
anesthetic will have positive effects on intraoperative
 periodontal disease as it is classically defined or one of its
 physiology, minimizing hypotension, hypoventilation,
308 Related Topics
and bradycardia.22 If perfusion is maximized, normo-
twice that experienced with bupivicaine alone.36 A
thermia becomes easier to maintain.
similar study demonstrated analgesia from systemic
This author routinely utilizes lidocaine and bupivicaine
buprenorphine plus a bupivicaine regional brachial
 in combination for regional oral nerve blocks. Use of this
plexus block to be inferior to inclusion of buprenorphine
combination is well documented in human medicine for
with bupivicaine locally.37 More research is needed to
a variety of applications.3-s The veterinary literature
explore this exciting possibility and its application in
 suggests the onset of action of bupivicaine is significantly
veterinary patients.
longer than that of lidocaine. The duration of effect of
lidocaine (1-2 hours)* does not provide adequate
Rostral maxillary regional block (infraorbital)
analgesic duration in lengthy procedures and offers very
(Figures 21.1 and 21.2)
minimal if any extended effect in the postoperative
The rostral maxillary block affects the infraorbital nerve
period. Bupivicaine's effect is notably longer in duration
and the rostral maxillary alveolar nerve. The rostral
(8 hours)* but is traditionally thought to have a longer
maxillary alveolar nerve branches to enter the
 onset of action. Studies in humans, however, suggest that
incisivomaxillary foramen within the infraorbital canal
the average onset may be as short as 4.4-7.7 minutes.27-29
 and innervates the canine and incisor teeth. The
 Bupivicaine's extended duration of effect makes it a
infraorbital nerve courses rostrally to innervate the soft
comparatively superior choice for use alone or in 
tissues of the lip and gingiva.38
combination
with lidocaine.  The recommended
To perform this block, manually retract the lip and
maximum total dose of local anesthetics is 2mg/kg
the infraorbital neurovascular bundle dorsally. The
(whether used alone or in combination).22
2.0% and bupivicaine 0.5%3 results in a volume ratio of
1:4, respectively. This maximum dose should be calculated
first and not exceeded. Recommended infusion volumes 
vary from 0.25-1.6 ml from small to large patients.31
Blood pressure, heart rate, and respiration rate should
aq aa soa jn nsu ieins uodn ais u
administered properly and adequate onset time from
administration has been given. Increases in these physi-
 ologic parameters indicate that the block is not effective
or optimal time to onset was not allowed. The nerve
 block may be repeated providing that the maximum total
dose is not exceeded.
 No special needles or syringes are needed. Needle
Figure 21.1 Rostral maxillary block. The infraorbital neurovascular
o ad i ix o ae a ao si
bundle and lip are retracted dorsally and the needle is placed as
without directional deviation. Standard length 25-gauge
shown.
needles are preferred.
Intravascular  administration must  be  avoided.
Aspirating prior to injection will ensure extravascular
placement of the agent. Excessive systemic uptake or
intravascular administration could result in CNS, car-
diovascular, or vasopressive complications.32
This author has never experienced complications at
these dosages. Clinically, prehension and mastication do
and cats receiving dental blocks even if all four quadrants
are blocked
 Studies have widely demonstrated mu opiate receptor
association with peripheral nerves.21-233-35 Human
research supports the addition of opiates to local anes-
thetics to extend their duration of action. Adding
Figure 21.2 Rostral maxillary block. A cadaver skull demonstrates
the location of needle placement. The needle is placed just inside
plexus block in one study resulted in a duration almost
the canal.
Patient Management for Periodontal Therapy 309
neurovascular bundle is easily palpated as a band of
To perform this block, the mouth is opened wide and the
tissue coursing rostral and slightly dorsal from the infra-
lip commissure retracted caudally. The needle is directed
orbital foramen demonstrated beneath the vestibular
 in a dorsal direction, immediately behind the central por-
mucosa. Advance the needle in a caudal direction close
tion of the maxillary second molar tooth. Advancement of
to the maxillary bone and ventral to the retracted bundle
the needle need not be more than 3-5 millimeters depend-
to a point just inside the canal. The needle should pass
ing upon patient size. A recent study showed the caudal
 into the canal without engaging bone. Correct placement 
 maxillary block may be achieved by holding direct digital
can be confirmed if desired, by gentle lateral movement
 pressure over the infraorbital canal for 60 seconds follow-
 of the needle allowing it to engage the canal wall.
 ing the infraorbital block (see above).39
Caudal maxillary regional block
Rostral mandibular regional (mental) block
(Figures 21.3 and 21.4)
(Figures 21.5 and 21.6)
The pterygopalatine nerve and the infraorbital nerve are
 In the rostral mandibular block, both the inferior alve-
branches of the maxillary nerve and supply sensory inner- 
 olar nerve (that courses rostral within the mandibular
vation to the maxilla.3 Tissues innervated include all teeth
canal) and its cutaneous branch, the middle mental
in the quadrant, the bone surrounding the teeth, and the  nerve, are affected. The middle mental nerve exits the
adjacent soft tissue to the midline. Major and minor pala-
 middle mental foramen apical to the mesial root of the
tine nerves leave the pterygopalatine nerve and innervate
second premolar in the dog, and in the diastema between
the hard and soft palatal mucosa and the palatal bone.3
the canine and third premolar in the cat, to innervate the
Figure 21.3 Caudal maxilary block. The needle is placed just
Figure 21.5 Rostral mandibular block. The mandibular labial
behind the maxillary second premolar and advanced only slightly.
frenulum is retracted ventrally and the needle placed as shown.
Figure 21.4 Caudal maxillary block. A cadaver skull demonstrates
Figure  21.6 Rostral mandibular block.  A  cadaver  skull
the location of needle placement. The needle need only advance
demonstrates the location of needle placement. The needle is
as shown.
placed just inside the canal
310  Related Topics
lip.3* The canal is located one-third of the distance from
infiltrating the nerve at this level prior to its entry into
the ventral to the dorsal border of the mandible.
the canal. The administrator should visualize a line
The inferior alveolar nerve continues within the canal to
extending from the lateral canthus to the ventral man-
innervate the mandibular third premolar to the central
dible. The needle is then inserted at the point of intersec-
 incisor and the surrounding bone. Therefore, needle
 tion of this imaginary line and the lingual aspect of the
 placement must be within the canal to properly anesthe-
 ventral mandible. The needle is then advanced to a point
tize all tissue.
one-third of the distance of the width of the mandible.
 To perform this block, the mandibular labial frenulum
All teeth, adjacent bone, and soft tissue are affected by
is retracted ventrally. The needle is inserted at the rostral
 this block. This block may also be performed intraorally,
aspect of the frenulum and advanced along the mandib-
which is more technically demanding in some patients.
ular bone to just enter the canal. Placement can be
Animals that are not monitored postoperatively have
 been known to cause severe trauma to the tongue during
the lateral aspect of the canal.
the recovery period. Whether this is specifically associ-
ated with regional oral nerve blocks (particularly the
Caudal mandibular regional block
caudal mandibular) or recovery from any procedure is
(Figures 21.7 and 21.8)
not reflected in the literature. In any case, proper patient
The inferior alveolar nerve enters the mandibular
 monitoring during recovery should preclude this problem.
foramen on the lingual aspect of the caudal mandibular
Aq paoad si ona renaiu pepne au sapoq
Feline and brachycephalic anatomical
differences
Cats and brachycephalic dogs posses similar anatomical
differences that require minor variations in technique
when administering nerve blocks. The rostral maxillary
nerve block is performed as described; however, the
entrance to the canal resides comparatively more dor-
sally. Careful caudal advancement should place the
needle just within the canal.
 The infraorbital canal in cats and brachycephalic dogs
is much shorter while the foramen is relatively larger
than in other dogs. Consequently, the infraorbital and
pterygopalatine nerves lie just caudal to the site of
administration for the rostral maxillary block. This elim-
inates the need for the caudal maxillary block. The orbit
Figure 21.7 Caudal mandibular block. The lateral canthus is
is closer to needle placement in these patients, so care
utilized as a landmark in determining the point of needle entry on
must be taken to ensure the needle just enters the canal
the lingual aspect of the ventral mandibular skin.
 and is not directed too far caudally.
Postoperative care
The pain control that has been carefully provided pre-
 and intraoperatively is of little use if the patient is not
adequately treated postop. At the end of anesthesia, the
 d  a s 
protocol and ensure that (1) it is appropriate for the
level of surgery performed, (2) there are no gaps in the
 protocol (by noting the timing of administration and
duration of action), and (3) the pain medications are
provided for an appropriate amount of time. One week
is the standard length of treatment in most periodontal
cases. Finally, clients should be informed that patients
Figure  21.8 Caudal  mandibular block.  A cadaver  skull
will rarely show signs of pain and to administer the pain
demonstrates the location of needle placement. The agent(s) are
medicants as prescribed, regardless of lack of perceived
deposited adjacent to the bone as described.
pain (unless the patient is having an adverse reaction).
Patient Management for Periodontal Therapy 311
 Pain evaluation and scoring
6. Marietta M, Facchini L, et al. Pathophysiology of bleeding in
surgery. Transplant Proc. 38(3):812-814, 2006.
Pain evaluation for patients with periodontal disease
7. Paddleford RR. Manual of Small Animal Anesthesia. 2nd ed.
both preoperatively and postoperatively should utilize
Philadephia: Saunders, 1999, p. 144.
oral palpation of affected tissue and behavioral observa-
 8. Pottie RG, Dart CM, et al. Effect of hypothermia on recovery from
general anaesthesia in the dog. Aust Vet J. 85(4):158-162, 2007.
tion. Patient avoidance of oral manipulation, however,
9. Kurosawa S, Kato M. Anesthetics, immune cells, and immune
may be related to pain or individual behavioral intoler-
responses. J Anesth 22(3):263-277, 2008.
ance to oral manipulation unassociated with pain. Pain
10. Cabell LW, Perkowski SZ, et al. The effects of active peripheral
scales provide written documentation of pain behaviors
 a jo d e s pi  ps p
26(2):79-85, 1997.
11. Niedfeldt RL, Robertson SA. Postanesthetic hyperthermia in cats:
 management protocol. Additional analgesics can be
given at appropriate intervals, based upon palpation and
buprenorphine. Vet Anaesth Analg. 33(6):341-342, 2006.
behavioral results from the pain scale evaluation, to
12. Mitchell SL, McCarth R, Rudloff E, Pemell RT. Tracheal rupture
 maintain patient comfort. Ifquestions still exist regarding
associated with intubation in cats: 20 cases (1996-1998). JAVMA
 pain status of a particular patient one should err on the
216(10):1592-1595, 2000.
13. Nagy RJ, Novak MJ. Chronic periodontitis. In: Carranzas Clinical
side of assuming that pain exists. Agents for both central
Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006.
and peripheral pain analgesia should be utilized for
14. Luo Y, McGrath C. Oral health status of homeless people in Hong
Kong. Spec Care Dentist 26(4):150-1504, 2006.
15. Conte M, Broder HL, Jenkins G, Reed R, Janal MN. Oral health,
related behaviors and oral health impacts among homeless adults.
Box 21.3 Key points
J Public Health Dent. 66(4):276-278, 2006.
16. Luo Y, McGrath C. Oral health and its impact on the life quality of
●Periodontal procedures often unexpectedly tum into long
homeless people in Hong Kong. Community Dent Health
25(3):137-142, 2008.
17. Cunha-Cruz J, Hujoel PP, Kressin NR. Oral health -related quality of
intraoperative care and monitoring will help ensure a safe
life of periodontal patients. J Periodontal Res. 42(2):169-176, 2007.
anesthesia.
18. Hargreaves KM, Hutter JW. Endodontic pharmacology. In:
 Hypothermia and hypotension are serious complications
Pathways of the Pulp (Cohen S, Burns RC eds.). 8th ed. St Louis:
and steps must be taken to prevent and/or control them.
Mosby, 2002.
 Periodontal patients are likely in chronic pain, which
19. Tony L Yaksh. Central pharmacology of nociceptive transmission.
increased acutely with treatment. Pain management is
In: Wall and Melzack's Textbook of Pain (McMahon S, Koltzen-
mandatory for proper care.
burg M eds.). 5th ed. China: Elsevier, 2006.
 Regional anesthesia is a critical piece of patient 
 20. Fields HL, Basbaum AI, Heinricher MM. Central nervous system
management for oral care.
 mechanisms of pain modulation. In: Wall and Melzack's Textbook
of Pain (McMahon S, Koltzenburg Meds.). 5th ed. China: Elsevier,
2006, p. 130-135.
21. Brookoff D. Chronic pain: A new disease? Hospital Pract.
Notes
35(7):45, 2000.
22. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis. In:
A. Hot Dog Patient Warming System, Augustine Biomedical & Design.
Veterinary Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders,
B. Gaymar TP500 T/pump, Gaymar Industries, Inc.
1998, pp. 492-493.
 23. Lee-Elliott CE, Dundas D, Patel U. Randomized trial of lidocaine
References
vs lidocaine/bupivacaine periprostatic injection on longitudinal
pain scores after prostate biopsy. J Urol. 171(1):247-250, 2004.
1. Huffman LJ. Oral examination. In: Small Animal Dental, Oral and
24. Kaukinen S, Kaukinen L, Eerola R. Epidural anaesthesia with mix-
Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA ed.).
tures of bupiviacaine-lidocaine and etidocaine-lidocaine. Ann
London: Manson, 2010, pp. 39-61.
Chir Gynaeco. 169(6):281-286, 1980.
 2. Torossian A. Thermal management during anaesthesia and
25. Price DD, Long S, Wilsey B, Fafi A. Analysis of peak magnitude
thermoregulation standards for the prevention of inadvertent
perioperative hypothermia. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol.
suas ud ii xdo jo euee edas o
22(4):659-668, 2008.
patients. Clin J Pain. 14(3):216-226, 1998.
 3. Broadbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, Wood JLN. Results of the
26. Khursheed R. Local Anesthetics. In: Handbook of Veterinary
confidential enquiry into perioperative small animal fatalities
Pain Management (Gaynor JS, Muir W III eds.). St. Louis: Mosby,
regarding risk factors for anesthetic-related death in dogs. JAVMA
2002,p.232.
233(7):1096-1103, 2008.
27. Gross R, McCartney M, Reader A, Beck M. A prospective,
4. Hall LW, Clarke KW, Trim CM. Veterinary Anesthesia. 10th ed.
randomized, double-blind comparison of bupivacaine and lido
London: Saunders, 2001.
caine for maxillary infiltrations. J Endod. 33(9):1021-1024, 2997.
 5. Muir WW, Hubbell JAI, Skarda RT, Bednarski RM. Handbook of
28. Lai F, Sutton B, Nicholson G. Comparison of L-bupivacaine 0.75%
Veterinary Pain Management. 3rd ed. St. Louis:Mosby, 2002,
and lidocaine 2% with bupivacaine 0.75% and lidocaine 2% for
Pp. 177-179.
peribulbar anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 90(4):512-514, 2003.
312
 Related Topics
29. Valvano M, Leffler S. Comparison of bupivacaine and lidocaine/
35. Houghton AK, Valdez JG, Westlund KN. Peripheral morphine
bupivacaine for local anesthesia/digital nerve block. Ann Emerg
administration blocks the development of hyperalgesia and allo-
Med. 27(4):490-492, 1996.
dynia after bone damage in the rat anesthesiology. Anesthesiology
 30. Stein R, Thompson D. Veterinary Anesthesia Support Group.
89(1):190-201, 1998.
www.VASG.org.
36. Bazin JE, Massoni C, Bruelle P, Fenies V, Groslier D, Schoefler P.
31. Beckman BW. Pathophysiology and management of surgical and
The addition of opioids to local anaesthetics in brachial plexus
chronic oral pain in dogs and cats. J Vet Dent. 23(1):50-60, 2006.
block: The comparative effects of morphine, buprenorphine and
32. Khursheed R. Local anesthetics. In: Handbook of Veterinary Pain
sufentanil. Anaesthesia 52(9):858-862, 1997.
Management (Gaynor JS, Muir W II eds.) St. Louis: Mosby, 2002,
37. Candido KD, Winnie AP, Ghaleb AH, Fattouh MW, Franco CD.
p 232.
Buprenorphine added to the local anesthetic for axillary brachial
33. Ko MC, Butleman ER, Woods JH. The role of peripheral mu
 plexus block prolongs postoperative analgesia. Reg Anesth Pain
opioid receptors in the modulation of capsaicin-induced thermal
Med. 27(2):162-167, 2002.
 38. Evans HE, Christensen GC. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. 2nd ed.
286(1):150-156, 1998.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1979, pp. 914-920.
34. Obara I, Przewlocki R, Przewlocka B. Local peripheral effects of
39. Klima, L. Intraoral nerve blocks: Expectations and delivery.
mu-opioid receptor agonists in neuropathic pain in rats. Neurosci
Proceedings Veterinary Dental Forum, 2007, pp. 381-383.
Lett. 360(1-2):85-89, 2004.
SECTION6
Periodontal instrumentation
22
Periodontal hand instruments
There are various types of hand instruments available
measurements. A longer style of probe is also recom-
for periodontal therapy. These include instruments
mended, as dogs commonly have pockets in excess of
designed for collecting diagnostic information as well
10mm. This author's probe of choice is the UNC-15
as performing scaling and surgery. This chapter will
probe, which is 15 mm long and has markings every mm
 provide information on the majority of instruments
(Figure 22.1a). The marquis probe with markings every
currently available along with brief descriptions of
3 mm and measures up to 18 mm is another good option,
proper usage. More detailed attention is provided on 
but any probe can be effective (Figure 22.1b).
 hand instruments designed for scaling.
Specialized probes are also available. One style
employs a latch that will collapse if too much pressure is
Instruments for diagnosis
 applied. This helps avoid false positives that may occur if
the probe is forced through the gingival attachment, as
Periodontal probes (Figure 22.1)
inflamed periodontal tissues are friable and can easily be
Periodontal probes are primarily used to measure sulcal
penetrated by the thin metal probes. Another specialized
or pocket depth, as well as to determine their anatomic
selection is a curved #2 Nabers probe that is used for
configuration.' In addition, they can be used to measure
furcation detection' (Figure 22.1c).
oral masses as well as gingival enlargement and reces-
 Recently, a veterinary-specific probe^ has become
sion. These probes are tapered rod-like instruments with
available that is color-coded for canine and feline
blunt rounded tips that are measured and marked in mil-
patients. This probe allows for inexperienced operators
limeters.1-3 There are numerous designs of periodontal
to consistently diagnose periodontal pockets in cats and
probes currently available. The majority of probes
dogs (Figure 22.1d).
require manual measurements, but there are options for
Many periodontal probes (including the veterinary
instruments that measure pocket depth mechanically.4
probe above) are combined with an explorer that is
Standard periodontal probes fall into two major cate-
placed on the opposite end of the instrument. This
gories: notched and anodized (or color-coded).25 In
creates an "expro,” which is the most efficient instrument
addition, they can be obtained in a variety of cross-
for periodontal/oral evaluation (Figure 22.1e).
sectional shapes such as round, oval, or flat.? The notched
types are made with mechanically produced indenta-
Dental explorers (Figure 22.2)
tions at selected intervals. These may or may not have
These are sharp, relatively fine instruments that are used
coloration within the indented markings. While per-
to evaluate for tooth surface irregularities such as residual
fectly suitable for diagnosis, they are usually slightly
calculus, caries, resorptive lesions, fractures, and incon-
thicker than color-coded probes. Regardless of the type
spicuous pulp exposure.1- These instruments are gener-
selected, it is strongly recommended to choose a probe
ally used supragingivally but with care can be used
with markings at every millimeter for more accurate
subgingivally (e.g., evaluating for tooth resorption).
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
315
316
 Periodontal Instrumentation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 22.1 (a) UNC-15 probe. (b) Marquis probe. (c) #2 Nabers
furcation probe. (d) "Niemiec" color-coded periodontal probe.
(e) Double-sided "expro."
Periodontal Hand Instruments 317
 Box 22.1 Instruments for scaling
Note that periodontal hand instruments are only effective
when sharp. This means they need to be sharpened on a
regular basis (at least weekly if used regularly). If a curette or
scaler has not been sharpened in over a few months, it will
o paeidai no pauadieas Aeuoissajond ag oi paau aal
sharpening instructions please see appendix 3.
Scalers (Figure 22.4)
Scalers have three sharp edges (both sides and the
bottom), a sharp tip, and are flat across the top
(Figures 22.4a and b)235 There are numerous sizes and
Figure 22.2 Classic sickle explorer.
shapes ofscalers available, with the same basicarchitecture.
Large-sized scalers include the Ball and Indiana University
types, as well as the classic sickle (Figure 22.4c).' In con-
trast, Jacquette scalers are medium-sized and straight
(Figure 22.4d). There are also smaller posterior scalers,'
but these are not commonly used in veterinary medicine.
This author recommends a combination of a large- and
medium-sized scaler, which can be obtained in one
instrument (U15/30) (Figure 22.4e).
Most scalers are “universal,” meaning they can be used
anywhere in the mouth. These instruments have their
cutting edge perpendicular to the handlea (Figure 22.4f)
and therefore are most effective when the handle is
parallel to the tooth. Area-specific scalers are another
 option; they add an additional angle to the terminal end
or shank of the instrument (see curettes below). Scalers
with straight shanks are designed to be used rostrally in
the mouth, while those with an additional (contra) angle
Figure 22.3 Front surface mirror.
are used more distally.'
While these instruments are very effective at calculus
removal, they are designed for supragingival scaling
only.3 5 If introduced under the gingival margin they may
The classic explorer is sickle-shaped (#23),2 but many
result in tearing/cutting the gingival tissues, because all
fine styles are available for increased tactile sensitivity.
contact surfaces (the sides, botom, and tip) of scalers are
This author recommends that practitioners have a
sharp.'
"pigtail"’ (#3CH) explorer to evaluate feline dentition.
Hoe scalers (Figure 22.5)
Dental mirrors (Figure 22.3)
 These instruments are actually rarely used in veterinary
Mirrors are helpful to evaluate the distal areas of the
 dentistry, but the standard hoe scalers are the McCall's
teeth/mouth. They can also be a useful aid in illumina-
series. Hoe scalers are very thin instruments that are
tion, transillumination, and retraction.26 There are
 designed to be used in a pull manner. The blade is bent at
numerous types of dental mirrors, each with various 
 a 99- to 100-degree angle, with the cutting edge beveled
positive attributes and scenarios for different indica-
at 45 degrees.? It is also slightly bowed to allow a two-
 tions. The front surface mirror provides the best image
 point contact with the tooth surface, resulting in superior
 and is thus likely the best choice for use in veterinary
control' The blade is very thin to allow for excellent
dentistry.2
access to the roots in narrow pockets.
318Periodontal Instrumentation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 22.4 Scalers. (a) Side view. (b) Top view. Notice the sharp edges (yellow arrows) and tip (red arrow). In addition, there is a mild 
accessory bend (purple arrow). (c) Sickle scaler (for large calculus accumulations). Note sharp back (red arrow). (d) Jacquette scaler (for
smaller spaces). (e) Double-ended Jacquette/sickle scaler. (f) Back view: showing lack of secondary angle of a "universal" scaler
Periodontal Hand Instruments 319
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
(c)
Figure 22.6 Gracey curette. (a) Side view showing curved
face (yellow arrow) and blunted toe (red arrow). (b) Back view
showing blunted surface.
utilized they will not cut through the delicate periodontal
attachment or lacerate the gingiva, and they can be safely
utilized within periodontal pockets. There are two major
types of curettes, universal and area-specific.
Universal curettes (Figure 22.7)
Universal curettes typically have a blade at a 90-degree
angle to the terminal shank.13 This design allows them
Figure 22.5 Hoe scaler. (a) Front. (b) Face. (c) Side
to be used throughout the mouth, providing that the
instrument is adapted to the tooth correctly.7 Various
manufacturers offer options of angulation and blade
Curettes
size.' Colombia and Barnhart are the most common
Curettes are the instruments of choice for subgingival
types of universal curettes. These instruments generally
calculus removal, root planing, and subgingival curettage.
have what is known as “handle parallelism? Handle
A curette has two cutting edges and a blunted toe and
 parallelism means that when the handle of the instru-
bottom (Figure 22.6).2 7 These instruments are semicircular
 ment is parallel to the tooth, the blade is in proper posi-
 in cross section with a convex base.' When properly
tion for calculus removal.
320
 Periodontal Instrumentation
Area-specific curettes (Figure 22.8)
 Gracey curettes are the classic area-specific curette. They
are designed with different angles to provide superior
adaptation to specific areas of the dentition. The pri-
mary angle or bend allows the instrument to gain access
to
different areas of the mouth. (Figure 22.8a)
Additionally, these instruments are created with an offset
blade that is at a 60- to 70-degree angle to the terminal
shank.3 (Figure 22.8b) The blade itself is also curved.
These instruments have only one cutting edge,² but these
blade modifications allow the instrument to be adapted
 idod r yo al  s ad on
Thus, these instruments have what is called “shank
parallelism?" Shank parallelism means that the blade is
Figure 22.7 Universal curette (from behind). No accessory bend.
in proper position for calculus removal when the
terminal shank (as opposed to the handle) is parallel to
the tooth.' A major advantage of this design is that the
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(p pue o) aoi paiunig pue aey paaan bunmous maia apis (a) puaq Arossanne sieaaan maia aabap-st (e) alan Aanein g'zz anb
an ly aun puag aun ahig aui gist 'izt se 'l au wog uenhue u auaia a huensuap sanain snoea
number, and the further distal it is designed to be used.
Periodontal Hand Instruments 321
 operator's hand can stay outside of the mouth, allowing
(a)
for easier manipulation.
The proper curette should be selected based on its
angulation. Curettes are labeled by numbers that corre-
late to the angle of the blade in relation to the shaft of the
instrument (Figure 22.8c and d). The lower the number
(i.e., 1/2) the smaller the angle of the blade, and the more
rostral in the mouth the instrument is used.' Conversely,
larger numbers (e.g., 13/14) have a larger angle and are
designed to be utilized more distally in the mouth. Keep
 in mind that these numbers were designed in association
with human dentition, and therefore may not correlate
well with the same area of the mouth in veterinary
patients. Regardless of the position in the mouth, the
operator should choose the curette that best adapts to the
tooth. This author recommends a minimum armatarium
of a 1/2, 7/8, and 13/14 curette, as this selection will cover
(b)
 the vast majority of presentations in veterinary patients.
 ment for the convenience of veterinary professionalss.C
(Figure 22.9).
e i, 'n o go sd omi ae aa
"finishing?" The rigid curettes have a larger, stronger,
and less flexible shaft than the finishing type. This means
that they are better suited for removing heavy calculus
 deposits but lack the tactile sensitivity of the finishing
type.° Due to the level of calculus encountered in veteri-
nary patients, rigid shafts are recommended for use in
general practice. A dental practice (or a general practice
with a strong dental interest) should also consider add-
 ing some finishing curettes to their armatarium.
In addition to the standard Gracey curettes (as
described above), there are two other varieties of modi-
Figure 22.9 Basic periodontal kits. (a) Weldin periodontal kit
fied Gracey curettes in common usage.
(Miltex). (b) Diplomate kit (Dentalaire products).
Extended shank curettes
These curettes are designed with a terminal shank 5 mm
longer than the standard Gracey, which allows usage in
deeper periodontal pockets (deeper than 5 mm).' It is for
this reason that one brand name of extended shank
curettes is called the After-Five.’ In addition, these
curettes have a thicker, tapering shaft and a thinner blade
for
superior
cleaning
 deep pockets.  Since
cine, it is strongly recommended that all practices have a
supply of these instruments.
Mini-bladed curettes (Figure 22.10)
These are basically “after-five" curettes that have a blade
that is half the length of standard Gracey curettes. This
shorter blade allows insertion into deep/narrow pockets,
Figure 22.10 Comparison between standard (top) and petite
furcations, developmental grooves, and areas of unusual
(bottom) curettes. Note how much smaller the petite version is:
 he sn aa, as oo p
this is for deep pockets and tight spaces.
322
2 Periodontal Instrumentation
(a)
Figure 22.11 Periodontal chisel.
(b)
other short-bladed instruments allow for instrumenta-
tion of these previously unreachable areas. Consequently,
 mini-bladed instruments provide superior cleaning
ability in hard to reach areas.
Chisels (Figure 22.11)
Chisels are designed for very tight proximal spaces, such
 as between the maxillary fourth premolar and first molar,
or between the mandibular first and second molars.
Standard curettes and scalers may not effectively access
these tight areas. Chisels are double-ended, with one
straight end and one curved end. They have slightly
curved blades with a straight cutting edge beveled at 45
degrees. Chisels are used in a push motion while the side
of the blade is held firmly against the tooth root. Ideally,
they should be used in a horizontal direction to avoid
(c)
potential gingival laceration if the instrument is inadver-
tently pushed into the sulcus.2
Files (Figure 22.12)
Files have a series of small blades on a wider base. They
are designed to break large deposits of tough calculus.2
i  s  e aa a ae 
design makes them prone to damaging the tooth surface.
They are rarely used today because ultrasonic scalers are
safer and more efficient and are therefore a superior
choice for these presentations.
Quetin furcation curettes
These curettes are hoe-type instruments that are extremely
fine and have a very shallow half-moon shape. They are
Figure 22.12 Files. (a) Orban file. (b and c) Sugarman file.
primarily designed for use in furcational defects but are
also very effective in cleaning developmental grooves. The
the smallest/finest mini-curette often results in damage to
very smal/fine design makes this types of curette the best
the furcation. Consequently, the practitioner should
hand instrument for these presentations. However, even
always use extra caution in furcational areas.
Periodontal Hand Instruments 323
(a)
 The Kirkland knife is generally used for gingivectomy
in human dentistry. The entire outer edge of the
kidney-shaped knife is the cutting edge. While excellent
for fine surgeries with mild gingival enlargement, they
 are somewhat less effective when dealing with the large
 deposits of fibrous hyperplasia seen commonly in veteri-
 nary dentistry.
The other type in common use is the interdental knife
(Orban, Goldman-Fox, and Merrifield). These instru-
 u saa o aa e pader-reads ae s
sides. They come in various sizes.
Box 22.2 Key points
(b)
● Scalers are used for supragingival areas and curettes for
subgingival areas.
● Gracey curettes are the best choice for instrumenting
periodontal pockets because they adapt well to the teeth
and generally keep the operator's hand out of the
patient's mouth
●Periodontal instruments must be kept sharp for proper
performance.
Notes
A. Niemiec Periodonal Probe, Dentalaire Products.
B. Diplomate periodontal kit, Dentalaire Products.
C. Weldin Periodontal Kit, Miltex.
Figure 22.13 Knives. (a) Kirkland. (b) Orban.
References
1. Pattison AM, Pattison GL. Scaling and root planning. In: Carranza's
Diamond-coated files
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 749-797.
2. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Dental equipment. In: Veterinary
These files' are very fine instruments that are designed
 Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
for the final cleaning/finishing of root surfaces. They do
1997, p. 1-28.
not have cutting edges but instead are coated with very
3. Bellows J. Equipping the dental practice. In: Small Animal Dental
fine grit diamonds. When new, these instruments are
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
Blackwell, 2004, pp. 13-55.
very sharp and must be used very carefully and with a
4. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
light touch. Standard curettes are used first to remove the
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
vast majority of the calculus. Following the removal of the
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
gross calculus, the diamond-coated files are used like
5. Niemiec BA: Periodontal therapy. Top Companion Anim Med.
sandpaper to remove the minute deposits of residual
23(2):81-90, 2008.
calculus.' This creates a perfectly clean and smooth tooth.
6. Huffman LJ. Oral examination. In: Small Animal Dental, Oral and
Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA ed.).
Care must be taken with these files, as overinstrumenta-
London: Manson, 2010, pp. 39-61.
 tion is easily done and will damage the root surface.
 7. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental equipment and care. In:
Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Srmall Animal Practitioner.
Knives (Figure 22.13)
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 31-106.
8. Klokkevold PR, Takei HH, Carranza FA. General principles of
U pasn Auo gsa jo sad ueu omi ae ai
periodontal surgery. In: Carranzas Clinical Periodontology.
 periodontal surgery.
St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 887-901.
23
Mechanical scalers
 Historically, all scaling was performed by hand, and this
coolant spray (cavitation).78.21.2z Cavitation results from
is still the case in many human dental offices. However,
vacuum bubbles created by the motion of the ultrasonic
veterinary patients (especially large breed dogs) have a
-n a saa asar pe isn ai iel as
much greater tooth surface area compared to human
 tational effect has been one of the arguments for the use
patients. Furthermore, there is typically a significantly
of ultrasonic scalers over sonic scalers. However, this
higher larger accumulation of dental calculus in most of
long-held theory is currently being challenged by recent
our patients in comparison to the average human being.
studies that demonstrate that it is the heat produced, not
Finally, general anesthesia is required for adequate scal-
the vibrational energy that creates the antibacterial
 ing of veterinary patient's teeth. The combination of
effects.24 In fact, the acoustic microstreaming produced
these factors makes the use of mechanical scalers
by all mechanical scalers has been shown to break up the
necessary in veterinary hospitals, as their use can greatly
bacterial biofilm."5 Furthermore, the water spray deliv-
decrease  anesthetic time and increase safety
and
 ered by all mechanical scalers serves to flush plaque,
 efciency for dental scaling in animal patients.1-6
calculus, and other debris from the sulcus/pocket,$26
Mechanical scalers come in both sonic and ultra-
which decreases bacterial numbers and improves sub-
gingival periodontal health.27 Consequently, sonic scalers
designed with big and bulky tips for removal of large
may be as antibacterial as ultrasonic scalers and there-
deposits of supragingival calculus. & Recently, however,
fore can be used as subgingival instruments, as long as
there has been significant interest in using mechanical
the  appropriate appropriate ultrasonic subgingival
scalers subgingivally, resulting in the development of
 attachments are used.
thinner, more delicate tips, which are typically found
There are two main types of ultrasonic scalers, magne-
on ultrasonic equipment. Mechanical scaling with
 tostrictive and piezoelectric.72 These instruments are
these specialized tips has been shown to be at least as
 electrically powered; the oscillations are a result of the
effective as hand scaling for plaque and calculus
alternating electrical current. Both types of ultrasonic
removal, as well as providing a positive clinical response
 scalers are effective at calculus removal because they
to therapy.1.10-20
produce vibration at a frequency of approximately
20,000-45,000 Hz.7s.26 Some ultrasonic scalers have a
limited effective working surface involving the last few
Ultrasonic scalers
mm from the tip, while others have an effective working
The most common type of mechanical scaler used in
surface for up to 12mm.4 Regardless, the area of
veterinary dentistry today is the ultrasonic scaler. These
maximum vibration (and therefore efficiency) for all
instruments are electrically powered and the oscillations
 mechanical scalers is 1-2 mm from the tip.28-30 The very
are run by the alternating electrical current.
tip of the instruments should not be used, as the tips are
Ultrasonic scalers are very efficient and provide an
not effective for calculus removal and can potentially
additional benefit of creating a bactericidal effect in the
damage the tooth.
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
324
Mechanical Scalers  325
Figure 23.3 Magnetostrictive scaler, ferrite rod type, internal
view.
Figure 23.1 Magnetostrictive scaler, external view.
(a)
Figure 23.4 Magnetostrictive scaler, ferromagnetic stack type,
internal view; revealing the permanent connection between the
stack and the tip. The entire apparatus must be changed when it
wears out.
(b)
alternating current (AC) electricity.′ The ferrite rod type
has a titanium tip attached to the cleaning end
(Figure 23.3). Generally, for either of these units, the
entire rod/tip unit must be replaced when worn out or
damaged’ (Figure 23.4). Although the replacements for
 these magnetostrictive units are more expensive than are
the tips for piezoelectric scalers (see below), they do not
need to be replaced as often.
Magnetostrictive scalers have an elliptical or figure-8
pattern of vibration, so all sides of the working end are
effective, especially the ferrite rod style.478 Moreover,
it has been shown that the ferrite rod has a more
elliptical motion than the ferromagnetic stacks, which
results in less “dead strikes" (oscillations that are not
Figure 23.2 Magnetostrictive scaler, feromagnetic stack type,
effective at cleaning) and thus may be more efficient.47
internal view. (a) Close-up view of the strips of laminated nickel.
Finally, the ferrite rods are effective over the full 12 mm
(b) Close-up view of the connection between the strips and
of their working tip as opposed to the metal stack,
the tip.
which is effective at the last 4 mm, and piezoelectric,
which is effective only over the terminal 3 mm. One
potential drawback of the magnetostrictive scalers is
Magnetostrictive units (Figure 23.1) generate their
that these instruments generate significant heat and
activity from either ferromagnetic stacks or a ferrite rod
therefore require the water spray for cooling and
 in the handl.4.726 Ferromagnetic stacks are strips of
 creation of the cavitation effect.7 Examples of magne-
laminated nickel (Figure 23.2) that lengthen and shorten 
tostrictive scalers include Scalex 830,^ Cavitron,$
Odontoson, and Vetroson.
326  Periodontal Instrumentation
Figure 23.5 Piezoelectric scaler, eternal view. Note the short and
Figure 23.6 Sonic scaler, external view.
thick handle.
 Piezoelectric systems operate as a result of the expan-
faster.3 An additional advantage is that they do not gen-
 sion and contraction of quartz crystals in the handle.47
 erate heat like most ultrasonic systems do, thereby
Consequently, their handles are thicker but shorter
 reducing the chance of pulp damage.?6
 than those of the magnetostrictive systems (Figure 23.5).
 Due to their lower speed and power, they have long
As they "wear out,” only the tip needs to be replaced,
been thought to not offer cavitation, although this is also
but this occurs more frequently than with magneto-
 being challenged (as above). However, they do offer the
strictive units.26
In contrast to magnetostrictive scalers, piezoelectrics
of all the mechanical scalers' ability to decrease bacterial
were reported to have a curvilinear pattern of vibration'
loads in the pocket/sulcus.827 Several studies have shown
and thus only the sides (not the front or back) of the
sonic scalers to be as effective as ultrasonics in bacterial
instrument were reportedly effective at plaque removal.?
reduction and clinical success.18.3 Another disadvantage
However, a recent study has shown that piezoelectrics
of sonic scalers is that they have a higher amplitude (10
also demonstrate an elliptical motion, suggesting that
 m (suosn ii pandoo se ao no sa
they therefore can be used on all surfaces.31 Until this
 be more damaging to the root surface.437 Finally, these
 information is further substantiated, it is recommended
instruments require a significant amount of air pressure
to continue utilizing the sides of piezoelectric scalers.
to be effective, which may be an issue with smaller com-
Other than this potential limitation, these units are
pressor systems. Sonic scalers are available from Star
equally effective at plaque removal, do not generate as
Dental, Ka Vo, and Miltex.
much heat, and are less damaging to the enamel.
Consequently, piezoelectric scalers may be safer than
Tips (Figure 23.7)
magnetostrictive systems.2832 Examples of piezoelectric
There are numerous choices of tips available for
scalers include the Megasonic 200o,F Petpiezo,F and the
 periodontal therapy. They can be divided into two main
Piezon Master 400.G
categories, supragingival and subgingival.
Sonic scalers (Fiqure 23.6)
Supragingival tips
In contrast to ultrasonic scalers, sonic scalers are pow-
Supragingival tips tend to be thicker and wider than
ered by compressed air.47 The air running through a hole
 subgingival and are designed to be utilized on a higher
at the end of the shaft turns a rotor causing it to spin,
resulting in an oval-elliptical tip oscillation.62 These
on the comparatively more robust enamel. Another
instruments vibrate at a slow speed of only 2,000-
difference is that the water coolant typically exits the
6,500 Hz,6α although speeds of up to 9,000 Hz have been 
tip relatively high on the instrument. Supragingival tips
reported.4 Most reports indicate that this slower speed
 must not be utilized under the gingival margin, as they
results in longer scaling time compared to ultrasonics.33
will damage the cementum and potentially overheat
However, some studies show equal scaling time?4 and at
 the tooth (especially when using the magnetostrictive
 a ss s e n   s
systems).4.6-3
Mechanical Scalers  327
(a)
Figure 23.7 A selection of ultrasonic tips for a piezoelectric ultra-
sonic scaler. On the right are two shorter/thicker scalers for
Supragingival scaling (red arrows). On the left are longer, thinner 
(b)
instruments for careful subgingival scaling (yellow arrows)
Subgingival tips
There has been a tremendous surge in the development
and usage of subgingival ultrasonic tips. This is
driven by the fact that these instruments (when prop-
erly designed and employed) were found to be as
effective (or more so) as hand scaling. Subgingival tips
are generally significantly thinner than supragingival
tips.467 This is an important aspect that allows them to
work in the tight periodontal or furcational spaces.67
In addition, these tips are designed to be utilized on
lower power settings so as to not damage the delicate
cementum on the root surface.6* Finally, and probably
Figure 23.8 Measuring tip wear. (a) Image showing a new (right)
most importantly, the water port for coolant is very
and used (let) ultrasonic tip. Note that the used tip has lost
near the tip of the instrument.7 This is critical because
approximately 2 mm of its tip/point. This decreases its efficiency
by approximately 50%. (b) Commercial tip wear guide.
the coolant must be able to get to the area where the
instrument is working. The water spray provides not
 only cooling effects but also flushes the pocket/sulcus
Rotary scalers
and delivers the lavage, which decreases bacterial
numbers.27
These are sofft-sided, non-cutting, soft steel burs that
run on a high-speed hand-piece.' At a standard
Tip replacement (Figure 23.8)
high-speed rotation (300,000 rpm) with six sides to the
bur, these scalers run at approximately the same fre-
All mechanical scaling instruments must be carefully
quency as ultrasonic scalers (30kHz).7 Rotary scalers
 inspected on a regular basis to ensure that they have not
         a 
 s s s s    
the most damaging instrument for this purpose.72.38
greatly affect the efficiency of the instrument. In fact, it
has been shown that a loss of the last 1 mm of the tip
Therefore, these instruments are not recommended for
routine scaling.4
causes a 25% loss of efficiency, and with a 2 mm loss it
increases to 50% loss. Worn or damaged tips will thus
Conclusions
markedly  slow  the cleaning procedure.4
Most
mechanical scalers come with a chart to measure the
There have been significant advances in mechanical
wear of the instrument, which is a great visual aid for
periodontal instrumentation in the last decade. This has
evaluations over time.
resulted in the development of exceedingly thin and
328  Periodontal Instrumentation
delicate subgingival tips. These new tips are equal, or
References
superior to, hand scaling for supra- and subgingival
1. Copulos TA, Low SB, Walker CB, et al. Comparative analysis
 debridement. The lavage created by the water spray
between a modified ultrasonic tip and hand instruments on clinical
further decreases bacterial load. Finally, mechanical
 parameters of periodontal disease. J Periodontol. 64:694, 1993.
2. Dragoo MR. A clinical evaluation of hand and ultrasonic instru-
 icantly more efficient than hand scaling.
 ments on subgingival debridement. Part 1. With unmodified and
For all these reasons, mechanical scaling is becoming
modified ultrasonic inserts. Int J Periodont Restor Dent. 12:311,
a mainstay of periodontal therapy and should be utilized
1992.
3. Kocher T, Rihling A, Momsen H, Plagmann HC. Effectiveness of
 in all veterinary facilities. That being said, studies that
subgingival instrumentation with power-driven instruments in
have shown these instruments to be invaluable adjuncts
the hands of experienced and inexperienced operators. A study on
to periodontal therapy have utilized only new and highly
manikins. J Clin Periodontol. 24(7):498-504, 1997.
specialized tips. Veterinary practices with older/outdated
4. Bellows J. Equipping the dental practice. In: Small Animal Dental
units will not enjoy these benefits and may in fact cause
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
Blackwell,2004, pp.13-55.
greater damage to the root surface. Practitioners are
5. Tunkel J, Heinecke A, Flemmig TE. A systematic review ofeffcacy
strongly recommended to invest in a late-model ultra-
of machine-driven and manual subgingival debridement in the
       s 
treatment of chronic periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol. 29 Suppl
mechanical subgingival debridement.
3:72-78,2002.
6. Jahn CA. Sonic and ultrasonic instrumentation. In: Carranza's
Clinical Periodontology. St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 828-835.
Box 23.1 Key points
7. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Dental equipment. In: Veterinary Den-
tistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven,
+ Ultrasonic and sonic scaling is very effective and efficient.
1997, pp. 1-28.
● Supragingival tips are large and bulky, whereas subgingi-
 8. Pattison AM, Pattison GL. Scaling and root planning. In: Carran-
val tips are thinner and finer.
zas Clinical Periodontology St. Louis: Saunders, 2006, pp. 749-797.
Subgingival tips are requirec for subgingival use.
9. Holbrook T, Low S. Power driven scaling and polishing instruments.
 In: Clarke's Clinical Dentistry. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1991.
●Sonic scalers are likely as effective as ultrasonic varieties.
10. Breininger DR, O'Leary TJ, Blumenshine RV. Comparative effec-
●Rotosonic scaling is not recommended!
 tiveness of ultrasonic and hand scaling for the removal of subgin-
●  The use of mechanical scalers can greatly decrease
gival calculus. J Periodontol. 58:9, 1987.
anesthetic time and increase safety and efficiency for
11. Santos FA, Pochapski MT, Leal PC, Gimenes-Sakima PP, Marcanto-
dental scaling in animal patients.
nio E Jr. Comparative study on the effect of ultrasonic instruments
●The acoustic microstreaming produced by all mechanical
on the root surface in vivo. Clin Oral Investig. 12(2):143-150,
scalers (including sonic) has been shown to break up the
2008.
bacterial biofilm.
12. Stende GW, Schaffer EM. A comparison of ultrasonic and hand
●The area of maximum vibration (and therefore efficiency)
scaling. J Periodontol. 32:312, 1961.
13. Torfason T, Kiger R, Selvig KA, et al. Clinical improvement of
for all mechanical scalers is 1-2 mm from the tip.
gingival conditions following ultrasonic verses hand instrumenta-
 The loss of the last 1 mm of the tip causes a 25% loss of
tion of periodontal pockets. J Clin Periodontol. 6:165, 1979.
efficiency, and with a 2 mm loss it increases to 50% loss.
14. OosterwallPJ, Matee MI, Milkx FHM, etal. The effectof subgingi-
● Supragingival ultrasonic tips must not be used under the
val debridement with hand and ultrasonic instruments on subgin-
gingival margin.
gival microflora. J Clin Periodontol. 14:528, 1987.
 The properties that define subgingival tips are
15. Drisko CH. Root instrumentation. Power-driven versus manual
o Thinner to allow for work in the subgingival space.
scalers, which one? Dent Clin North Am. 42(2):229-244, 1998.
o Lower power setting.
16. Dragoo MR. A clinical evaluation of hand and ultrasonic instru-
o Most importantly, the water coolant reaches the very tip.
 ments on subgingival debridement. 1. With unmodified and
modified ultrasonic inserts. Int J Periodont Restor Dent. 12(4):
310-323, 1992.
17. Gagnot G, Mora F, Poblete MG, et al. Comparative study of manual
Notes
and ultrasonic instrumentation of cementum surfaces: Influence
of lateral pressure. Int J Periodont Restor Dent. 24:137, 2004.
A. Scalex 830, Dentalaire Products.
18. Derdilopoulou FV, NonhoffJ, Neumann K, Kielbassa AM. Micro-
B. Cavatron, Densply.
biological findings after periodontal therapy using curettes,
C. Odontoson, Horsholm.
Er:YAG laser, sonic, and ultrasonic scalers. J Clin Periodontol.
D. Summit Hill.
34(7):588-598, 2007.
 E. Megasonic 2000, Dentalaire Products.
19. Obeid PR, D'Hoore W, Bercy P. Comparative clinical responses
F. Petpiezo, Inovadent.
related to the use of various periodontal instrumentation. J Clin
G. Piezon Master 400, Electro Medical Systems.
Periodontol. 31(3):193-199, 2004.
H. BlisSonic Ergonomic Scaler.
 20. Thornton S, Garnick J. Comparison of ultrasonic to hand instru-
1. KaVo SONICflex scaler, KaVo.
ments in the removal of subgingival plaque. J Periodontol.
J. Mx Esonic Scaler, Miltex.
53(1):35-37, 1982.
Mechanical Scalers  329
21. Felver B, King DC, Lea SC, Price GJ, Damien Walmsley A. Cavita 
30. Debowes LJ. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
tion occurrence around ultrasonic dental scalers. Ultrason Sono-
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niemiec BA
chem. 16(5):692-697, 2009.
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
22. Walsley AD, Laird WR, Williams AR. Dental plaque removal by
31. Lea SC, Felver B, Landini G, Walmsley AD. Three-dimensional
cavitational activity during ultrasonic scaling. J Clin Periodontol.
analyses of ultrasonic scaler oscillations. J Clin Periodontol.
15:539, 1988.
36(1):44-50, 2009.
 23. Bellows J. Periodontal equipment, materials, and techniques. In:
32. Bellows J. Equipping the dental practice. In: Small Animal Dental
Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2004, p. 115-173.
Blackwell,2004, pp. 45-80.
24. Schenk GY, Flemmig T, Lob S, Ruckdeschel G, Hickel R. Lack of
 33. Loose B, Kiger R. An evaluation of basic periodontal therapy
antimicrobial effect on periodontopathic bacteria by ultrasonic
using sonic and ultrasonic scalers. J Clin Periodontol Res. 14:29-33,
and sonic scalers in vitro. J Clin Periodontol. 27:116-119, 2000.
1987.
25. Khambay BS, Walmsley AD. Acoustic microstreaming: Detection
34. Lie T, Leknes KN. Evaluation of the effect on root surfaces of air
and measurement around ultrasonic scalers. J Periodontol.
turbine scalers and ultrasonic instrumentation. J Periodontol.
70(6):626-631, 1999.
56(9):522-531, 1985.
 26. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental equipment and care. In:
35. Clinical Research Associates. Sonic and Ultrasonic Scalers. Provo,
Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner.
UT. 6:1, 1982.
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 31-106.
36. Herrmann JS, Rieder C, Rateitschak KH, Hefti AF Sonic and ultra.
27. Baehni PY, Thilo B, Chapuis B, Pernet D. Efects of ultrasonic and
sonic scalers in a clinical comparison. A study in non-instructed
sonic scalers on dental plaque microflora in vitro and in vivo.
 patients with gingivitis or slight adult periodontitis. Schweiz
J Clin Periodontol. 19:455, 1992.
Monatsschr Zahnmed. 105(2):165-170, 1995.
28. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental prophylaxis. In: Veteri-
37. Jacobson L, Blomlof J, Lindskog S. Root surface texture after dif-
nary Dental Techniques. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998,
ferent scaling modalities. Scand J Dent Res. 102(3):156-160, 1994.
Pp.133-166.
38. Brine EJ, Marretta SM, Pijanowski GJ. Comparison of the effects
 29. Niermiec BA. Periodontal therapy. Top Companion Anim Med.
of four different power scalers on enamel tooth surface in the dog.
23(2):81-90, 2008.
JVet Dent. 17(1):17-21, 2000.
24
Other power equipment
used in periodontology
There are a few mechanical instruments other than ultra-
sonic scalers that practitioners performing periodontal
therapy should be familiar with. The most important of
 these is the prophy polishing cup on a low-speed (some-
times referred to as slow-speed) hand-piece. In addition,
practitioners should have a basic familiarity with the
different varieties of dental burs and the high-speed
hand-pieces that run them. Air abrasion dentistry wil
 also be discussed in this chapter.
Hand-pieces
The vast majority of dental equipment other than ultra-
l r pssao q pasod si sns o
source of power. Ideally, these are the newer “oil-less"
Figure 24.1 High-speed air-driven hand-piece.
compressors. I further cleanlinessis desired, these hand-
pieces can be powered with nitrogen.? An additional
advantage to nitrogen is the fact that less hand-piece
but do not have good tactile sensitivity. High-speed
maintenance is required due to the increased cleanliness
hand-pieces have an aperture for water coolant directed
on the bur's working surface that helps prevent the hard
 amounts of advanced oral surgery may consider switch-
tissues from overheating.3 The speed at which the
 ing to nitrogen power. Finally,the use of a water filter or
distilled water is strongly recommended for both infec-
the amount of pressure placed by the operator on the
tion control and for hand-piece maintenance.23
foot pedal.
Most dental machines have three attachments 
A low-speed hand-piece (Figure 24.2) is preferred
addition to the ultrasonic scaler. These include
when precision is required. Low-speed hand-pieces have
high-speed hand-piece, low-speed hand-piece,
and
a ring dial that controls their speed (Figure 24.3). Low-
three-way air-water syringe. High-speed drills (Figure 24.1)
speed hand-pieces are generally run in the 5,000-
-  pads jo ai y A e ie ao
 20,000rpm range;23 however, they can be run at speeds
400,000 but up to 800,000 rpm') but are generally low
up to 100,000 rpm.' In addition, the head attachments
torque.23 This means that they will stall if excessive
al aa sae uonpai, pue sae eno, se pns 
pressure is placed on the instrument. These high-speed
ability to further regulate the speed of rotation up or
instruments are very efficient in tooth and bone removal
down through a fixed reduction with internal gears.?
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
330
Other Power Equipment Used in Periodontology 331
(a)
Figure 24.2 Slow-speed air-driven hand-piece.
(b)
Figure 24.3 Close-up view of a slow-speed air-driven hand-piece
demonstrating the speed control dial (red arrow).
Figure 24.4 Cutting burs. (a) Cross-cut taper fissure burs: from
left: 699, 701, 701L, 702, 703. (b) Round burs: from left: 1/4, 1/2,
1, 2L, 4L, 8L.
While these instruments can be used to remove tooth
tissue (particularly carious dentin), they do not provide
Cutting burs (Figure 24.4)
coolant and therefore care must be taken when using
These are rotary dental instruments with cutting blades
them, especially for prolonged periods. In veterinary
typically used on high-speed hand-pieces. In veterinary
periodontics they are used for cutting teeth (for extrac-
 only used for polishing (see below).
tions or tooth resection) and removing bone (alveo-
Dental burs
plasty). The vast majority of dental burs in common use
are carbide steel, which maintains its cutting ability
apnpu Aau s-'snq lup jo sadn deaas ane a
better than other metals. In regards to the method of
high-speed, low-speed, and laboratory types. The main
attachment to the hand-piece, dental burs are available in
differences in the bur itself are the diameter of the shank
several different types, with friction grip (FG) being the
as well as attachment to the hand-piece. Laboratory and
most common. Dental burs come in numerous shapes
slow-speed burs tend to have a larger diameter than
and sizes for various purposes. This author recommends
high-speed burs. Additionally, low-speed burs tend to
that all practitioners have at a minimum a supply of taper
have alatch type of attachment as opposed to the friction
fissure (699-703), round (1/4-2), and pear-shaped (330)
- e pads-m aus (q aas) paad- go d
burs. In addition, short shank (S or SS) and surgical
 [upoad n paieipu aeidii jou are snq aioeno
length (SL or SU) burs can be helpful in managing certain
work, they will not be discussed herein.
 presentation. Note that SS or SL burs may not have the
332  Periodontal Instrumentation
Figure 24.5 Diamond-coated burs (or abrasive points). On the
Figure 24.6 A 90-degree "prophy" angle that is attached to a
left is a "football"-shaped fine diamond bur as demonstrated by
slow-speed hand-piece.
the red line. The other three burs are various shaped/sized coarse
diamonds as labelled by the green line.
coolant appropriately targeted to the working end of the
bur. Therefore, consider using conventional-length burs
with traditional high-speed hand-pieces to avoid this
problem.
Abrasive points (Figure 24.5)
In contrast to cutting burs, diamond burs are considered
to be abrasive points. They are generally used for gingi-
vectomy or bone smoothing. These are created from var-
ious shaped and sized blanks onto which diamonds have
been electroplated. Like sandpaper, these electroplated
industrial diamonds vary in their coarseness, depending
on the size of diamond particles. Coarse grit diamond
 sd   a saq ae 
coarse removal of bone or tooth structure. Finer grits are
Figure 24.7 Gray "soft" screw-on style prophy cups.
used for final tooth preparation and finishing restora-
tions. One important point with diamond burs is that
they have increased continuous surface contact and
 prophy angles are available that are designed to oscillate
rather than continually rotate. These are equally effec-
therefore generate more heat, thus increasing the chance
of thermal damage to vital pulps.4
tive for polishing as continually rotating ones but are
slightly more expensive. However, they do not require
 Instruments for polishing
lubrication, generate less heat, and avoid hair catching.
The polishing hand-piece should be run at a slow
Prophy angles (Figure 24.6)
speed, no greater than 3,000 rpm. Faster rotation will not
Prophy anglesl-3 provide the attachment to the low-
improve the speed or quality of the procedure but may
speed hand-piece for the prophy cup. There are numerous 
result in overheating the tooth. Remember that in con-
designs available; however, the 90-degree prophy angle is
trast to the high-speed hand-piece, the slow-speeds do
the most common choice.
not provide water coolant.
When using standard prophy angles, the rubber pro-
Prophy cups (Figure 24.7)
phy cup attaches at the tip as a separate disposable piece.
However, the newer disposable prophy angles with
 Tooth polishing is typically performed with a rubber
attached cupsA are gaining popularity, as they decrease
 prophy cup.1-3 These can be attached to a disposable pro-
the spread of infection. Standard prophy angles operate
10 deus Aq paqee pue ajeedas io (aaoqe se) albue Aud 
by continuously rotating the prophy cup, but other
screw to a metal multiuse angle. There are numerous
Other Power Equipment Used in Periodontology 333
types and brands of prophy cups available. The soff
Box24.1 Key points
Aqdod qm pasn aq oi pauisap ae pe sno (e)
paste are generally recommended.6 With the softer
High-speed hand-pieces have water coolant but low-
rubber texture, it takes less pressure to flare the edges of
speed generally do not; therefore you need to be careful
these cups when subgingival polishing is performed.
when using low-speed burs to not overheat the structure
Additional products include the standard "white” prophy
being worked on.
cups, which are suitable but require more downward
 High-speed burs are very low torque, which means that if
pressure to flare under the gingiva. Finally, pasteless
excessive pressure is placed on the structure stalling will
 prophy cups have been developed and provide another
occur and bur fracture may result.
option.
Long and short burs (as opposed to traditional length)
Regardless of which style of cup is used (except paste-
may not have the coolant directed toward the correct
less), plenty of polish paste should always be employed.6
place, so be careful using them.
This is important because it is the polish that smoothes
 Plenty of polish paste should always be employed as the
polish smoothes the tooth, while the prophy cup only
the tooth, while the prophy cup only serves to move the
serves to move the paste.
 paste. The use of polish provides additional advantages,
as it not only helps to smooth the tooth but also lubri-
 cates the cup to decrease the amount of frictional heat
buildup.
Notes
A. Upgrade Disposable Prophy Angle, Sultan Healthcare.
 This avoids the use of a damaged cup (which lowers its
B. Disposable Standard Prophy Angles, Keystone Vet.
efficacy) and also decreases the transmission of infectious
C. CROSSTEX TWIST PROPHY ANGLE, New Line Medical, Inc.
D. Disposable Oscillating Prophy Angles, Keystone Vet.
organisms.
E. Butler Paste-Free Prophy pasteless disposable prophylaxis angle,
Sunstar Americas, Inc.
Air abrasion units
 F. Plaque Sweep, Dentsply.
Air abrasion unitszs.F can be used for polishing or
minor cleaning of the teeth (mostly stain removal).
References
These units employ compressed air to spray a mixture
1. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Dental equipment. In: Veterinary
of water and abrasive powder onto the teeth. The most
 Dentistry, Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippinctt-Raven,
common abrasive is fine sodium bicarbonate powder.
1997, pp. 1-28.
This provides a “sandblasting" effect that may allow
 2. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Dental equipment and care. In:
 access into developmental grooves as well as interprox-
Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Srmall Animal Practitioner.
imal areas. An additional advantage is that these units
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004, pp. 31-106.
 3. Bellows J. Equipping the dental practice. In: Small Animal Dental
 do not generate heat.
Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a Primer. Ames, IA:
Note that care must be taken when utilizing these
Blackwell,2004, pp.13-55.
 instruments, as improper usage can result in several del-
4. Reder BS, Eames WB. The cutting rates and durability of diamond
 eterious effects. First, significant damage can occur if
stones. J Dent Res. 55(B):186, 1976.
the spray is inadvertently directed toward the oral soft
 5. Bellows J. Periodontal equipment, materials, and techniques. In:
Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and Techniques, a
tissues. In addition, barotraumas have been reported
Primer. Ames, IA: Blackwell, 2004, pp. 115-173.
with these instruments when directed into a salivary
6. Niemiec BA. Periodontal therapy. Top Companion Anim Med.
duct. Subcutaneous emphysema has been reported
23(2):81-90, 2008.
subsequent to their use. The use of these units may be
 7. Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Periodontology. In: Veterinary Dentistry,
contraindicated in some patients, as they can cause an
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven, 1997,
 a  s ia s s  u asn
Pp. 186-231.
8. Debowes LI. Problems with the gingiva. In: Small Animal Dental,
particular concern in patients with renal or cardiac
Oral and Maxillofacial Disease, a Color Handbook (Niermiec BA
disease.
ed.). London: Manson, 2010, pp. 159-181.
Appendix 1
AVDC-Approved abbreviations
Definition
AB
abrasion
APG
apexogenesis
APX
apexification 
AT
attrition
B
biopsy
B/E
 biopsy excisional
B/1
biopsy incisional
BG
bone graft (includes placement of bone substitute or bone stimulant material)
canine
CA
caries
CBU
core build up
CFL
cleft lip
CFL/R
cleft lip repair 
CFP
 cleft palate
CFP/R
 deft palate repair 
CMO
 ranio-mandibular osteopathy
CR
qown
CR/M
cown metal
CR/P
 rown preparation
CR/PFM
cown porcelain fused to metal
CRA
αrown amputation
CRL
cown lengthening
CRR
cown reduction
Veterirnary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
334
AVDC-Approved Abbreviations 335
Definition
CS
culture/susceptibility
DT
deciduous (primary) tooth
DTC
dentigerous cyst
E
enamel
E/D
enamel defect
E/H
enamel hypocalcification or hypoplasia
E
flap
F/AR
apically repositioned periodontal flap
F/CR
coronally repositioned periodontal flap
F/L
lateral sliding periodontal flap
FB
foreign body
FGG
 free gingival graft 
FRE
frenoplasty (frenotomy, frenectomy)
FX
 fracture (tooth or jaw)
For tooth fracture abbreviations, see under T/FX.
FX/R
repair of jaw fracture
FX/R/P
 pin repair of jaw fracture
FX/R/PL
 plate repair of jaw fracture
FX/R/S
screw repair of jaw fracture
FX/R/WIR
wire repair of jaw fracture
FX/R/WIR/C
cerdlage wire repair of jaw fracture
FX/R/WIR/ID
interdental wire repair of jaw fracture
FX/R/WIR/OS
osseous wire repair of jaw fracture
G
 granuloma
G/B
buccal granuloma (cheek-chewing lesion)
G/E/L
eosinophilic granuloma——lip
G/E/P
eosinophilic granuloma—-palate
13/
eosinophilic granuloma—tongue
G/L
sublingual granuloma (tongue-chewing lesion)
HD
 gingival hyperplasia/hypertrophy
GR
gingival recession
GTR
 guicded tissue regeneration
GV
 gingivoplasty (gingivectomy)
11,2,3
incisor teeth
IM
impression and model
IMP
implant
10
interceptive (extraction) orthodontics
I0/D
deciduous (primary) tooth interceptive orthodontics
(continued)
336
6Appendices
Definition
I0/P
permanent (secondary) tooth interceptive orthodontics
indlined plane
/P
IP/AC
acrylic indined plane
IP/C
composite inclined plane
IP/M
metal (i.e., lab-produced) indlined plane
LAC
laceration
LAC/B
laceration buccal (cheek)
LAC/L
laceration lip
LAC/T
laceration tongue
M1,2.3
 molar teeth
MAL
Maloccusion—see definitions in Nomencdature document
MAL/1
aa sads 'dusuoelan me! jeuouuoisnponaui uoisnnu  ssn
are incorrectly positioned)
MAL/2
dlass 2 malocclusion (mandibular distocdusion—mandible shorter
than maxilla)
MAL/3
class 3 malocclusion (mandibular mesioclusion—-maxilla shorter than
mandible)
MAL/1-3/BV
buccoversion
MAL/1-3/CXB
caudal crossbite
MAL/1-3/DV
distoversion
MAL/1-3/LABV
labioversion
MAL/1-3/LV
linguoversion
MAL/1-3/MV
mesioversion
MAL/1-3/0B
open bite
MAL/1-3/RXB
rostral crossbite
MAL/1-3/XB
Crossbite—see CXB or RXB
(use of the term "wry bite" is not recommended, and WRY is not an
AVDC-approved abbreviation)
MN
mandible or mandibular
MN/FX
mandibular fracture
MX
 maxila or maxillary
MX/FX
 maxillary fracture
OA
orthodontic appliance
OA/BKT
bracket orthodontic appliance
OA/BU
button orthodontic appliance
OA/EC
elastic (power chain) orthodontic appliance 
OA/WIR
wire orthodontic appliance
OAA
adjust orthod ontic appliance
OAI
install orthodontic appliance
OAR
remove orthodontic appliance
AVDC-Approved Abbreviations 337
Definition
OC
orthodontic/genetic consultation
OM
oral mass
OM/AD
adenocarcinoma
OM/EPA
acanthomatous ameloblastoma (epulis)
OM/EPF
fibromatous epulis
OM/EPO
 osseifying epulis
OM/FS
fibrosarcoma
OM/LS
lymphosarcoma
OM/MM
 malignant melanoma
OM/OS
osteosarcoma
OM/PAP
papillomatosis
OM/SCC
squamous cell carcinoma
ONF
oronasal fistula
ONF/R
oronasal fistula repair
OR
orthodontic recheck
OST
osteomyelitis
PC
pulp capping
PC/D
direct pulp capping
 PC/1
 indirect pulp capping
 PDI
 periodontal disease index
PD0
normal periodontium
PD1
gingivitis only
PD2
< 25% attachment loss
PD3
25-50% attachment loss
PD4
> 50% attachment loss
PE
pulp exposure
PM1,2,3,4
premolar teeth
PRO
 periodontal prophylaxis (examination, scaling, polishing, irigation)
R
restoration of tooth
R/A
restoration with amalgam
R/C
 restoration with composite
R/CP
restoration with compomer
R/1
restoration with glass ionomer
RAD
radiograph
RC
root canal therapy
RC/S
surgical root canal therapy
RD
retained deciduous (primary) tooth
Rl is no longer used for resorptive lesion. See TR for tooth resorption
RPC
root planning—closed
(continued)
338
8Appendices
Definition
RPO
root planning—open 
RR
 internal root resorption
RRT
retained root tip
RRX
root resection (crown left intact)
RTR
retained tooth root
S
surgery
S/M
mandibulectomy
S/P
palate surgery
S/X
maxillectomy
SC
subgingival curettage
SN
supernumerary
SPL
splint
SPL/AC
acrylic splint 
SPL/C
composite splint
SPL/WIR
Wire-reinforced splint
ST
stomatitis
ST/CU
Stomatitis——contact ulcers
ST/FFS
Stomatitis—-feline faucitis-stomatitis
SYM
symphysis
SYM/S
symphyseal separation
SYM/WIR
wire repair of symphyseal separation
tooth
T/A
avulsed tooth
T/FX
fractured tooth (see next seven listings for fracture types)
T/FX/EF
enamel fracture
T/FX/EI
 enamel infraction
T/FX/CCF
complicated crown fracture
T/FX/RF
root fracture
T/FX/UCF
uncomplicated crown fracture
T/FX/CCRF
complicated crown-root fracture
T/FX/UCRF
uncomplicated crown-root fracture
For furtherinformation on the tooth fracture definitions, see the Tooth Fracture
section on the Nomenclature web page.
T/1
impacted tooth
T/LUX
luxated tooth
T/NE
near pulp exposure
T/NV
non-vital tooth
T/PE
pulp exposure
T/V
vital tooth
AVDC-Approved Abbreviations 339
Definition
TMJ
temporomandibular joint
TMJ/C
temporomandibular joint condylectomy
TMJ/D
TMJ dysplasia
TMJ/FX
TMJ fracture
TMJ/LUX
TMJ luxation
TMJ/R
reduction of TMJ luxation
TP
 treatment plan
TR
tooth resorption
TR1
TR stage 1: mild dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel)
TR2
TR stage 2: moderate dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and
enamel with loss of dentin that does not extend to the pulp cavity)
TR3
TR stage 3: deep dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and enamel
with loss of dentin that extends to the pulp cavity): most of the tooth retains its
integrity
TR4
TR stage 4: extensive dental hard tissue loss (cementum or cementum and
 enamel with loss of dentin that extends to the pulp cavity): most of the tooth
has lost its integrity
(TR4a) crown and root are equally affected
(TR4b) crown is more severely affected than the root
(TR4c) root is more severely affected than the crown
TR5
TR stage 5: remnants of dental hard tissue are visible only as irregular
radiopacities, and gingival covering is complete
TRX
tooth partial resection (e.g., hemisection)
VP
vital pulp therapy
X
simple closed extraction of a tooth
XS
extraction with tooth sectioning, non-surgical
XSS
 surgical (open) extraction of a tooth
This list is current as of April 11, 2012. The list is revised periodically by AVDC. For the current list, browse to http://www.avdc.org/
abbreviations.pdf. Changes are made periodically in these AVDC-approved abbreviations. These abbreviations were adopted by AVDC
to facilitate entry of information in AVDC case logs: inclusion of AVDC-approved abbreviations on this list does not imply that the
abbreviations will be recognized by or made use of by journals and textbook publishers.
Appendix2
Dental charts
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
340
Dental Charts  341
Southern California Veterinary Dental Specialties
Brook Niemiec, DVM, Dip. AVDc, Fellow AVD
Name:
Date:
 Anesthetic Protocol:
Prophylaxis:
Exodontia
Mandibular
Crown Scaling
 O Crown Amputation
 Pre-Medication
Occlusion
Symphysis
O Hand
 O Routine Extraction
Atropine,
O Scissors
O Intact
OUltra-sonic
O Sectioning
Buprenorphine,
O Brachygnathic
O Luxated
 O Buccal Cortical Bone
O Even
Subgingival
Induction
Removal
O Anterior Crossbite
O Exploration
OAlveoloplasty
O Posterior Crossbite
Temporoman dibular
Valium_
0 Subgingival
O Suture
Propoflo_
O Prognathic
Palpation
Curettage
O Chromic Gut_
0 Sevoflurane/O2
O Wry
O Normal
ORoot Planing
OMonocryl
O Endentulous
O Pain
 Polishing
OPDS
Maintenance
O Crepitus
0 Oxygen
Skull Type
O Clicking.
0 Chlorhexidine +
Diagnostic
OIsoflurane
0 Brachycephalic
 O Inhibited
 Pumice
OBiopsy
O Sevoflurane
O Mesocephalic
O Luxated
O Fluoride Tx
0 Oravet
OCulture
0 Dolichocephalic
109108107106104103102101201202203204206207208209
 Mobility/Furcation
Perio Pocket
Attachment Loss
Right
Left
Buccal →
4
888888881
Lingual →
8888888
8888888
√
0
Buccal →
409408407404403402401301302303304307308309
MF
P
AL
ED-Enamel Defect
GH-Gingival Hyperplasia
PD-Persistent Deciduous
 Sl-Intrinsic Staining
F-Furcation Exposure
M-Mobility
RC-Root Canal Therapy
TR-Tooth Resorption
CCF-Complicated crown
O-Missing Tooth
R/C-Restoration/Composite
UCF-Uncomplicated Crown
Fracture
OM-Oral Mass
R/Gl-Restoration/Glass lonomer
Fracture
GR-Gingival Recession 
P-Periodontal Pocket
RPC-Root Planing Closed
VPT-Vital Pulp Therapy
GV-Gingivectomy
R-Rotated Tooth
RPO-Root Planing Open
W-worn
RR-Retained Root
X-Extracted
342
Appendices
Southern California Veterinary Dental Specialties
Brook Niemiec, DVM, Dip. AVDc, Fellow AVD
Name:
Date:
Exodontia
Prophylaxis:
Q Crown Amputation
Skull Type
Restoration
 Temporomandibular 
 Crown Scaling
Q Routine Extraction
O Fillings
O Brachycephalic
Palpation
O Sectioning
O Bonded Sealant
OMesocephalic
O Normal
O Hand
O Buccal Cortical Bone
0 Dolichocephalic
0 Pain
O Ultra-sonic
Removal
O Crepitus
Subgingival
OAlveoloplasty
 Mandibular
0 Clicking 
O Exploration
OSuture
Diagnostic
Symphysis
0Inhibited
O Subgingival
O Chromic Gut
OBiopsy
OMonocryl
OCulture
O Intact
O Luxated
ORoot Planing
Curettage
O Luxated
Periodontal Surgery
Occlusion
O Doxirobe
Polishing
O Gingivectomy
O Scissors
0 Open Curettage
OBrachygnathic
O Chlorhexidine +
OPeriodontal Fiap
O Even
 Pumice
O Fluoride Tx
O Reverse Bevel
O Anterior Crossbite
 Apically repositioning
O Posterior Crossbite
O Coronal repositioning
O Prognathic
O Lateral Sliding
O Wry
0 Guided Tissue
O Endentulous
Regeneration
110109108107
104
103102101201202203204205206207208209210
Mobility/Furcation
PerioPocket
AttachmentLoss
Right
Buccal →
Palatal →
Lingual →→
88888888888
Buccal
↑
411410409408407406405404
M/F
P
AL
CA-Caries
GH-Gingival Hyperplasia 
PE-Pulp Exposure
 RPO-Root Planed Open 
CR-Crown Restoration 
GR-Gingival Recession
R-Rotated Tooth
RR-Retained Root
CWD-Crowding
GV-Gingivectomy
R/C-Restoration/Composite
TR-Tooth Resorption
Dox-Doxirobe
LUx-Luxated tooth
R/BS-Rest/Bonded Sealant
UCF-Uncomplicated 
EH-Enamel Hypoplasia 
M-Mobility
RC-Root Canal Therapy
Crown Fracture
F-Furcation Exposure
O-Missing Tooth
RPC-Root Plane Closed
W-Wworn
CCF-Complicated Crown Fx
PD-Persistent Deciduous
VPT-Vital Pulp Therapy
X-Extracted
Appendix3
Sharpening
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
343
344
Appendices
INTEGRA
REFERENCE
250
二
240
Dental Hand Instrument Sharpening Instructions
How to sharpen instruments?
220
The sharpening stone moves while the instrument is held stationary.
二
1. Place 1 drop of Miltex Honing Oil on the Arkansas or India
210
 sharpening stone. No lubrication is required on ceramic
stones. (Apply oil only if it was not previously applied to stone 
200
 or if more lubrication is needed).
 2. Hold the instrument in one hand while applying the stone to
190
the lateral surface of the point of the instrument, forming a
110° angle with the face of the blade of the instrument.
180
二
3. Position the sharpening stone to contact the heel of the 
instrument blade and work toward the tip, keeping the stone
 STEP 1
170
in contact with the blade throughout the shar pening
procedure
160
4. Move the sharpening stone up and down along the instrurment
witlh short strokes, placing more pressure on the down stroke.
(Continue to keep the instrument still).
150
 5. Finish shar pening the instrument with a down stroke, which
 prevents a rough edge froim forming on the instrument.
140
a) Metal particles and lubricant will accumulate on the blade and
 can be wiped off with sterile gauze. (This accumulation is also
130
an indication that the proper angulation was maintained during
二
 the sharpening process).
120
6. For sickle scalers, continue sharpening to the point of the scaler.
For curettes, continue around the toe to maintain its
curved shape.
STEPS 2 & 4
8
二
7. Test for sharpness with a plastic Miltex test stick. If the blade
0UL
 of the instrument is sharp, it will grab into the stick. If the blade is
dull, it will slide over the stick without grabbing. If the blade of
the instrument is still dull after sharpening. re-evaluate the angle 
of the stone and repeat the sharpening procedure (steps 2-6).
8. Repeat the procedure to sharpen the other side of sickle scalers
 and universal curettes.
60
STEP 7
0F
30
Sharpening
345
REFERENCE
INTEGR
Dental Hand Instrument Sharpening Instructions
Rounding the toe of curettes
1. Place 1 drop of Miltex* Honing Oil on the Arkansas
 or lndia sharpening stone. No lubrication is required
on ceramic stones. (Apply oil only if it was not previously
applied to stone or if more lubrication is needed).
2. Place the sharpening stone at a 45° angle to the face of
the instrument.
 3. Using downward strokes, rotate the sharpening stone
 around the toe of the instrument.
ROUNDING THE TOE
Sharpening the face of dental instruments
CURVED SICKLE
 Sharpening the face of periodontal instruments is only
recommended for removing a roughened edge. Extraneous
grinding of the face can weaken the instrument blade.
For curettes and curved sickles, use a conical or
cylindrical sharpening stone (Arkansas Conical.
 part number: STN-ARK-CON or Inclia No.309 part
number: STN-IND-CON-309)
1. Place 1 drop of Miltex Honing Oil on the Arkansas
 or India sharpening stone. No lubrication is required onl
ceramic stones.
(Apply oil only if it was not previously applied to stone or
 if more lubrication is needed).
ROUNDING THE TOE
STRAICHT SICKLE
2. Place the stone at the junction between the face of the
instrument and the shank of the instrument.
3. Roll the sharpening stone across the face of the 
instrument, moving toward the toe of the instrument.
4. Use as few strokes as possible and light, even pressure.
For straight sickle instruments, use a flat sharpening stone 
(Arkansas No. 4 flat, part mumber: STN-ARK-FLT-4 or India
No.1, part number STN-IND-FLT-1).
1. Place 1 drop of Miltex~ Honing Oil on the Arkansas
 or India sharpening stone. No lubrication is required on
ceramic stones.
(Apply oil only if it was not previously applied to stone or
if more lubrication is needed).
2. Place the stone on the entire facial surface of
the instrument.
3. Move the stone across the facial surface of the
 instrument in a back and forth motion.
4. Use as few strokes as possible and light, even pressure.
www.integralife.comyintegra-miltex
Appendix 4
Resources
Resources-dental radiology techniques
 Resources--hands-on dental training
and interpretation
San diego veterinary dental training center
Www.vetdentairad.com
Classes taught by the author are held in a state-of-the-art
The premier full-service veterinary dental radiology
700 sq.f. training facility specifically esigned forveeri
company.
. Offers telemedicine consulting services
nary dentistry. We offer regularly scheduled hands-on
including STAT readings (within 20 minutes), enabling
 dental training weekend seminars covering periodontal
patient treatment within the same anesthetic episode.
 therapy and surgery, in addition to extractions, dental
Educational DVDs are also available as a valuable
radiology, and restorations. Class sizes are small,
training resource on dental radiographic exposure and
providing excellent student:teacher ratios and learning 
interpretation. In addition, equipment prepurchase con-
opportunities.
sults are available to help practitioners choose the right
For more information, please contact us:
dental equipment for their needs and practice.
(858) 279-2108
dsabatino@SCDVS.com
Resources-client education
www.vetdentaltraining.com
Www.vetdentalrad.com
American veterinary dental forum
Increasing dental compliance DVD
This is a large annual meeting held in the fall season and
This is a live recording of a powerful marketing lecture
 organized by the AVDC, AVD, and AVDS. The meeting
presented by the author. This presentation offers tips and
 changes locations around the county and is regularly
techniques to get your clients to comply with your dental
attended by most veterinary dentists. All facets of veteri-
recommendations and is appropriate for the entire staff 
 nary dentistry are taught in this 3-day meeting.
 to view. Involving the entire staff in this learning experi-
www.AVDF.org
ence will help take your practice's dental services to the
next level.
Training centers from other diplomates
 Colorado Pet Dental Training Center
"'The importance of dental radiographs""
Dr. Tony Woodward
client educational poster
www.vetdentalclasses.com
Punta Gorda Veterinary Dental Training
nated poster demonstrates the importance of dental
Dr. Brett Beckman
radiology in common diseases. Pathologies include
www.veterinarydentistry.net
 periodontal disease, fractured teeth, tooth resorptive
lesions, and oral neoplasia. Displaying this poster for
Animal Dental Training Center
clients to view and read will greatly increase utilization of
Dr. Iral Luskin
your dental radiology equipment and services.
www.animaldentalcenter.com/html/adtc-frameset.html
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
346
Resources  347
Fox Valley Veterinary Dentistry
From other sources
Dr. Cindy Charlier
● Aflas of Dental Radiography in Dogs and Cats.
http://www.fvvds.com/dentalce.html
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2008. Dupont G, Debowes LJ.
● Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical
 Companion Small Animal Dentistry. Ames, IA: Wiley-
Further reading on veterinary dentistry
Blackwell, 2007. Lobprise HB.
From the author
Carranza's
Clinical
Periodontology.
St.
Louis:
● Small Animal Dental, Oral and Maxillofacial Disease,
Saunders, 2006. Newman MG, Takei HH, Klokkevald
a Color Handbook London: Manson, 2010.
PR, Carranza FA.
● Veterinary Dentistry Applications  in Emergency
● Feline Dentistry: Oral Assessment, Treatment, and
Medicine and Compromised and Critical Patients.
Preventative Care. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.
San Diego: Practical Veterinary Publishing, 2012.
Bellows J.
·Veterinary
Endodontics.
Sann
Diego:
Practical
 Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal
Veterinary Publishing, 2011.
Practitioner. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2004.
●Veterinary
Orthodontics.
San
Diego:
Practical
Holmstrom SE, Frost PF, Eisner ER.
Veterinary Publishing, 2012.
Veterinary
Dentistry,
Principles
and
Practice.
●Veterinary Restorative and Operative Dentistry. San
Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven, 1997. Wiggs RB,
 Diego: Practical Veterinary Publishing, 2012.
Lobprise HB.
Appendix 5
Plaque and calculus indices
Plague index (Pl) (Silness and Loe)
Calculus index (Cl)
 PI 0: No observable plaque
Cl 0: No observable calculus
PI1: A thin film of plaque is detected at the gingival
Cl1: Scattered calculus covering less than 1/3 of the
 margin by running a probe or explorer across the tooth
buccal surface of the tooth.
surfaces
CI2: Calculus covering between one- and two-thirds of
PI 2: A moderate amount of plaque is detected along the
the buccal  tooth  surface with minimal  subgingival
gingival margin. Plaque is visible clinically.
calculus.
Pl3: Heavy plaque accumulation is detected at the gin-
 CI3: Calculus covering greater than two-thirds of the
gival margin and in the interdental spaces.
buccal tooth surface and extending subgingivally.
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
348
Abscesses
Alveolar crest fiber group, 12
Antiseptic rinses, 179, 179f
gingival,94
Alveolo gingival gingival fiber group, 5
chlorhexidine, 179
periodontal
Amantadine, 307
Apical fiber group, 12
acute, 91-93
 American Veterinary Dental College
Apically displaced flap surgery, 222-24,
chronic, 93-95
(AVDC),134
223f, 224f, 225f
clinical appearance of, 91-93,
Anatomy
Area-specific curettes, 320-21, 320f
92f,93f
feline and brachycephalic differences
Aspiration, 306
diagnosis, 93-94, 94f
in, 310
Atorvastatin, 300
etiology, 91, 91f, 92f
furcation, 289-90
Attachment
treatment, 94-95
 periodontal, radiographic
gingival, 6, 7-8, 8f, 56
Acellular afibrillar cementum (ACC), 14
 appearance of normal, 112, 113f
 periodontal flaps to increase/
Acellular extrinsic fiber cementum
Anesthesia
replace, 228
(AEFC),14
duration, 305-6
GTR and determining, 274-75
Acellular intrinsic fiber cementum
 general, prophylaxis and, 131
loss, 51
(AIFC), 14
hypotension and, 306
CEJ and, 56
Advanced non-surgical therapy,
hypothermia and, 305-6
 periodontal disease and, 56
154-67, 154f, 155f
mechanical scaling and, 165
 osseous surgery and determining.
 mechanical (ultrasonic) therapy,
NAD, 130-33, 130f, 131f, 132f, 133f
274-75
164-65
regional, 311
Autografts
options for, 156
safe,305-6,311
free connective tissue, 232, 232f 233f
SRP, hand, 156-57, 156f
Angles
free gingival
AEFC. See Acellular extrinsic fiber
dental cleaning, 161-62, 161f, 162f
obtain graft from donor site,
cementum
prophy 332, 332f
230-31, 231f
After-Five (curette), 321
Angulation curettes, 321
prepare recipient site, 229-30, 230f
Age, gingival tissues and, 10
Antibiotics
technique for, 229-31, 230f, 231f
AIFC. See Acellular intrinsic fiber
anti-inflammatory effect, 170
 transfer/immobilize graft, 231,
cementum
in dental procedures, 187-88
231f
Air abrasion units, 333
dislodgement, 173
 periodontal regeneration, 267
Allografts
feline caudal stomatitis, 99
AVDC. See American Veterinary
DFDBA,267,268,268f
 improved wound healing and, 170
 Dental College
periodontal regeneration, 267-68, 268f
indications, 188
Azithromycin, 188
Alveolar bone, 14-15, 15f
local delivery of, 188
architecture, 254, 255f
local usage of, 170-73
Bacteremia, 187
GTR,268
mixture, 170, 171f
Bacteria, 20-21
loss
osteoclast function and, direct
behavior, 21-22
horizontal, 54, 55f, 254-56
reduction of, 170
in biofilm, 21
mobility and, 64
 in periodontal disease, 186t
exposure, sulcal epithelium and, 82
patterns of, 254-56, 256f
implications for, 187-88
gingival fluid, 35
 periodontitis and patterns of,
initial therapy 170-73, 186-88
plaque, 21
52-56, 52f, 53f, 54f, 55f, 56f
periodontal pocket, 170-72, 171f,
saliva and, 44
vertical, 54-56, 55f 254
172f, 173f
 Bacteriology of periodontal disease,
osseous form, 254, 255f
potential alternative uses of, 188
35-36
osteomyelitis, 75
 selection, appropriate, 186-87
 Barrier membranes, periodontal
radiographic evaluation of, 109, 110f
Anti-inflammatories, 299
regeneration
regeneration, 268
antibiotics and, 170
first generation membranes, 265-66
remodeling, 15-16, 15f 16f
feline caudal stomatitis, 100
second generation membranes, 266,
walled pockets, 256
Antimicrobials, 300
266f
Veterinary Periodontology, First Edition. Brook A. Niemiec.
@ 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
349
350  Index
Barrier sealants, 180, 180f
feline interferon for, 100
periodontal probing, 146-49, 147f,
application, 150, 150f
laser therapy for, 99
148f, 149f
Bartonella henselae, 95
management of, 98
polishing and, 143-44, 144f 145f
Biofilm, bacteria in, 21
medical therapy for, 99-100
 postsurgical exam and consultation,
Biomaterials, synthetic, 268
other medications for, 100
129-35, 135f
Biomodification, root surface,
surgical therapy for, 98-99, 98f, 99f
procedure for, 129-50
250-52, 251f
CEJ. See Cementoenamel junction
residual plaque and, 143, 143f
Bioresorbable membranes, 266
Celecoxib, 299
staff/patient protection, 135, 135f
Bisphosphonates, 300
Cells
subgingival plaque and, 140-42
BMPs. See Bone morphogenic proteins
DAT, 9
sulcal lavage and, 144-45, 145f
Bone grafting materials, 266-67
Langerhans, 5
supragingival cleaning, 136-39, 136f
Bone morpho genic proteins (BMPs),
Merkel, 5
treatment planning and, 150
267,269
PDL, 11-12
Complete oral health assessment and
 Bone treatment, exposed root surface
WBCs, 44
treatment (COHAT), 129
and, 249, 250f
 Cellular intrinsic fiber cementum
Connective tissue
 Brachycephalic anatomy, 310
(CIFC), 14
free, autograft, 232, 232f, 233f
Brain, systemic manifestations of
Cellular mixed stratified cementum
PDL, 11-12
 periodontal disease, 84
(CMSC), 14
Conventional flap, 228
Breed, periodontal disease and, 28, 73
Cementoenamel junction (CEJ), 7
 Coronally displaced flap surgery.
Brushing, 175
 attachment loss and, 56
224-26
frequency, 178
Cementum, 13-14
technique, 225-26, 226f
technique, 177-78, 178f
 development, 14
Corticosteroids, periodontal disease
tooth, 176
types, 14
and, 29-30
brushes for, 176-77, 176f
Ceramic-based materials, 268, 268f
Craniomandibular osteopathy,
materials and methods for, 176-77
Chemotherapy periodontal disease
 periodontium in, 120, 121f
pastes for, 177,177f
and, 30
Crown, root planing and, 161-62,
 Bupivacaine, regional nerve block, 308
Chisels, 322, 322f
161f, 162f
Buprenorphine, 308
Chlorhexidine, 98, 165
Curettage
Burs
antiseptic rinses, 179
gingival, 195f
cutting,331-32,331f
lavage 135-36, 136f
inadvertent, 195
dental, 331
CI. See Calculus index
intentional, 194, 194f
CIFC. See Cellular intrinsic fiber
technique, 194
Calculus, 22-23, 22f, 23f
cementum
variations, 194-95
deposits, 155
Circular gingival fiber group, 5
inadvertent, 193
detection, 157-58,158f
Citric acid
subgingival, 194
identification, complete dental
furcation, 290
Curettes, 140, 319-22, 319f
cleaning and, 143, 143f
root conditioning, 251
After-Five, 321
 periodontal disease and, 24, 24f,
Class II perio-endo lesion, 69-71, 72f
angulation, 321
25f, 26f
CMSC. See Cellular mixed stratified
 area-specific, 320-21, 320f
radiographic appearance, 117-18
cementum
extended shank, 321
scaling
Coenzyme Q10, 301
Gracey, 140, 157, 157f, 320-21
hand, 140-42, 141f 142f
feline caudal stomatitis, 100
finishing, 321
mechanical, 142, 143f
COHAT. See Complete oral health
rigid, 321
Calculus index (CI), 348
assessment and treatment
mini-bladed, 321-22, 321f
Cancer, oral, 75, 77f
 Complete dental cleaning
mini-five, 321
Caudal mandibular regional block,
application of barrier sealant and,
Quetin furcation, 322
310,310f
150, 150f
universal, 140, 319, 320f
Caudal maxillary regional block,
calculus identification and, 143, 143f
Cutting burs, 331-32, 331f
309, 309f
calculus scaling and, 140-42
Cyclosporine, feline caudal stomatitis,
Caudal stomatitis, feline
chlorhexidine lavage, 135-36, 136f
100
antibiotics for, 99
client education and, 150
anti-inflammatories for, 100
dental charting and, 146-49
DAT cells, 9
clinical signs of, 95-96, 96f, 97f
dental radiographs and, 149
Deciduous teeth, 23,28f
cyclosporine for, 100
fluoride therapy and, 145-46, 146f
 Deleterious effects of periodontal
diagnostics of, 97-98
goal of, 129
disease
etiology of, 95
NAD, 130-33, 130f, 131f, 132f, 133f
chronic inflammation and, 85
extraction therapy, 98-99
oral evaluation and, 146-49
diabetes mellitus as, 84
Index  351
malignancies and, 84
 Dentin hypoplasia, periodontium in,
Evaluation
 pregnancy and, 84-85
119,120f
oral, 146-49
Demineralized freeze-dried bone
Dentistry
pain, 311
allograft (DFDBA), 267, 268,
NAD, 130-33, 130f, 131f, 132f, 133f
radiography, 111
268f
scaling, 130
Excisional new attachment procedure
 Dental burs, 331
sedation, 133
(ENAP), 195, 195f, 196f, 197f
Dental charting, 146-49
Dentogingival gingival fiber group, 5
Exposed root surface
 Dental cleaning
Dentoperiosteal gingival fiber
root conditioning, 250-52, 251f
angle, 161-62, 161f, 162f
group, 5
treatment, 249-52,249f
complete
 Dermal papilla, 8
bone, 249,250f
 application of barrier sealant and,
DFDBA. See Demineralized freeze-dried
Extended shank curettes, 321
150, 150f
bone allo graft
Extraction therapy
calculus identification and, 143,
 Diabetes melltus, periodontal disease
feline caudal stomatitis, 98-99
143f
and,29, 29f, 84
tooth resection with partial, 292-93
calculus scaling and, 140-42
Diamond-coated files, 323
tooth resection with partial,
chlorhexidine lavage, 135-36, 136f
Diets
furcation, 292-93, 294f
client education and, 150
nutrition, 301
dental charting and, 146-49
raw, 181
Fatty acids, 301
 dental radiographs and, 149
tarter control, 180-81, 181f
 FCV. See Feline calicivirus
fluoride therapy and, 145-46, 146f
Disease progression, 39-103
 Feline anatomy, 310
goal of, 129
gingivitis, 41-49
Feline calicivirus (FCV), 95
NAD, 130-33, 130f, 131f, 132f 133f
 periodontal disease, unusual forms
Feline caudal stomatitis, 95-101
oral evaluation and, 146-49
of, 91-103
antibiotics for, 99
 periodontal probing, 146-49, 147f,
 periodontal disease systemic
anti-inflammatories for, 100
148f, 149f
manifestations, 81-85
clinical signs of, 95-96, 96f, 97f
polishing and, 143-44, 144f, 145f
periodontitis, 51-67
cyclosporine for, 100
 postsurgical exam and
Doxycycline, 100, 188, 300
diagnostics of 97-98
consultation, 129-35, 135f
feline caudal stomatitis, 100
etiology of, 95
procedure for, 129-50
Drug therapies. See also specific drugs
extraction therapy, 98-99
residual plaque and, 143, 143f
 anti-inflammatories, 299
feline interferon for, 100
staff/patient protection, 135, 135f
antimicrobials, 300
laser therapy for, 99
subgingival plaque and, 140-42
bisphosphonates, 300
management of, 98
sulcal lavage and, 144-45, 145f
 inflammatory mediators, 300
medical therapy for, 99-100
supragingival cleaning, 136-39,
NSAIDS, 299-300
other medications for, 100
136f
nutraceuticals, 301
surgical therapy for, 98-99, 98f, 99f
 treatment planning and, 150
PTH,300
Feline hyperplastic gingivitis, 101, 101f
professional, 82
statins, 300
Feline interferon, 100
SRP and, 164-65, 164f
 Feline juvenile gingivitis/periodontitis
supragingival, 136-39, 136f
Education, dental cleaning and
clinical features, 101, 101f, 102f
hand scaling and, 139, 139f, 140f
client, 150
definition, 101
 mechanical scalers for, 136
Electrocautery, 198-99, 199f
diagnostics, 102
mechanical scaling and, 137-39,
periodontal flap surgery, 209, 210f
etiology 101
137f, 138f
Enamel matrix derivative (EMD), 269
management, 102-3
Dental explorers, 315-17, 317f
ENAP. See Excisional new attachment
FeLV,95
Dental mirrors, 317, 317f
procedure
 Fiber groups
Dental procedures
Endo-perio lesions, 124, 125f
alveolar crest, 12
 antibiotic administration during.
Epithelium
apical, 12
187-88
gingival, 4-5
gingival, 5, 6f
 dental cleaning, complete, 129-50
types of, 6-8
horizontal, 12
ENAP, 195
HERS, 3
interradicular, 12, 13f
gingivectomy, 199-202, 200f, 201f,
JE,8-10, 9f, 10f, 11f
oblique, 12
202f
keratinocyte, 5
PDL, 12-13, 12f, 13f
 pathologic fractures and, 76, 76f
 non-keratinized, 5
transseptal, 12, 13f
scheduling, 134
 parakeratinized, 5
Files, 322,322f
SRP, 158-60
sulcular, 6-7, 7f
diamond-coated, 323
 subgingival scaling, 165-66, 166f
bacterial exposure and, 82
FIV, 95
time for, 134-35
Etoricoxib, 299
Fluoride therapy, 145-46, 146f
352   Index
Folic acid, 301
lymphatics, 5-6
scoring index, 47-48, 48f
Free connective tissue autograft, 232,
MGJ,8
stages
232f, 233f
nerves, 5-6
features and clinical signs of, 44-48
Free gingival autograft
orthokeratinized, 5
stage I, 44
obtain graft from donor site, 230-31,
sulcus, 7
stage II, 44-46, 45f
231f
tissues
stage III,46, 46f 47f
prepare recipient site, 229-30, 230f
age and, 10
stage IV, 46-47, 47f
technique for, 229-31, 230f, 231f
PDL and, 10-13, 10f, 11f
therapy, 48-49
transfer/immobilize graft, 231, 231f
vascular supply, 5-6
Gingivoplasty, 201, 201f
Free gingival autograft flap surgery.
Gingival abscesses, 94
Gingivostomatitis. See Caudal
229-31, 230f, 231f
Gingival attachment, 6, 7-8, 8f, 56
stomatitis
Free gingival groove, 7, 7f
 periodontal flaps to increase/replace,
Gracey curette, 140, 157, 157f, 320-21
 Frenectomy, 234-36, 236f
228
finishing, 321
technique, 236, 237f
Gingival crevicular fluid (GCF), 8,
rigid, 321
Frenotomy, 234-36, 236f
41-44
Grafts
technique, 236, 237f
composition, 9-10
additives, GTR, 269-70
Furcation
Gingival curettage, 193-95, 195f
allografts
anatomy, 289-90
inadvertent, 195
DFDBA, 267
class I defects, treatment, 290, 291f
intentional, 194, 194f
 periodontal regeneration, 267-68,
classification, 289
 technique, 194
268f
class I1/III defects, treatment, 290,
variations, 194-95
autografts
291f 292f
Gingival defense, 41-44
free connective tissue, 232, 232f,
diagnosis, 289
Gingival enlargement (GE), 196-97,
233f
etiology, 289
198, 198f
free gingival, 229-31
involvement, 289-95
 periodontal flap method, 202-3,
 periodontal regeneration, 267
local anatomic factors, 289-90
202f,203f
bone grafting materials, 266-67
prognosis, 295
 treatment and management of 197
xenografts, periodontal regeneration,
Quetin, curettes, 322
 Gingival epithelium, 4-5
268
tooth resection with partial
types, 6-8
Growth factors, 270
extraction,292-93,294f
Gingival reattachment, 170
Guided tissue regeneration (GTR),
treatment, 289-95
Gingival stippling, 8, 8f
254-82, 265
citric acid, 290
Gingival surgery, 193-204, 193f
alveolar bone, 268
hemisection, 292, 292f
gingivectomy, 195-97, 198f
case selection for, 258-60
tooth resection with partial
 periodontal flap method, 202-3,
determination of new attachment,
extraction, 292-93, 294f
202f,203f
274-75
Gingivectomy, 195-97,198f
factors, 269-70
Gabapentin, 307
equipment options, 197-99, 199f
graft additives, 269-70
GCE See Gingival crevicular fluid
incisions, 200-201, 201f
periodontal splinting, 275-81
GE. See Gingival enlargement
laser, 199
preoperative diagnostics and, 257-59,
 General anesthesia, prophylaxis
 periodontal flap method compared
257f, 258f, 259f, 260f, 261f
and, 131
with,203,204f
prognosis for, 260-61
Gingiva, 4-10, 4f
 procedure for standard, 199-202,
responses to treatment, 268-70
bacteria and, 35
200f, 201f, 202f
techniques, 270-71, 271f, 272f, 273f,
bleeding, 201, 201f
techniques, 199
274f, 275f, 276f 277f, 278f, 279f
classification, 6-8
Gingivitis, 22, 51
transplantation, 270
fiber groups, 5, 6f
disease progression, 41-49
treatment planning for, 258-60
free, 6-7, 7f
etiology, 41, 42f
free gingival autograft
feline hyperplastic, 101, 101f
Halitosis, 65
 obtain graft from donor site,
feline juvenile
Hand-pieces, 330-31, 330f, 331f
230-31, 231f
clinical features, 101, 101f 102f
high-speed, 333
prepare recipient site, 229-30, 230f
definition, 101
Hand scaling
technique for, 229-31, 230f, 231f
diagnostics, 102
calculus, 140-42, 141f, 142f
 transfer/immobilize graft, 231,
etiology, 101
combined mechanical and, 166-67
231f
 management, 102-3
equipment for, 139, 139f
free gingival groove, 7, 7f
key clinical point, 43, 43f
technique for, 139, 140f
general histology of, 4-5
normal features of, 41, 41f
Heart, systemic manifestations of
interdental, 6, 8
periodontitis and, 51
 periodontal disease, 83
Index  353
Hematologic derangements,
mechanical scalers, 324-28
Lavage
 periodontal disease and, 30
polishing, 332-33
chlorhexidine, 135-36, 136f
Hemisection, furcation, 292, 292f
 power equipment, 330-33
sulcal, 144-45, 145f
Hertwig's epithelial root sheath
rotary scalers, 327
Lesions
(HERS), 3
Instruments
class II perio-endo, 69-71, 72f
Hoe scalers, 317, 319f
 periodontal hand
endo-perio, 124, 125f
Homecare
chisels, 322, 322f
radiography, 114, 119
active
curettes, 319-22
Lethargy, periodontal disease and, 66
antiseptic rinses and, 179, 179f
dental explorers, 315-17, 317f
Levamisole, 100
barrier sealants, 180, 180f
dental mirrors, 317, 317f
feline caudal stomatitis, 100
tooth brushing and, 176-78
diamond-coated files, 323
Lidocaine, 307
discussions/instructions, 175
files, 322, 322f
regional nerve block, 308
passive
hoe scalers, 317, 319f
Liver, systemic manifestations of
raw diets and, 181
knives, 323, 323f
periodontal disease, 82-83
tarter control diets and, 180-81,
periodontal probes, 315, 316f
Lungs, systemic manifestations of
181f
Quetin furcation curettes, 322
periodontal disease, 83-84
tarter control treats and, 181-82,
scalers, 317, 318f
Lymphatics, gingival, 5-6
182f
polishing
water additives and, 182
 air abrasion units, 333
Malignancies, periodontal disease
types, 176-83
paste,333
and, 84
Home plaque control, 175-83
prophy angles, 332, 332f
MBP. See Milk basic protein
goals of 175-76
prophy cups, 332-33,332f
Mechanical scalers, 136, 324-28
Horizontal fiber group, 12
Interdental knife, 323, 323f
sonic, 326
Host modulation therapies, 299-302
Interferon, feline, 100
sonic scalers, 326, 326f
drug therapies, 299-301
 Intermediate cementum, 14
tips, 326-27,327f
anti-inflammatories, 299
 Interradicular fiber group, 12, 13f
ultrasonic, 324-26
antimicrobials, 300
Mechanical scaling, 137-39, 137f, 138f
bisphosphonates, 300
Jaw, pathologic fracture, 71-74,73f,
anesthesia and, 165
inflammatory mediators, 300
74f, 75f
calculus, 142, 143f
NSAIDS, 299-300
Junctional epithelium (JE), 8-10, 9f,
combined hand and, 166-67
nutraceuticals, 301
10f, 11f
equipment needed for, 165
PTH, 300
Juvenile onset periodontitis, 101, 102f
subgingival procedure, 165-66, 166f
statins, 300
Mechanical (ultrasonic) therapy,
Howship's lacunae, 15, 16f
Keratinocyte epithelium, 5
164-65
Hypercementosis, 121, 122f
Ketamine, 307
Melanocytes, 5
Hyperparathyroidism, periodontium
Ketoprofen, 300
Meloxicam, 299
in, 120, 121f
 Kidneys, systemic manifestations of
Merkel cells, 5
Hypotension, 306, 311
periodontal disease, 82-83
MGJ. See Muco gingival junction
Hypothermia, 305-6, 311
Kirkland knife, 323, 323f
Milk basic protein (MBP), 301
prevention, 306
Knives, 323, 323f
Mini-bladed curettes, 321-22, 321f
Mini-five (curette), 321
Ibuprofen, 300
Lactoferrin, 100
Modified Widman flap surgery
 Implantology 124, 126f
feline caudal stomatitis, 100
216-19
 Inadvertent curettage, 193, 195
Lamina propria, 4
technique, 218-19, 218f 219f 
 Indomethacin, 299
Langerhans cells, 5
Morphine, 308
Inflammation
Laser irradiation, 251-52
Mortality, periodontal disease and, 85
chronic, periodontal disease and, 85
Laser therapy
Muco gingival junction (MGJ), 8
periodontal, 30-31
feline caudal stomatitis, 99
Inflammatory mediators, 300
gingivectomy, 199
NAD. See Non-anesthetic dentistry
 Instrumentation
Lateral sliding (pedicle) flap surgery,
Neoplasia, periodontal disease and, 30
osseous surgery, 262
233f, 234f 235f, 236f
Nerve blocks, 306
periodontal, 313-33
flap preparation and, 233-34, 234f,
regional, 307-8
abrasive points, 332, 332f
235f
caudal, 309,309f
cutting burs, 331-32, 331f
flap transfer/closure and donor site
caudal mandibular, 310, 310f
dental burs, 331
protection, 234,235f, 236f
rostral mandibular, 309-10, 309f
hand, 315-23
recipient site preparation and, 233,
rostral maxillary 308-9, 308f
hand-pieces, 330-31, 330f, 331f
233f, 234f
Nerves, gingival, 5-6
354  Index
Non-anesthetic dentistry (NAD),
Osteoclast function, antibiotics
rostral mandibular regional block,
130-33, 130f, 131f 132f, 133f
and, 170
309-10, 309f
scaling, 130
Osteomyelitis
 rostral maxillary regional block,
Non-keratinized epithelium, 5
alveolar bone, 75
308-9,308f
 Non-specific plaque hypothesis, 30
 periodontal disease and, 75-78,
scoring, 311
Non-surgical therapy
78f, 79f
safety concerns, 305-6
advanced, 154-67, 154f, 155f
Osteoplasty, 249, 250f
 PDL. See Periodontal ligament
 mechanical (ultrasonic) therapy
Oxytalan fibers, 13
 Pedicle flap surgery. See Lateral sliding
164-65
flap surgery
options for, 156
 Pain considerations, 306-10
Pellicle, 19
SRP, hand, 156-57, 156f
acute, 307
 Periodontal abscesses
 combined mechanical/hand methods
caudal mandibular regional block,
acute, 91-93
of, 166-67
310, 310f
chronic, 93
NSAIDS, 299-300, 307
 caudal maxillary regional block, 309,
treatment of,94-95
 Nutraceuticals, 180-81, 301
309f
clinical appearance of, 91-93, 92f,
Nutrition, 301
chronic, 307, 311
93f
raw diets, 181
evaluation, 311
diagnosis, 93-94, 94f
tarter control diets, 180-81, 181f
regional nerve blocks, 307-8
etiology 91, 91f, 92f
rostral mandibular regional block,
treatment, 94-95
Oblique fiber group, 12
309-10, 309f
 Periodontal anatomy, radiographic
Ocular damage periodontal disease
rostral maxillary regional block,
appearance of normal, 112, 113f
and, 75,77f
308-9, 308f
Periodontal diagnostic strip, 133
Odontogenesis, periodontium, 3-4, 4f
scoring, 311
Periodontal disease, 51
 ONFs. See Oronasal fistulas
Palatine flap, 227-28
advanced, 66
Opiates, 307-8
 Papilla
antibiotics in, 186-88, 186t
 Oral cancer, periodontal disease and,
dermal, 8
implications for, 187-88
75, 77f
preservation flap, 228, 229f
assessing, 307
Oral cavity, plaque accumulation and,
 Papilla preservation flap surgery,
attachment loss and, 56
23-28,26f,27f
228, 229f
bacteriology of 35-36
Oral evaluation, 146-49
Parakeratinized epithelium, 5
breed and, 28, 73
Oral exam, 131
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 300
calculus and, 24, 24f, 25f, 26f
 periodontal flap surgery and, 210
Pasteurella multocida,95
chronic inflammation and, 85
 Oral hygiene, 307
 Pathologic conditions, radiography,
classification, 60, 60f, 61f
Oronasal fistulas (ONFs), 69, 69f,
114-19, 114f 115f, 116f, 117f,
AVDC,134
70f, 71f
118f, 119f, 120f
deleterious effects
Orthodontic treatment, 126f, 127
Pathologic fractures
chronic inflammation and, 85
 Orthokeratinized gingiva, 5
dental procedures and, 76, 76f
diabetes mellitus as, 84
Osseous form, 254, 255f
jaw, 71-74,73f, 74f, 75f
 malignancies and, 84
Osseous surgery, 254-82
 Patient
pregnancy and, 84-85
case selection, 258-60
 dental cleaning and protecting
diagnostic and/or prognostic
determination of new attachment,
135,135f
importance
274-75
 management, for periodontal
clinical signs of, 57-66, 65f 66f
periodontal splinting, 275-81
therapy, 305-11
functional exposure and, 57-64,
preoperative diagnostics, 257-59,
feline and brachycephalic
62f 63f
257f 258f, 259f, 260f, 261f
anatomical differences in, 310
 mobility and, 64-65
prognosis for, 260-61
postoperative care, 310
etiology of, 18-31
radiographs, 257-58
 manipulation, safety concerns, 306
human, 36
reactive
 pain considerations, 306-10
 infectious cause of, 35
instrumentation for, 262
acute,307
 initial therapy 105-88
 osseous remodelling and, 264-65,
caudal mandibular regional block,
 antibiotics and, 170-73, 186-88
264f
310,310f
 complete dental cleaning in,
technique for, 262-63, 263f, 264f
caudal maxillary regional block,
129-50
sounding, 257, 259f
309,309f
 home plaque control and,
treatment
chronic, 307, 311
175-83
 planning, 258-60
evaluation, 311
lethargy and, 66
responses to, 268-70
 evaluation and scoring, 311
local and regional consequences of,
types, 260
regional nerve blocks, 307-8
69-79
Index 355
ocular damage and, 75, 77f
equipment needs, 208-10
interdental ligation, 240-41, 240f,
oral cancer and, 75, 77f
 scalpel blade, 208
241f 242f
osteomyelitis and, 75-78, 78f, 79f
suture, 208
interrupted sling pattern, 242,
mortality and, 85
flap types, 211
243f
normal, 60, 60f
apically displaced, 222-24
sling ligation patterns, 241-44
pathogenesis of, 18-31
conventional, 228
undisplaced flap, technique, 220-21,
 pathologic jaw fracture and, 71-74,
coronally displaced, 224-26
220f 221f, 222f
73f,74f, 75f
lateral sliding (pedicle), 233-34,
 Periodontal hand instruments,
 periodontopathogens, 36, 36t
233f, 234f 235f, 236f
 instruments for diagnosis
plaque and, 175
modified Widman, 216-19
chisels, 322, 322f
 predisposing factors, 23-29
palatine, 227-28
curettes, 319-22
 prevalence of, 81
papilla preservation, 228, 229f
dental explorers, 315-17, 317f
radiation therapy and, 27-28
regenerative surgery, 228
dental mirrors, 317, 317f
radiography, 114-19, 114f, 115f,
semilunar, 227,227f
diamond-coated files, 323
116f, 117f, 118f 119f, 120f
specific, 216-36
files, 322, 322f
staging
undisplaced, 219-20
hoe scalers, 317, 319f
periodontitis and, 56-58,56f 57f,
free connective tissue autograft, 232,
knives, 323, 323f
58f, 59f
232f,233f
periodontal probes, 315, 316f 
stage 1, 60, 60f
free gingival autograft, 229-31,
Quetin furcation curettes, 322
stage 2, 60, 61f
230f, 231f
scalers, 317, 318f
stage 3,60, 61f
frenectomy/frenotomy, 234-36, 236f
 Periodontal inflammation, 30-31
stage 4, 60, 61f
full flap, 213-15, 215f, 216f
Periodontal instrumentation, 313-33
 systemic influences on progression
full thickness flaps, 211, 216
abrasive p0ints, 332, 332f
of, 28-30
goals of, 206
cutting burs, 331-32, 331f
chemotherapy and, 30
indications, 206-7, 207f, 208f, 209f
dental burs, 331
corticosteroids and, 29-30
interdental incision, 213
hand,315-23
diabetes mellitus and, 29, 29f
lateral sliding (pedicle) flap, 233f,
hand-pieces, 330-31, 330f, 331f
 hematologic derangements and, 30
234f, 235f 236f
mechanical scalers, 324-28
neoplasia and, 30
flap preparation and, 233-34,
polishing, 332-33
systemic manifestations, 81-85
234f, 235f
power equipment, 330-33
affected organs/systems, 82-84
flap transfer/closure and donor
rotary scalers, 327
brain, 84
site protection, 234, 235f, 236f
 Periodontal ligament (PDL), 3
heart, 83
 recipient site preparation and, 233,
cells, 11-12
liver and kidneys, 82-83
233f,234f
connective tissue, 11-12
lungs, 83-84
modified Widman flap, 216-19
fiber groups, 12-13, 12f, 13f
pathogenesis of, 81-82
technique, 218-19, 218f, 219f
 gingival tissues and, 10-13, 10f, 11f
theories, 30
 oral exam, 210
 Periodontal pockets
tooth resorption in, 120-21, 122f
palatine flap, 227-28
alveolar bone, 256
treatment, 66-67
papilla preservation flap, 228, 229f
antibiotics, 170-72, 171f, 172f, 173f
unusual forms of, 91-103
partial thickness flaps, 211, 215-16
5mm standard, 206
feline caudal stomatitis as, 95-100
technique for, 216, 216f, 217f
one-walled, 261
feline juvenile gingivitis/
 periodontal pockets and, 206, 207f
 periodontal flap surgery and, 206,
periodontitis as, 101-3
results of, 207-8
207f
 periodontal abscesses, 91-95
postoperative care, 244-46
results of, 207-8
 Periodontal flap method, 202-3, 202f,
regenerative surgery flaps, 228
reduction, 207-8, 260
203f
semilunar flap, 227,227f
treating, 157
gingivectomy compared with, 203,
sounding, 210-11, 210f
two-walled, 261
204f
sulcal incision, 211-13, 212f, 213f,
walled, 256
 Periodontal flap surgery, 206-46
214f
Periodontal probes, 315, 316f
apically displaced flap, technique for,
full flap, 213-15
Periodontal probing, 146-49, 147f,
222-24, 223f, 224f, 225f
surgical preparation, 210-11
148f 149f
attached gingiva, 228
suture patterns, 236-40,237f 238f,
bone regrowth and, 274
conventional flap, 228
239f, 240f
Periodontal radiography
coronally displaced flap, 224-26
anchor, 242-44, 246f
clinical applications of, 121-27, 123f,
technique,225-26, 226f
continuous sling, 242, 244f, 245f,
124f 125f, 126f
envelope flap creation, 211-13, 212f,
246f
value of, 107-11, 108f 109f, 110f,
213f, 214f
direct loop suture, 240, 240f
111f 112f
356  Index
 Periodontal regeneration, 265-68
dentin hypoplasia, 119, 120f 
 Proteins
allografts, 267-68, 268f
hyperparathyroidism, 120,
BMPs,267,269
autografts, 267
121f
MBPs, 301
barrier membranes
 proliferative conditions, 121,
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone
first generation membranes,
122f, 123f
265-66
tooth resorption, 120-21, 122f
Quetin furcation curettes, 322
 second generation membranes,
function of, 3-16
266, 266f
gingiva and, 4-10, 4f
 Radiation therapy, periodontal disease
 bone grafting materials, 266-67
odontogenesis, 3-4, 4f 
and, 27-28
non-animal products, 268, 268f
repair/regeneration, 4
Radiography
xenografts, 268
structure of 3-16
alveolar bone, 109, 110f 
Periodontal splinting
tissues of, 3, 3t
in calculus, 117-18
GTR, 275-81
 Periodontopathogens, periodontal
dental cleaning and, 149
osseous surgery, 275-81
disease, 36,36t
 determining new attachment and,
techniques
Perio-endo lesion, class I1, 69-71,
274-75
 acrylic or composite-only splint,
72f
evaluation, 111
279, 279f, 280f, 281f
PI. See Plaque index
in lesions, 114, 119
figure-8 wiring, 279, 281f
PLA. See Polylactic acid
osseous surgery 257-58
lingual wiring, 281, 282f
Plaque
in pathologic conditions, 114-19, 114f,
Periodontal surgery
accumulation, 23-28, 26f, 27f 
115f, 116f, 117f, 118f 119f, 120f
hypothermia and, 305-6
adherence, 18-19, 19f, 20f, 21f
periodontal
 periodontal therapy and, 259, 262f
bacteria, 21
 clinical applications of, 121-27,
regenerative, 265-68
detection, 157-58, 158f
123f, 124f 125f, 126f
techniques, 191-295
formation, 19-21
value of, 107-11, 108f, 109f, 110f,
exposed root surface and,
 pellicle, 19
111f, 112f
treatment of 249-52,249f
home control of, 175-83
periodontal anatomy 112, 113f
 furcation involvement and
goals of, 175-76
periodontal disease, 114-19, 114f,
treatment, 289-95
 non-specific plaque hypothesis, 30
115f, 116f, 117f 118f, 119f, 120f
gingival, 193-204
 periodontal disease and, 175
technique, 110
GTR,254-82
predisposing factors, 23-29
x-ray quality and, 109-10
0sseous, 254-82
oral cavity, 23-28, 26f, 27f
RANK, 16
periodontal flap surgery, 206-46
residual, complete dental cleaning
RANKL, 16
treatment plan, 123
and, 143,143f
Raw diets, 181
Periodontal therapy 262f
specific plaque hypothesis, 30
 Reactive osseous surgery
novel, 299
subgingival, 140-42
instrumentation for, 262
patient management, 305-11
Plaque index (PI), 348
 osseous remodelling and, 264-65,
surgery and, 259, 262f
Polishing instruments
264f
tissue engineering and, 269
air abrasion units, 333
technique for, 262-63, 263f, 264f
Periodontitis, 51-67
paste,333
Regeneration
bone loss patterns and, 52-56, 52f,
prophy angles, 332, 332f
alveolar bone, 268
53f, 54f, 55f 56f
prophy cups, 332-33, 332f
GTR,254-82
clinical signs, 51-52, 52f, 53f
 Polylactic acid (PLA), 266
alveolar bone, 268
feline juvenile
Porphyromonas, 51
case selection for, 258-60
clinical features, 101, 101f, 102f
Porphyromonas gingivalis, 35-36
determination of new attachment,
definition, 101
 Pregabalin, 307
274-75
diagnostics, 102
Pregnancy periodontal disease and,
factors, 269-70
etiology, 101
84-85
graft additives, 269-70
management, 102-3
Probing periodontal, 146-49, 147f,
periodontal splinting, 275-81
gingivitis and, 51
148f, 149f, 315, 316f
 preoperative diagnostics and,
juvenile onset, 101, 102f
bone regrowth and, 274
257-59, 257f, 258f, 259f, 260f,
 periodontal disease staging and,
 Proliferative conditions, periodontium
261f
56-58, 56f, 57f, 58f, 59f
in, 121, 122f 123f
prognosis for, 260-61
Periodontium
 Prophy angles, 332, 332f
responses to treatment, 268-70
appearance of, in specific conditions,
Prophy cups, 332-33, 332f
techniques, 270-71, 271f, 272f, 273f,
121f 122f, 123f
Prophylaxis
274f, 275f, 276f, 277f, 278f 279f
 craniomandibular osteopathy,
dental, 129
transplantation, 270
120, 121f
 general anesthesia, 131
treatment planning for, 258-60
Index  357
periodontal
rotary 327
Sulcular epithelium, 6-7, 7f
allografts, 267-68, 268f
sonic,326,326f
bacterial exposure and, 82
autografts, 267
ultrasonic
Sulcus, gingival, 7
barrier membranes, 265-66, 266f
magnetostrictive, 325,325f
Supragingival cleaning, 136-39, 136f
bone grafting materials, 266-67
piezoelectric, 324, 326, 326f
hand scaling and, 139, 139f, 140f
non-animal products, 268, 268f
Scaling, 154, 252
mechanical scalers for, 136
xenografts, 268
calculus, 140-42
mechanical scaling and, 137-39,
 periodontium, 4
hand, 140-42, 141f, 142f
137f 138f
 Regenerative periodontal surgery, 265
hand, 139, 139f, 140f 324
Supragingival tips, 326-27
 periodontal regeneration, 265-68
calculus, 140-42, 141f, 142f
Suture patterns, periodontal flap
 Regenerative surgery
combined mechanical and,
surgery, 236-40, 237f, 238f,
periodontal flaps, 228
166-67
239f, 240f
prognosis, 260-61
equipment for, 139, 139f
anchor, 242-44, 246f
Regional blocks
technique for, 139, 140f
continuous sling, 242, 244f, 245f,
caudal mandibular, 310, 310f
mechanical, 137-39, 137f, 138f, 324
246f
caudal maxillary, 309, 309f
calculus, 142, 143f
direct loop suture, 240, 240f
rostral mandibular, 309-10, 309f
combined hand and, 166-67
interdental ligation, 240-41, 240f,
rostral maxillary, 308-9, 308f
equipment needed for, 165
241f 242f
 Repair, periodontium, 4
subgingival procedure, 165-66,
interrupted sling pattern, 242, 243f
 Rete pegs, 4
166f
sling ligation patterns, 241-44
Rete Venosum, 13
NAD, 130
Synthetic biomaterials, 268
Root conditioning
sonic, 136
Systemic manifestations of periodontal
citric acid, 251
subgingival, manual, 140-41, 141f
disease, 81-85
exposed root surface, 250-52,251f
ultrasonic, 156, 165
affected organs/systems, 82-84
products, 250-51
Scaling/root planing (SRP), 94, 156,
brain, 84
tetracycline, 250
158-64, 160f, 163f, 164f 249,
heart, 83
 Root planing, 154-55
250f
liver and kidneys, 82-83
crown and, 161-62, 161f, 162f
cleaning and, 164-65, 164f
lungs, 83-84
SRP, 94, 156, 158-64, 160f 163f,
hand, 156-57, 156f
pathogenesis of, 81-82
164f, 249, 250f
equipment for, 157, 157f
cleaning and, 164-65, 164f
preparation for, 157
Tarter control diets, 180-81, 181f
hand, 156-57, 156f, 157f
procedure, 158-60
Tarter control treats, 181-82, 182f
 preparation for, 157
Sedation dentistry, 133
Tetracycline, 170, 300
 procedure, 158-60
Semilunar flap, 227, 227f
root conditioning, 250
 Root scaling/planing, exposed root
Sharpey's fibers, 10-11
topical, 173
surface,249,250f
Simvastatin, 300
TIMPs. See Tissue inhibitors of
Root surface
Sonic scalers, 326, 326f
 metalloproteinases
biomodification, 250-52, 251f
Sounding
Tips, 326-27, 327f
exposed
osseous surgery, 257, 259f
new and specialized, 327
bone treatment and, 249
 periodontal flap surgery, 210-11,
replacement, 327, 327f
 root conditioning, 250-52, 251f
210f
subgingival, 327
treatment of, 249-52, 249f, 250f
Specific plaque hypothesis, 30
supragingival, 326-27
Rostral mandibular regional block,
Spirochetes, 36
Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases
309-10, 309f
SRP. See Scaling/root planing
(TIMPs), 44
 Rostral maxillary regional block, 308-9,
 Staff, dental cleaning and protecting.
Tissues
308f
135, 135f
connective
Rotary scalers, 327
Statins, 300
free, autograft, 232, 232f, 233f
Subgingival curettage, 194
PDL, 11-12
Safety concerns
Subgingival plaque, 140-42
engineering, 269
anesthesia, 311
Subgingival scaling
gingiva
duration of 305-6
manual, 140-41, 141f
age and, 10
aspiration, 306
procedure, mechanical, 165-66, 166f
PDL and, 10-13, 10f, 11f
patient, 305-6
Subgingival tips, 327
GTR, 254-82,265
Saliva, 44
Sulcal incision, periodontal flap
alveolar bone, 268
Scalers, 318f
surgery,211-13,212f 213f, 214f
case selection for, 258-60
hoe, 317, 319f
full flap, 213-15
determination of new attachment,
mechanical, 136, 324-28
Sulcal lavage, 144-45, 145f
274-75
358 Index
Tissues (contd)
mobility
Ultrasonic scaling, 156, 165
factors, 269-70
bone loss and, 64
Ultrasonic therapy 164-65
graft additives, 269-70
causes, 64, 64f
 Undisplaced flap surgery, 219-21, 220f,
periodontal splinting, 275-81
 periodontal disease and, 64-65
221f, 222f
preoperative diagnostics and,
resection
Universal curettes, 140, 319, 320f
257-59, 257f, 258f 259f, 260f,
advantages, 293
261f
with partial extraction, 292-93,
Vascular supply, gingival, 5-6
 prognosis for, 260-61
294f
Volatile sulfur compounds
responses to treatment, 268-70
resorption, 120-21, 122f
(VSCs), 65
techniques, 270-71, 271f 272f, 273f,
Transseptal fiber group, 12, 13f
274f 275f, 276f, 277f, 278f, 279f
Treatment planning
Water additives, 182
 transplantation, 270
 complete dental cleaning 150
White blood cells (WBCs), 44
treatment planning for, 258-60
GTF 258-60
periodontium, 3, 3t
osseous surgery, 258-60
Xenografts, periodontal regeneration,
Tooth
Treats, tarter control, 181-82, 182f
268
brushing
Xerostomia, 44
brushes for, 176-77, 176f
Ultrasonic scalers
X-ray quality, 109-10
materials and methods for, 176-77
magnetostrictive, 325, 325f
pastes for, 177, 177f
piezoelectric, 324, 326,326f
Zinc salts, soluble, 179, 179f